




















































Hansard: April 07, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1377 

 April 7, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly two 

residents of my constituency in Saskatoon: namely, Shelby 

Harder, age 8, and I'd ask her to stand up; and her mother, 

Tracey Harder, also from Saskatoon. 

 

And I hope they enjoy the proceedings today and have an 

enjoyable stay in Regina, and would ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like 

to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members 

of the Assembly here today several friends of mine up in your 

gallery.  And I emphasize friends; if I keep introducing friends, 

people will genuinely believe that I do have friends. 

 

Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker -- and I ask them to rise as 

well as I introduce them - is first of all, to the right, Kelvin 

Greschner, who has just received . . . and I've just noted it so I 

get this right, and this is complimentary of the federal 

government.  He has received the Prime Minister's award for 

teaching excellence in science, technology, and mathematics.  

Kelvin, if you'd stand, please. 

 

And with him, his wife, Elaine.  And seated beside her is 

Nicole Klassen, and beside her is her mother, Marie Klassen, 

formerly Greschner.  Some will recognize the name as well.  

Donna Greschner is a human rights commissioner, and this is 

her family and also grew up with all these folks. 

 

So welcome, and join with me in welcoming them.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly a 

good friend of mine, Mr. Bob Francis from Gull Lake, 

Saskatchewan.  Bob is up in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker.  

He's in Regina with the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation 

meetings, and Bob is the secretary-treasurer, of course, of our 

school unit down at Gull Lake, so I would invite all members 

to join with me in welcoming Bob to the city. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would ask all members to join me in welcoming to the 

Assembly, Greg Eyre, who is on staff with UFCW (United 

Food and Commercial Workers) 

and has provided that union with good leadership over many 

years. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would like to introduce to the members of the Legislative 

Assembly through you, Mr. Garf Stevenson, who is seated in 

your gallery and is the former president of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool and who is a well-respected member of the 

province's agriculture and business community.  Mr. Stevenson 

is going to be a one-person commission on district health board 

elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the members to join me in welcoming him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Skating Rink Repaired 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In a small 

community, the loss of any facility or business is more than just 

a change in the available services.  Such a loss can often be a 

real blow to the vitality of the town.  We hear too often what 

happens when a curling rink, a recreation hall or a business is 

lost.  The town of Lake Alma in my constituency recently had a 

set-back but I'm happy to report that the fine people of that 

community and surrounding district quickly set about to correct 

the problem. 

 

In February, a heavy snowfall caused the roof of the skating 

rink to collapse.  Fortunately no one was hurt, but this was a 

tough blow.  The town set about almost immediately to repair 

the damages. 

 

As Bob Thue of the Lake Alma Recreation Board said, the 

people in the community really took the effort to heart.  With 

almost total volunteer labour, the rink has been restored.  

Repairs are almost finished and the rink will be ready for use 

next season. 

 

The repair's, Mr. Speaker, on time, on budget, and a dedication 

ceremony will occur in the fall.  This Saturday I'm looking 

forward to attending a fantastic fund-raiser at Gladmar for Lake 

Alma's rink.  It will be a banquet, auction, and cabaret. 

 

The people of Lake Alma and surrounding district, I want to 

congratulate them for their determination to keep their 

recreation facility functioning.  They recognize that there is 

more than a building at stake here and have acted in their own 

best interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wolseley Senior Girls' Basketball Champions 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to at this 

time extend our sincere congratulations and acknowledge the 

achievements of the Wolseley senior girls' basketball team who 

won the 1994 AA 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

Provincial Championships.  After bronze medal finishes in '92 

and '93, the gold medal was particularly satisfying for the team. 

 

The season was the most successful ever for a Wolseley team.  

The girls finished with a record of 38 wins and 4 losses, 

including tournament championships in Kenaston, Outlook, 

Leask, Indian Head, Wolseley, and Lumsden, plus district, 

regional, and provincial titles. 

 

Team members Angie Magel, Sarah Magel, Ann Bieber, Cherri 

Armstrong, Glenda Lemcke, Lindell Haywahe, Amy 

Frederickson, Aimee Beliveau, Erin Moss, and Kristin Miller 

are to be commended for their long hours of hard work and 

commitment. 

 

And also a special tribute to their coach, Gary Frederickson, 

and the parents and families of this team of champions.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yom Hashoah -- Holocaust Remembrance Day 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Sundown today begins the solemn day of Yom 

Hashoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day, the day during which 

we formally remember the 6 million European Jews murdered 

between 1939 and 1945.  They were slaughtered, along with 

gypsies, Slavs, homosexuals, and mentally handicapped people, 

all in the name of purification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not choose my words casually.  These 

murders were not accidents of history; these Jews were not the 

statistical victims of social and economic forces careening out 

of control.  These were executions, one by one, individual by 

individual, committed by individuals, and committed in large 

part because of the silent compliance of the rest of the world -- 

by us. 

 

These unspeakable crimes happened in Europe but we in North 

America stood by, like Paul at the stoning of Stephen, and did 

nothing until it was too late.  This, I think, is why we 

remember.  We remember those who died, of course, but we 

also remember with universal shame that this crime against our 

fragile humanity was the responsibility of all humanity. 

 

We therefore should vow with collective determination, never 

again -- never again in Europe; never again in North America; 

no more in Sri Lanka; no more in Bosnia; no more in Indonesia 

or East Timor; no more in any part of this fragile planet, our 

island Earth. 

 

The lesson of the holocaust is that the seed of racial hatred is 

within us all.  If we are not on guard, it can bloom again.  If we 

remember -- as we must -- we can hold back the dark night a 

little longer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trade Show -- indEX '94 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On a much happier 

note, I am pleased to report that the ninth annual indEX '94, 

which is western Canada's premier multi-industry trade show, 

is going to be going on today, tomorrow, and Saturday at the 

Regina Exhibition Park -- indEX '94 features the latest 

technology in manufacturing, construction, high tech, industrial 

biotechnology, transportation, and environmental businesses. 

 

A new inventions showcase features inventions from start-up 

businesses wanting to test the market and/or seeking 

manufacturers.  There's also an international business centre 

and trade luncheons that enable business people to make 

connections with trade representatives and on-site seminars 

offered by a variety of industries that provide current and very 

practical information. 

 

The theme for the '94 show, Mr. Speaker, is diversification 

opportunities.  I have viewed their information very carefully; 

this looks like an exciting show, and one that I urge anyone 

who can, to drop by the Regina Exhibition Park April 7, 8, or 9 

for indEX '94.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Globe Theatre Gala Performance 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I want to do 

a bit of bragging on a constituent of mine in a quiet, modest 

Canadian way.  Last week the Deputy Premier announced that 

Prince Edward will visit Saskatchewan in August. 

 

One event planned in his honour is a performance at the Globe 

Theatre in Regina, the theatre of which he's royal patron.  The 

play to be performed is Dancing in Poppies, a play set in 

Saskatchewan and co-authored by Professor Ron Marken of 

Saskatoon, and Professor Gail Bowen of Regina Lake Centre 

constituency, playwright and mystery writer extraordinaire.  

Adapted from their novel, 1919, the play was commissioned by 

the Globe and produced in February of 1993 to full houses and 

excellent reviews. 

 

And once upon a time in Canada, Mr. Speaker, a visit by a 

significant person might mean hiding our Canadianism.  Our 

culture was imported culture from Britain first, and if we 

wished to be daring, from the U.S. (United States).  Our 

colonial status lasted long past 1867. 

 

I don't want to make too much of one gala evening, but it does 

seem significant that the best foot being put forward for Prince 

Edward is a Canadian one, specifically a Saskatchewan foot, 

and particularly one from Regina Lake Centre. 

 

I congratulate Susan Ferley, artistic director of the Globe 

Theatre, for having the artistic courage and good sense to 

present a portrait of ourselves to our royal visitor.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Welfare Numbers 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

couple of questions I'd like to address to the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday we pointed out to you the number of 

persons on welfare exceeded 81,000 and you tried to defend 

your dismal record, Mr. Minister, in this area by reading off a 

list of money that you had thrown at the problem.  Mr. 

Minister, that's the usual NDP (New Democratic Party) 

measures that you use; that's the way you measure compassion, 

by talking about the money that you throw at a problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that compassion is shown and measured 

not by the number of people who are receiving government 

assistance but instead the number of people who no longer need 

government assistance.  And by that yardstick, Minister, your 

government has shown no compassion.  This number continues 

to grow every month and you have no plans to cut the growth. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to start helping these 

81,000-plus people by creating some jobs in this province?  

When are you going to start protecting the taxpayer that have to 

pay for that load?  Would you explain that to us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate we 

see the member again beating up on low income people for the 

second day in a row.  I went over yesterday some of the 

economic development measures in the last two years, and 

specifically in the budget that we're debating right now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I want to read, because he's out of step with the Saskatoon 

Chamber of Commerce and the Conference Board of Canada 

on his projections on economic development, let me read from 

The Nipawin Journal where it says, Nipawin Journal, 

February 23, says, the front page: Construction up in 1993.  

Fourth page: Government delivers on its budget. Fourth page: 

Budget good news. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can't stand good news.  They left us in a 

horrendous mess.  We're providing support to low income 

people in spite of their huge debt.  We don't give low income 

people one-way bus tickets out of the province like your people 

do in Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There we drag out 

the blame thrower again and talk about what's going on in 

Alberta.  Mr. Minister, your job is in Saskatchewan. Your job 

is to try and get jobs for 81,000 people. 

 

And the tremendous social cost that welfare puts us 

under. What about the taxpayer that's paying these costs? And 

some of those taxpayers, Mr. Minister, are taking salary at very 

little more than welfare.  And you're asking them to pay the 

cost. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said your budget was $334 million for 

welfare payments.  That's over a hundred million more than 

was spent on welfare in our last year of government -- over a 

hundred million.  And you're the guys who are going to get 

away from poverty. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you still on target at 334 million, or is the 

sky-rocketing number of people on welfare going to drive your 

cost higher?  Can you tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not casting blame; 

I'm trying to set out the facts as they exist. 

 

Your former federal counterparts contributed to dumping 

through two measures -- UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) cuts and offloading on treaty Indian families.  

And the treaty Indian families don't like this. 

 

Ten thousand new cases.  Now you're talking about 80,000 

beneficiaries. That is 8 per cent of the population is dependent 

on social assistance.  That is too high.  But the next closest 

province dependency rate is 11 per cent.  When you compare 

us to the Canadian average increase, we're doing very well.  

We're not happy about that; that's why we've got the last budget 

focused on job creation as our priority. 

 

The reason your social assistance budget was low is because 

you beat up on welfare recipients.  I mean you didn't accept 

that poverty existed until 1990.  I remember that very clearly. 

 

We're trying to focus on meaningful jobs at decent wages.  The 

economic development plan is with the Partnership for 

Renewal.  In the budget, for the second year in a row we had 

tax cuts to small-business people who create the real jobs 

around Saskatchewan.  There are positive signs; get positive 

because there are good indicators. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's very interesting, 

the response to that last question.  You never told me whether 

you were still on target or not for your budget, so you just kind 

of lead us around.  Well, Mr. Minister, that's a good example of 

the downward trend that you've thrown the province into. 

 

Every month there are fewer and fewer taxpayers, each paying 

more and more taxes to support more and more people who 

don't have jobs.  What does your government do to address this 

problem?  Well you keep on giving us more and more medicine 

that made us sick in the first place. 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

You raise taxes, you raise utility rates, you put more 

regulations on business -- the very people who create jobs.  

And the next month the welfare numbers keep getting higher 

and higher, the job numbers get worse.  And then you think of 

another way to tax the people and then the cycle starts again. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to start protecting the 

taxpayers, the people who provide the money to run the 

province?  When are you going to put some safeguards in 

place, to ensure that the social security net has some safeguards 

against abuse? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Let me say, Mr. Speaker, these are the 

facts -- there are a thousand more people working this year than 

were working last year.  That is a fact; that is reality.  You 

should have thought about this concern you have for the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers when you were racking up a $15 

billion debt, what we could do with that $850 million a year 

that is accountable to you. 

 

Now your federal counterparts offloaded to the tune of $40 

million; you haven't helped us.  And the federal Liberal budget 

hasn't helped us either.  Their last budget took $40 million out 

of the Saskatchewan economy on UIC  cuts; that is a fact. 

 

Not only did that do that, that is going to result in increased 

public assistance case-loads.  And the federal government is 

working against us, like your federal government was before.  

The Liberals are continuing your policies.  We need national 

partnership, Saskatchewan and Canada.  We're involved in the 

economic development opportunities here as best we can with 

the debt that you gave us.  What we need is some leadership 

from the federal Liberals, not unilateral cuts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

keep talking about what the federal budget done to you.  But 

you and I talked about the windfall profits you're going to get 

when they cancelled the seniors' $600 tax credit.  I asked you at 

the time if you're going to talk to the Finance minister and get 

some of that money to help these people who are on welfare.  

You never done anything about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I asked you if you are on target with 

your budget; you never answered.  Well we happen to think on 

this side of the House that it's going to get higher, at the rate 

you're going. 

 

And let's give you the benefit of the doubt.  Just, for instance, 

even at 334 million, that means the average taxpayer in this 

province pays more than $750 a year into the welfare system.  

Mr. Minister, when these taxpayers are paying that kind of 

money, they deserve to know what's going toward . . . is the 

money going towards what it was intended for.  Or is it helping 

those people who really need it, not those who wish to take 

advantage of the system? 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to start taking some 

of the steps to ensure that taxpayers are not paying for some of 

those who choose to abuse the system?  Why don't you hire 

more investigators?  Why don't you reinstate the cheque 

pick-up?  Why don't you reinstate direct payment to landlords? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The member has already 

asked four questions and he's entitled to one question.  He's 

gone way over his time already.  I wish he'd put his question 

right now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your 

ruling.  Mr. Minister, are you even considering any of these 

measurements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, he's the only person 

in Saskatchewan that doesn't know that we are on target with 

our budget for, you know, the third budget in a row.  

Everybody else knows that.  No wonder you're out of step . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Of course we are.  You should have 

thought of that . . . your interest payment cost every person in 

this province $2,000 a year.  You should have thought of that. 

 

Now listen, if you compare the Social Services budget which is 

going into public assistance in Saskatchewan, with any other 

jurisdiction in Canada, we're among the very lowest proportion 

of the budget to income security.  Now you know that because 

you and I talked about that, so quit playing cheap politics. 

 

You're not interested in low income people because you voted 

against every initiative in the last two years that would help low 

income people and we have a . . . and so did the Liberals, so did 

the Liberals.  Every single initiative including the introduction 

in principle of good labour legislation for working men and 

women that you say you're concerned about this; so did the 

Liberals.  Women's groups, low income people aren't going to 

forget that.  So we're on target; we're dealing with the problem. 

 

We're also dealing with the problem in another way through 

New Careers where we're providing assistance and 

opportunities for clients on assistance for education, training 

and employment.  Other provinces are trying to catch up to 

what we're doing.  We hired investigators a year and a half ago.  

I already told you about that.  So quit playing politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

District Health Board Elections 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, 

today you have appointed another so-called independent 

commission, namely Mr. Garf Stevenson, to look into the 

health board elections. 

 

Let's get this straight, Madam Minister.  First you appoint the 

boards, then your appointed boards tell you they want to remain 

appointed, they don't want 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

elections any time soon.  So then you appoint your friend, Garf 

Stevenson, to tell you not to hold the elections right away.  One 

NDP appointment after another, and you call that democracy, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, this is nothing but another stalling tactic.  

And you know it, and everyone else knows it.  Why don't you 

do the right thing, Madam Minister, and hold district health 

board elections this fall? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

opposite should be ashamed of himself.  Mr. Stevenson is the 

former president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and he is a 

well-respected member of the province's agriculture and 

business community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have every confidence, Mr. Speaker, 

that Mr. Stevenson . . . I have every confidence that Mr. 

Stevenson will consult broadly with the public and will consult 

fairly and in a consistent manner with people throughout the 

province and provide us with his recommendations on the 

matter.  I think that this is an important process for the 

government to undertake. 

 

We have indicated now for a two- or three-month period that 

we were putting in place a process in order to go out and 

consult with people and provide the government with 

recommendations, and Mr. Stevenson has agreed to form an 

independent, one-person commission to provide us with his 

recommendations.  And I have every confidence that he will do 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, Garf 

Stevenson has already received appointments to a couple of 

other government boards: the Gass Commission, SaskTel board 

of directors, Saskatchewan Health Council; and more 

importantly, NDP Party contributor.  And he's being paid, he's 

being paid, Madam Minister, $500 a day by your government.  

So he answers to your government not the people on the health 

boards, Madam Minister -- just like board appointments answer 

to your government not the people in the health boards, Madam 

Minister. 

 

You could have saved $200,000 by cancelling this phoney 

commission, Madam Minister.  You could save hundreds of 

thousands more dollars by holding the elections this fall.  That's 

what SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) are telling you, Madam Minister, and the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But that's why you had to hire Garf Stevenson to tell you 

something different, wasn't it, Madam Minister?  Madam 

Minister, why don't you spend this money on 

health services and the delivery of health care services rather 

than on phoney commissions set up and staffed by Garf 

Stevenson, Madam Minister?  Why don't you just hold the 

elections this fall as the people of Saskatchewan want? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the 

hon. member from Kindersley and the official opposition, as 

the Minister of Health has indicated, really ought to be 

ashamed of himself with the line of questioning which he has 

undertaken. 

 

But this person and this group is shameless.  They are simply 

incapable of exhibiting shame or acknowledgement of the 

predicament that they're in.  Here the member from Kindersley 

gets up and he says, why don't you get up and just hold the 

elections?  Maybe the hon. member might in his next question 

tell us, under what criteria, on what boundaries -- on what 

boundaries.  You tell us what you think the criteria are. 

 

Don't tell us we had two years.  You have fought the Bill; you 

have fought the appointment of the commission; you have 

fought the wellness model. You are sticking your head in the 

sand, working against health care reform, and then you get up 

in this shameless, partisan attack, when we're trying to establish 

the ground rules for fair elections to fulfil the statutory 

obligation.  No wonder you people are in single digit numbers 

as far as public support in the province is concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you and 

the Department of Health have had two years to set up these 

district board elections, and you know it.  And when you've set 

out elections like . . . when you set up a process like this, with a 

politician at-large like Mr. Garf Stevenson, of course he's open 

to criticism, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier. 

 

But that's no problem for you folks, is it, Mr. Premier?  Hold 

the elections whenever you want.  The people of Saskatchewan 

want them now, Mr. Premier.  They want them this fall.  

SUMA and SARM want them this fall.  And they're the people 

who represent folks all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister.  And you could be saving hundreds of thousands of 

dollars at the same time, Mr. Premier.  But oh no, you've got a 

problem with holding these elections, don't you, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, the question is very simple:  will you or will you 

not hold elections this fall, as SUMA and SARM and other 

groups across Saskatchewan are calling for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, the would-be 

leader of the Conservative caucus, the junior member from 

Kindersley, had better change his 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

approach or he will not be leader of anything.  Mind you, I 

don't think being a leader of the Conservative Party . . . He 

exhibits such an agitation and such a high anxiety about this 

health care reform. 

 

We're talking about a person who has headed the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, 60,000 members, and elected -- 60,000 people, 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and a member who is very 

prominent in the business community as well.  You, sir, will 

stop to nothing and you will stoop to nothing to destroy 

anybody in your attempt to kill health care reform. 

 

I tell you, you're back in the 18th century.  You're not going to 

succeed.  We're building the finest health care system in 

Saskatchewan.  Garf Stevenson and every other publicly 

minded, publicly spirited citizen is helping us in that task.  And 

I tell you, you should grow up and join in too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I'll tell 

you why there's high anxiety in some constituencies around this 

province . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Well I don't know how many people 

we have on their feet at one particular time, but we just can't 

have this constant interruption.  Members ask questions, and no 

sooner have they asked a question, then they're interrupting 

with the person that's giving the answer. 

 

The person who asked a question is being interrupted by the 

members who are trying to give the answer.  We can't have a 

half a dozen or a dozen people speaking at one time.  Please 

have respect for each other in asking a question and answering 

a question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I'll tell 

you why there's anxiety in some areas of this province:  three 

hospitals in my constituency alone closed as a result of you and 

your health care reforms. 

 

How many closed in your constituency, Mr. Premier?  How 

many closed in your constituency? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the member from Turtleford 

please come to order.  He's been yelling across the Chamber all 

afternoon.  I ask him to please come to order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Premier, and then on top of it all, 

you and your government and the Department of Health set up 

this phoney commission at $500 a day for an NDP partisan and 

pay him that kind of money when health care is going down the 

drain in this province, Mr. Premier. 

 

Why don't you and your Department of Health do something 

honourable for the people of Saskatchewan and hold the 

elections this fall, what people all across this province are 

calling for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the question, this 

particular question is laughable -- laughable. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Listen to the people -- SARM, SUMA. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The member seated from his position 

says listen to the people.  You know, even SUMA in the big 

cities is going through a redistribution of wards.  You have to 

have ground rules for the election.  You've got to figure out 

where the districts are going to be; you've got to figure out 

who's going to be eligible to vote; you've got to make sure that 

there's a person who does this fairly, who knows both rural 

Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan -- a person who's got 

experience. 

 

You know, this kind of low-level personality attack of people 

who cannot defend themselves is absolutely unparalleled in this 

legislature.  I tell you that the Conservative Party I didn't think 

could sink to the depths that it has sunk today.  But it is 

possible for them to sink even lower yet. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this kind of mud raking, this kind of an 

attack, all of which is intended to destroy the health care reform 

which is leading North America, all of which is intended to 

destroy the necessary changes, will not work, Mr. Speaker, 

because the people of Saskatchewan know we're on the right 

track.  Come on, get on to building rather than destroying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Infrastructure Program 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Premier this afternoon.  Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan 

government tried very hard to be the first to sign up for the 

federal infrastructure program in February.  And Saskatchewan 

people are anxious to know what the plans are for our province. 

 

Can you tell us how many Saskatchewan jobs the infrastructure 

program will create directly and when the first project will 

begin? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, we have carried out an 

extensive consultation process, and much work has now been 

done but is not yet complete with respect to the infrastructure 

program.  I'm advised by the minister in charge, who is the 

Deputy Premier who is away at a conference in Halifax on 

trade barriers, that the cooperation between the municipalities, 

rural and urban, and the federal government has been very 

good. 

 

We expect that there will be hundreds of jobs created by this 

over the two-year period.  I do not want this to be viewed as an 

attack on the infrastructure program, but it must be 

remembered that the total amount of money will only be $173 

million over two years. 

 

We welcome it, but with that size of contribution it's hardly 

going to set off major job creation.  It's 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

welcome, because any kind of job creation we can get will be 

of assistance to us.  And we appreciate the federal support.  The 

numbers will be finalized once the programs fall more clearly 

into line, which should be within the next 10 days, two weeks, 

or so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  As I said, the 

Saskatchewan government tried very hard to be the first 

province to sign up which should have given us the jump on 

putting people to work first. 

 

Today's newspaper headline says:  "Man., Sask. hard hit by job 

losses".  Yesterday, the Winnipeg Free Press covered the 

Manitoba government announcement that 131 projects worth 

more than $130 million are now in place.  However, Mr. 

Premier, the province of Saskatchewan is only now sending out 

application forms for the infrastructure program to 

municipalities as of April 5, and I know that members of this 

Assembly received the same kind of thing. 

 

And I say, application forms, Mr. Premier?  Can you explain 

why it has taken so long for the province of Saskatchewan to 

get the project applications out, and how long it will take for 

the approval and tendering processes to take place so that 

people can actually start applying for jobs in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say two things 

with respect to this question:  first of all, I want to avoid -- 

although I could get into it -- a blame-casting situation where 

there are explanations with respect to the delays pertaining to 

the federal government's aspects of infrastructure.  But I'm 

going to avoid that.  Because I think, on balance, our situation 

has been fairly good and working fairly well. 

 

Secondly, what we want to do . . . I wish the hon. member from 

Kindersley would contain himself -- he's just a jack-in-the-box 

today with his comments, and I don't know what it is that got 

into his pants, but just calm down, please, member from 

Kindersley. 

 

So what happens here, is a situation of making sure that we get 

the right projects -- the right projects -- not just any projects, 

but the right projects, which are long-standing. 

 

Now the job loss situation is as you pointed out.  I might add, 

however, no small measure of the blame for that is due to the 

fact that the Bank of Canada and the federal Liberal 

government has permitted interest rates to climb in the last 

couple of weeks or so.  The biggest inhibitor of jobs in an 

export area or in any area, the biggest impact on farmers, on 

small-business people in this province is the high interest rate 

policy which is being followed by the current, brand-new 

Liberal government. 

 

And to me, I'm worried about this because it seems like there's 

no change from John Crow to the new Bank of Canada 

governor and no change from Martin and Mazankowski with 

respect to the interest rate approach.  It is right, we have job 

losses.  Our biggest 

problem here is high interest rates.  I hope that you would have 

some influence with your federal counterparts in ensuring that 

the interest rates come down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker.  Your comments, Mr. Premier, are most interesting 

considering that they really are a commentary on your 

understanding of investment and the overall context of the 

North American . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, 

Manitoba has included -- apparently Manitoba has had none of 

the difficulties you're talking about in getting cooperation from 

Ottawa -- they have included a $10 million project which will 

provide jobs in street and sidewalk and lane repair for 1,800 

people currently on welfare in Manitoba. 

 

In February, as has been discussed already today, the number 

of people on welfare in Saskatchewan rose to 81,562 from 

80,593 the previous month.  And that is dangerously close to 

10 per cent of our entire population being on welfare - 

_ not unemployed, but on welfare. 

 

Can you tell me what your objectives are in terms of directing 

infrastructure monies to ensure that the thousands of welfare 

recipients in Saskatchewan are offered some hope and 

opportunity through this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again the parallelisms of 

the questions that we get from the Liberals and the 

Conservatives is underlined by this question.  The 

Conservatives for the last two days have been doing their best 

to beat up on welfare people, and the Leader of the Liberal 

Party is not quite as, how should I put it, unsubtle or blatant 

about it, but she comes in in any event with respect to what can 

you do with respect to welfare people. 

 

I say that the task here is to make sure that the projects are well 

thought out, that they create jobs, that where we can employ 

welfare people we employ them.  But there are a number of 

people also who are unemployed who are not on welfare.  It 

depends on the nature of the job and the nature of the 

applications which are accepted ultimately.  The trick here is 

jobs. 

 

I say again, the economy in the province of Saskatchewan -- 

and I would say throughout the West -- is more affected by the 

level of interest rate increases than it is anything else.  We don't 

have enough money -- Ottawa and Regina.  I note the Prime 

Minister said this morning in a press conference that the federal 

government is broke.  We do not have enough money, Regina 

and Saskatchewan, for make-work projects.  You can make 

more jobs and get economic activity by having a low interest 

rate policy which will assist our farmers and our small-business 

community, and that is an economic fact. 

 

So I say to you Liberals, please, the jobs on infrastructure are 

coming, the program is going to be a 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

good, solid program.  Do something more than that, get the 

federal Liberal Party off this high-interest kick and let's get 

people working again at it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

move first reading of a Bill to amend The Education Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 32 -- An Act 

to amend The Labour Standards Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well one nice thing 

about a debate that can follow from one day to the next is that 

we have in our minds, fresh, all of the things that are of 

particular interest on the subject.  And of course today we are 

talking again about the amendments to The Labour Standards 

Act, formally known as Bill 32 to the people in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I took some time yesterday to point out that I felt 

very strongly that we had to look at this Bill, not just from the 

perspective of the business community, but more importantly, 

that we should spend some time talking about this Bill from the 

point of view of the workers of this province. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that more and more we 

are coming to discover that the workers in this province are 

opposed to this Bill.  The workers in this province do not want 

changes to The Labour Standards Act that will in fact cause 

them to lose jobs or cause the job base in our province to 

deteriorate or to grow smaller, for whatever reasons.  And they 

are quite willing and anxious to have a compromise position 

that would allow them to work with dignity and respect, but 

also to allow the province to expand the job base so that there 

would be opportunities for all of the people who need jobs in 

our province. 

 

I pointed out yesterday, as you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that we 

had many, many letters and correspondences from a lot of 

business people, and yet we only had a very few letters of input 

from those people who actually defend this legislation.  The 

only real significant defence of the legislation came from 

the union people in Saskatoon.  And the other defence of 

course was a newspaper article wherein Barb Byers has been 

quoted as being upset by the proposed amendments that might 

change the Act. 

 

Now we need to deal with that, Mr. Speaker, because here is a 

serious conflict of interest between Barb Byers and the workers 

of Saskatchewan.  What Barb Byers is saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan is that she doesn't particularly like what the 

government might do with this Bill and therefore people should 

accept the fact that it would then end up being a good Bill even 

though it were detrimental to the province.  It's reverse 

psychology that the woman is using on us, or trying to, and of 

course we saw through that a long time back. 

 

The reality is though that she bases her disagreement on the 

Bill on assumptions that would take power away from union 

leaders, and that is her gripe with the changes that are 

proposed.  She is not defending the needs of the workers of this 

province in her arguments and in her debate.  She is totally 

opposed only to those changes that would take power out of her 

hands and the hands of union leadership.  Therefore she does 

not represent the workers of this province.  And I don't think 

we need to take her very seriously any longer in this debate, 

because quite frankly she is a self-serving person who is only 

trying to serve her own power-grabbing interests. 

 

(1415) 

 

And with that I want to go on to the real needs of the workers 

of this province and what they particularly need in legislation.  

And there are some things, as I've pointed out yesterday, that 

workers in this province definitely need and a lot of those 

issues have been addressed in this legislation.  And people from 

all across the province . . . particularly I'll deal with the position 

of SUMA and SARM and some of these other organizations to 

begin with, but basically they have said that they too agree that 

some changes are necessary in the labour Bills and that they 

should be done.  They must not of course be done without 

consultation and a fair and reasonable debate on the issues so as 

to determine how legislation can be brought into effect that will 

allow all sides of the issue to coexist together and to maintain a 

job base as well as protection for the workers of the province. 

 

And so I think with that, Mr. Speaker, I should enter into the 

records a few points made by some of the folks in the province 

that have been corresponding with us.  I have here a letter from 

SUMA and it's actually a press release that they released for the 

general public, so there's no secret about this, the government 

members have had it.  But the general public may not have had 

access to this too much, so I will read it into the record and then 

make my comments based on the materials therein. 

 

Now on March 30, 1994, SUMA joins the public sector 

coalition calling for delay in the passage of the labour standards 

amendments.  It says: 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, SUMA 

president Ted Cholod, today announced the association has 

joined a coalition of public sector employers calling for a 

delay in passage of amendments to The Labour Standards 

Act.  This is clearly an unprecedented move by associations 

representing public sector employers, Cholod said. 

 

Collectively, public sector employers represent the single 

largest employee group in the province.  The fact that we 

have marshalled our resources in a common call to table 

the amendments indicates just how serious our concerns 

are.  Cholod estimates that the coalition, which includes 

SUMA, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, greater than 40,000 employees. 

 

Now, noting that the coalition is not opposed to needed 

changes, Cholod pointed out that SUMA is not confident 

the amendments meet the criteria and is concerned that the 

amendments will unnecessarily disrupt existing collective 

agreements. 

 

He goes on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In a meeting yesterday with the Labour minister (and his 

name is there) our association asked for more time to 

analyse the impact of amendments for our sector, said 

Cholod.  We asked the minister to table the Bill until the 

next legislative session and to use that time in fine-tuning 

the language of the Bill and to draft sector-by-sector 

regulations. 

 

Cholod noted that because the regulations will define how 

the amendments impact on the workplace, says it is 

imperative that they be drafted before Bill 32 is passed.  

We raised with (and the minister's name is here) concerns 

on how the amendments will impact existing collective 

agreements and how they might displace part-time 

workers or cause a reduction in benefits as a cost-saving 

measure, Cholod said. 

 

In each case, the minister told us those concerns would be 

addressed through regulations.  If the regulations will be 

that powerful, we want to see them before the amendments 

pass the legislature.  Cholod added he does not understand 

why the provincial government cannot concede to the 

coalition's request to table the Bill. 

 

Now (the minister's name again) has told us that the 

amendments will not be proclaimed until the regulations 

are written, a process that could take anywhere from six 

months to a year, Cholod remarked.  Our request to table 

the Bill meets the minister's time line and gives all 

interested parties the time needed to provide responsible 

and sound public policy. 

 

The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

represents the interests of urban government, including 

cities, towns, villages, and northern communities, to the 

provincial government.  For further information, you could 

contact the president. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, an awful lot of ground is covered in this 

statement.  And it is probably yet the briefest and most concise 

piece of work that we have describing completely and fully 

where the problems lie between the government and the people 

of this province. 

 

As Mr. Cholod points out, they do agree, as you will have 

noted, that there are changes needed.  There are things that they 

agree with in the legislation.  However they do see some 

serious problems because the way the Act is written, these 

40,000 employees presently being employed by the public 

sector groups, all have collectively agreed to contracts.  

Collective bargaining process was used.  The members of the 

unions and the union leaderships have come to agreements with 

management and they have signed contracts.  All of these 

contracts, Mr. Speaker, could in fact become null and void 

upon the proclamation of this legislation as it is presently 

written, which would mean we could throw the whole province 

into absolute chaos. 

 

This is the concern that the president of SUMA is expressing in 

one segment of his complaints.  The fact that you could have 

40,000 people without a legitimate contract or a contract that 

was no longer in existence, that had become void because of 

the legislation, that, Mr. Speaker, could result in all of a 

sudden, for example, the union leadership saying, well perhaps 

the judges -- as we talked about the other day, were going to 

get 20 per cent increases -- and they might say, well if those 

fellows were worth that much, we are too; so now we're going 

to have a strike unless we get 20 per cent increases. 

 

And of course we all know that that's an exaggeration of the 

realities of life, but here we have to consider a little bit of 

exaggeration in order to make our point.  And the point that has 

to be made is that if the union leadership had 40,000 people at 

its disposal to strike at one time in the public service sector, 

then they certainly could hold the province up for ransom.  

They could ask for something that would be absolutely too 

expensive for the taxpayers of the province to ever be able to 

afford, and we would be in utter chaos.  Because all of these 

people could walk out on strike, and yet if you gave them what 

they wanted it would break the bank.  We would literally cause 

the province to become bankrupt. 

 

And that is the fear that Mr. Cholod and the other 

representatives on these groups fear.  They fear that this 

legislation may cause the door to open for such absolute chaos 

in our province. 

 

Now the paper goes on, Mr. Speaker, to explain that the 

minister had told certain people about the 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

amendments and how they were going to be handled.  He had 

made assurances that the regulations and the amendments 

would be brought in together and here we have a government 

who has not done what they said they would do.  They told the 

president of SUMA and the other leaders of this province that 

the regulations would be brought in with the amendments, and 

most people don't realize that regs and amendments are 

different. 

 

There's a serious, serious difference between the two methods 

of application of the way the legislation will work.  

Amendments of course are the changes to the actual legislation 

but they are very vague and they can be very general.  They can 

be so vague and so general, Mr. Speaker, that in fact what they 

will say is that a particular area of the legislation will now 

allow the government, through regulation, to make whatever 

changes they want to make.  And of course those regulations 

can be made when the Legislative Assembly is not even sitting 

and they can by made by orders in council, which of course 

would be a decision of cabinet, and no one in the legislative 

process would ever see those regulations or be able to debate in 

this public forum how the impact of those regulations would 

affect the people of the province either in one sector or in the 

province as a whole. 

 

And so because these people who represent these umbrella 

groups are very political in their own worlds, at a level of 

politics which is community politics -- mayors and councillors, 

the third level of government we call them in Saskatchewan -- 

they do understand the political system because they live with 

it, they study it, and they have an understanding for it. 

 

And because they understand what might happen to them, they 

said to the minister: we will not agree to the changes that are 

needed or any other changes unless you bring them all in 

together so that we can see them as a package.  We want to 

know what's going to happen all the way through this process. 

 

The minister apparently, according to this document, has made 

that promise that he was going to bring the regulations and the 

amendments in at the same time so that everyone in the public 

could and would be able to assess the impact on the entire 

province from this legislation with its regulations.  Now, 

apparently, according to this document, the minister has backed 

out.  He has not kept his word by not bringing forth regulations 

and therefore the business community is very upset. 

 

That is what has forced their hand into doing what Mr. Cholod 

points out is a very unprecedented thing to do, which is to try to 

mount public pressure against the government of the province 

-- the very government that they depend on and need and have 

to deal with on a day-to-day basis in order to have their cities 

and towns survive. 

 

All kinds of infrastructure deals have to be made and people 

have to get along.  So it is not normal at all for these leaders to 

deliberately pick a fight with the government, because they 

depend on one another far 

too much to have that make sense unless it's on an extremely 

critical issue.  In fact this issue is so extreme and so important 

that the people of the province have decided that they have to 

do this extreme measure, which is to make a news release 

against the government's Bill, the Bill No. 32. 

 

So with that kind of pressure being applied, we would have 

thought, Mr. Speaker, that the minister in charge would have 

reconsidered his position and would have introduced the 

regulations and the amendments and kept his word to the 

community at large, in particular to the municipal groups and 

the other business people in our community. 

 

But they haven't done that, and we seriously have to wonder 

why.  What could possibly be in these regulations that would 

be so terrible that the people shouldn't know what they are?  Is 

the minister afraid to tell the people what he's actually going to 

do them?  Or is he afraid that the union leaders will be upset 

when they find out what the regulations really are? 

 

Who is the minister afraid of?  Who is he afraid is going to be 

upset?  Perhaps the business community, perhaps the municipal 

organizations, perhaps the union leaders, or perhaps everyone.  

But the reality is that he must be afraid of something or he 

would bring these regulations in and let the people of this 

province judge them before this forum adjourns for the 

summer. 

 

So it seems to me that with the explanation that Mr. Cholod has 

given about how the timing would work, that it would be very 

clear that no one would be seriously hurt if we put this matter 

off until the fall. 

 

Now as Mr. Cholod points out, the minister has told them that 

the amendments will not be proclaimed until the regulations are 

written, a process that could take anywhere from six months to 

a year. 

 

Now if that's the truth -- and I'm sure that most people would 

like to believe that a minister would be factual in his 

determination of timing and the process that he's going to 

follow -- most people would, I think, have to take the minister 

at his word on the surface at least, at the outset.  And they 

would have to give him the benefit of the doubt as having told 

them what he intends to do is factually going to happen.  And 

only if the minister didn't do what he said he was going to do, 

that you would in retrospect have to expose him for what he 

really had done. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it makes eminent sense that if 

the minister has told the community at large that he is going to 

take six months or a year for this whole process to be melted 

together and to be written up, then in fact Mr. Cholod's 

argument is correct that no one could be hurt or upset by 

putting this whole matter off for another six months. 

 

(1430) 

 

If it's going to take six months to a year before you can 

empower anything or enact anything or have any 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

effect from the Bill, then surely it wouldn't hurt to not pass the 

Bill itself until next fall, which is probably six months away. 

 

So I think the argument is very well made, that we ought to 

take some time, table this Bill, and write up the regulations.  

Perhaps we need to bring Garf Stevenson in again to research 

the regulations.  Perhaps Mr. Stevenson could research the 

amendments and perhaps he could make a one-man 

commission report on how it should be done.  And if that's 

necessary, fine and dandy.  We could give him another $500 a 

day to do that as well.  But in the end, after six months, we 

could at least then see what the government's intentions are for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

People will say, Mr. Speaker, well why is it so important not to 

pass the legislation?  Why not just trust the government?  Pass 

the legislation and then we'll trust the government to do 

whatever is necessary to make things work. 

 

Well the problem is, Mr. Speaker, that very few people in our 

province trust this government for any reason whatsoever, at 

all.  There just is no trust left in the political system or the 

judicial system in our province.  With the breaking of contracts 

that has gone on in Saskatchewan over the past two years, 

there's absolutely nobody in this province that has any faith or 

confidence in any contract or any promise made by this 

administration. 

 

So there is the problem.  People simply don't trust the 

government to pass legislation and then make it work to the 

betterment of the people.  They are absolutely frightened and 

they are appalled at the way in which this administration flouts 

the law whenever it chooses to for its own particular benefit. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the legislation, once passed, will 

provide no more opportunity for the general public to have 

input.  There is no guarantee that this minister would keep his 

word and have meetings.  There is no guarantee in the 

legislation that he would in fact listen to the people.  And 

because there is no guarantee that there could be meaningful 

input into the regulations in the way that they are structured, 

people simply don't feel they can trust the government with 

everything that is so important and near and dear to their hearts, 

in their lives. 

 

And this gets down to the fundamental realities of existence for 

many of the people of our province.  For business people in the 

business community, if you cannot be competitive, then you are 

going to be out of business.  The profit margins in business in 

Saskatchewan I would suggest are probably as narrow today as 

they have ever been, and certainly by talking to many of the 

older folks in our community, they have to be paralleled only 

by the time of the Great Depression in the Dirty Thirties. 

 

And with those kinds of margins of profitability in business, 

with those kinds of limited amounts of movement within the 

dollar ranges that people have 

to work with, it only takes a small bit of change in the system 

to cause people to start to lose money.  And once that happens, 

it is only bankruptcy time or time to move out of the province. 

 

Many businesses of course choose the latter.  They will move 

to Alberta, British Columbia.  They'll go to Montana or North 

Dakota or some place else.  Even a few of them might even end 

up in Ontario, who knows, although I doubt it.  I don't know 

why anybody would want to jump from the frying pan into the 

fire.  But they do move out of Saskatchewan because they have 

to try to survive.  Either that or they declare bankruptcy and 

they're gone. 

 

The reality is that those businesses that might have come into 

the province will no longer come in.  I alluded yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, to people in Manitoba who had called me and told me 

about the reality that people they were representing in the 

manufacturing industry and the financial industry were in fact 

very seriously worried about the labour legislation that was 

being changed in Saskatchewan. 

 

And they in fact were sending a representative to this province, 

to this city of Regina, to study the legislation to find out if their 

clients could still competitively come into this province.  And 

they feared that they would have to advise them that they could 

no longer make a decent living or a decent profit in this 

province and they were going to leave.  The member from 

Regina, of course, suggests that it's good to get rid of them -- 

goodbye, get them out of here, who needs them. 

 

Well I suggest to you people that you need them.  More than 

anybody else in the world, you people need the businesses and 

the investments because without them who's going to pay the 

bills for your 81,000 people on welfare and your other 70,000 

on unemployment insurance?  Who is going to pay the bills for 

the 150,000 people that you've got sitting around in this 

province looking for jobs that you haven't got? 

 

Twelve thousand less jobs in this province today than there was 

a year ago.   That's the statistics that were read here the other 

day; 12,000 fewer jobs.  And you call yourselves a government 

that was going to eliminate poverty and dispose of all of the 

need for food banks.  Food banks now lined up twice as long as 

they ever were, begging for food.  Having farmers even 

donating land to try to grow some food to feed people. 

 

And your government is the most disastrous failure that we've 

ever seen in the history of this province.  Every promise that 

was ever made, every commitment you've ever made, you've 

forgotten it or you've broken it.  Absolute, total chaos is what 

we're heading for in this province.  And this labour legislation 

is really the shovel that's digging the grave to bury 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, my friend, is exactly where you're going with this 

labour legislation.  You're burying Saskatchewan in a hole that 

it will never dig itself out of in all of the history of my lifetime 

and yours put 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

together. Because we will be so far into debt, because our tax 

base will be gone and our job base will be gone, that there 

won't be one person left in this province who has the ability to 

get out. 

 

Everybody will leave that has the opportunity to go.  There's a 

few of us old guys that are just too stubborn to go, but the rest 

will all leave.  And certainly that means our children.  Children 

without jobs.  And why?  Because we have labour legislation 

that is so onerous that nobody will build or create or develop a 

job. 

 

Even the government itself can't create a job in this province.  

The only possibility we had today would have been if the 

Premier would have resigned and then we would have had at 

least one seat open so that somebody else could have had a job.  

That's the only way you could have created a job in this 

province today.  There is no other activity going on that will 

create work in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to take some time, Mr. Speaker, to go into some of the 

arguments that have been passed on to us as to what is wrong 

with this legislation and why it needs to be changed.  I want to 

do that because it needs to be on the record, Mr. Speaker, so 

that the minister in charge, who I'm sure will be studying this 

very carefully, will know why he has to make the changes that 

people have asked for. 

 

Now we had from the public sector area a little list made up to 

point out to the minister what is going wrong, some major 

concerns.  And they put it down in point form so that we could 

discuss it in debate here today. 

 

Now the lack of prior release of the amendments -- it says here 

that: 

 

Despite numerous commitments to employer groups, the 

provincial government chose not to provide advance 

release discussions of proposed amendments.  Such 

actions do not contribute to cooperative partnerships in the 

development or implementation of labour policy.  Our 

respective associations take great exception to the manner 

in which the province reneged on its obligation to 

employer groups. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, says it in words as 

polite as you can get.  The minister told them one thing and 

then he did another.  And then we wonder why the people of 

this province won't trust the government.  That's about as polite 

as you can get at saying that they were stabbed in the back, that 

they were told one thing and then the government changed its 

mind and didn't do it. 

 

And so I don't think I need to dwell on that any more because 

the people of this province know exactly how that happens in 

every facet of our society over the past two years. 

 

We start with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

contracts and 60,000 farmers that had those contracts broken so 

that the net effect now of course is 

that we have $350 million of money sitting in a pot that should 

have come from the federal government into the hands of 

farmers and it didn't happen.  The breaking of those contracts 

has cost this province the spin-off effect of $350 million that 

should have passed through the hands of the farming 

community, money that would have been spent for sure 

because the farming community is well known for its ability to 

put cash flow into an economy. 

 

And what has happened?  That money now sits there while we 

have a government on the opposite side of this House who says 

that they hold the federal government responsible to help the 

prairie farmers, and yet it is their actions that has stopped this 

money from coming to the province -- an absolute disgrace.  

But that of course is only one contract that was broken once . . . 

one type of contract which of course affected 60,000 individual 

farm families. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have the judges' contract where a lot of 

people say yes, they shouldn't have got that much.  But here we 

have a contract that is broken again, a very important principle, 

a precedent in our system, another justification for the breaking 

of contracts with anybody that has one. 

 

And what is the effect?  Surely the judges won't get their 24 per 

cent; they won't, not for the moment at least.  But how did this 

fiasco occur?  This fiasco occurred because people decided that 

they would trust the government.  They trusted the government 

when the government said we will set up a commission, a 

three-person commission, that will study the situation and come 

in with a recommendation; and we will pass legislation that 

will make it the law that everybody has to obey whatever that 

commission says. 

 

It was even a three-man commission, not just like Garf 

Stevenson, his one-man commission that's on the road today.  I 

mean at least he doesn't have to argue with anybody to get their 

agreement.  He'll know that 100 per cent of the commission 

agrees with whatever he comes up with, seeing as how he's the 

only one there. 

 

But in this other commission we've got three men.  Here's the 

joke of the whole thing that most of the general public haven't 

really heard about.  These three people are all legal people, all 

lawyers, I understand.  Now here you've got three lawyers 

appointed to decide what the judges' wages should be and the 

law that says that the government has to, by its own law, accept 

whatever they come up with.  Every lawyer knows very well 

who he's going to stand in front of one day -- a judge -- and 

what's going to happen to his career if that judge takes a 

disliking to him.  We all know that.  I see a few lawyers 

smiling over there. 

 

Well the reality of life is very simply this: there isn't a lawyer 

that's ever passed his bar that isn't bright enough to know that 

you don't cross a judge.  So you're naturally going to offer him 

a whole bunch of money so that he thinks you're a great guy.  

So you got three guys on a commission that are absolutely 

bound 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

to have to give a good decision in favour of the judges. 

 

So what silliness was it to put those three people on that 

commission?  You almost forced yourself to have to break your 

own law before you even got it rolling by just the fact of who 

you put on the board.  Good, honest people.  But they, by the 

nature of their business, had to find in favour of a high rate 

rather than a low rate.  If you'd have put three farmers on there, 

they'd have found a way to do it a lot different, I can assure 

you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, very important that these contracts having 

been broken, now tell everybody in this province that there has 

been a sweeping signal sent out to everyone -- you can't trust 

the government.  You can't trust the legal system either, 

because now, every contract in this province is up in the air.  

Any one the government decides they don't like, they simply 

pass a piece of retroactive legislation and break it -- it's 

cancelled. 

 

And so the general public say, when you come with labour 

legislation that is so onerous that it absolutely puts us out of 

sync with everybody else in North America, and the 

government says we'll fix it with regulations later on -- just 

pass the legislation and go away and be quiet -- nobody is 

going to be quiet because nobody trusts the government. 

 

Nobody can afford to trust this government because it is 

absolutely a death sentence to your business if you get involved 

with this government in any way, shape, or form.  And if you 

don't believe it, ask the 60,000 farmers who now know that 

there's $350 million of federal money that they can't . . . 

because of the breaking of their contracts by this government.  

How about that.  A lot of money. 

 

Well, my friends, most people would have agreed that you 

shouldn't offer judges as much money. But you put yourselves 

in a box.  You cornered yourselves. 

 

And then we hear from the minister from Swift Current -- the 

minister from Swift Current who thinks that Medicine Hat is a 

nicer city than Swift Current and a bigger city to shop in, and 

that's his defence of his government policy. 

 

The reason people leave our province, of course, is not because 

of the 9 per cent taxes that we have to pay extra, it's because 

Medicine Hat is a beautifuler city and they've got more 

businesses.  He never did think that the reason that the more 

businesses are there is because we drove them all over there. 

 

(1445) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've been talking about the reasons why 

the public and the general community want to see this 

legislation reconsidered.  And I want to go on to the no. 2 item 

that the coalition has raised, and that is the legislative 

timetable.  It says here that: 

 

It is our understanding that the provincial government 

wishes to complete passage of the 

amending Act by week's end.  This time frame is too short.  

No need is so pressing in this province's labour 

environment that we could not provide greater time to 

reflect on the impacts and costs of the amendments.  We 

recommend that the Act be tabled to the 1995 session of 

the legislature, whereby providing all parties with the time 

needed to thoroughly analyse. 

 

A very simple request and a very justifiable request too, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister in his negotiations and discussions and 

conversations with the SUMA members and other members of 

the business coalition in this province said that he couldn't 

bring the results of this legislation into effect until six months 

to a year down the road, in which case of course there is no 

need to have the legislation passed and empowered as a law. 

 

Why would you need to pass a law that can't go into effect for 

six months?  Where is the pressing need to have that timing 

right now?  Why not wait till next fall or next spring when 

you've got the regulations put into place so that everybody can 

study them, examine them, and know exactly what they're 

going to do? 

 

Are we going to say in the regulations that perhaps the food 

industry, perhaps the fast food industry -- we may categorize 

that a little more -- in the regulations would be exempt from 

this legislation and that their part-time workers would no longer 

be affected?  Is that a possibility?  In that case would Barb 

Byers be very happy?  I don't know.  But we don't know if 

that's going to be in the regulations or not.  Maybe it will say in 

the regulations that we are giving no exemptions, that 

everybody will be treated the same; in which case of course all 

the McDonald stores will probably have to close their doors. 

 

Are you afraid that the business community would be 

particularly upset by that and simply leave the province if they 

knew what was going to happen?  Or do you fear that maybe 

they would mount a public campaign that would put maybe 50 

or 60,000 people on the lawn of this Assembly? 

 

You see we don't know what's coming; that's what the fear is.  

We need to know what these regulations are all about.  There's 

speculation that starts from zero and goes to infinity on what 

kinds of changes could be implemented in this legislation 

through the regulations, that nobody has any idea what is even 

being contemplated. 

 

It could be just about anything that the imagination could come 

up with, because there is no indication how many regulations 

there will be.  What would be in the regulations?  Who would 

have input into the regulations?  Who in fact might even be the 

person to sit down and write them?  Would the minister write 

them?  Would he invite Garf Stevenson to write them?  Perhaps 

Barb Byers would write them.  Nobody knows. 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

Somebody has to tell the people of this province what kind of a 

realistic business future do they have.  What kind of an 

opportunity will there still be to stay in business when this 

legislation is finished?  How many people will in fact be able to 

continue to operate under these guidelines? 

 

And it all hinges on the regulations and the amendments -- all 

of which no one has seen.  I dare say the minister may not have 

seen them because I really don't believe he's even written them.  

I have my suspicions that not even no. 1 has been written yet, 

so how could the people know what's in it?  How could anyone 

know? The prospective mayor for Saskatoon says she knows. 

Unfortunately I don't think the people trust her either but they 

may elect her as the mayor.  And I wish you well.  I wish you 

well. 

 

One good thing about that, Mr. Speaker, would be that we 

would create one more job in the province because then her 

seat would be empty and somebody else could get the job by 

running for it. 

 

I want to go on to the no. 3 item, Mr. Speaker, the timing of the 

amendments. 

 

It is unclear (it says here) why the provincial government 

would choose to implement amendments that will produce 

significant employer costs at this point in our financial 

recovery. 

 

The amendments make it extremely difficult, if not 

impossible, to attract new industry and employers to our 

province, especially when compared to the labour 

environment in neighbouring western provinces.  We are 

equally concerned that extension of existing industries will 

be thwarted, leading to fewer jobs and fewer workers to 

enjoy the benefits of these amendments. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, I think what they're saying is that 

this legislation is going to kill the goose that lays the golden 

egg.  In other words, we won't have investment, we won't have 

outside people coming in to start businesses, we won't have 

businesses in our province that are already here able to expand; 

in fact, they will shrink and become smaller.  We will, in fact, 

create a situation where we have less employment rather than 

more employment. 

 

Exactly the opposite to the campaign promise that this 

government made when it was out on the hustings before the 

fall of 1991.  They went around this province campaigning on a 

pledge to create jobs, to eliminate poverty, and to eliminate 

food banks. 

 

We now have no jobs, we now have more poverty than we've 

ever seen since, I don't know even if it's the 1930s, and we 

certainly, certainly do not have an end to the food banks.  

Every promise has been broken.  And in this timing of the 

amendments portion of the argument, people in the community 

are saying to this government that the very problems that you 

set out to solve, to make better, you are actually doing it 

worse.  You're coming full circle and you're destroying exactly 

that which you said you were going to create. 

 

The briefing papers, Mr. Speaker, go on under the no. 4 section 

to the powers of the minister, powers of the director of labour 

standards, and power of regulations.  The minister of course 

would try to convince everyone that regulations are not really 

that important, because of course he doesn't want anybody to 

ask any questions about them.  The reality of life is this -- and 

the business community has got your number, sir -- the 

regulations are what the legislation is all about; the regulations 

are in fact what the legislation will do to the province and to the 

people in the province. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

In describing the reasons driving amendments to the Act, 

the minister has repeatedly talked of centring the 

pendulum and depoliticalizing the statute.  The 

amendments, however, make the statute more vulnerable 

to the whims of political parties.  Should an administration 

choose to move the Act in one direction, it is probable that 

succeeding administrations will move it more firmly in the 

opposite direction. 

 

You see the legislation will do exactly the opposite to what the 

government says it wants done.  There will be a backfiring 

effect, and the pendulum will not stop in the centre; it will 

swing hard every time the administration changes -- especially 

if the history of our provincial political system holds true in the 

future. 

 

And this morning at our Crowns meeting, some of the members 

of the government side alluded to the fact that history repeats 

itself.  And if they are true then, they would be true here as 

well, and certainly then that would mean that we will change 

political parties with different philosophies from time to time. 

 

That being the case, then most certainly we would see the next 

administration take this same legislation and drastically change 

the course of the province simply by changing the regulations 

and never debating this issue in the legislature.  They would 

simply do it behind closed doors, the same as this government 

is attempting to do for themselves.  And it always seems okay 

for a government to grab power when it's in power, and it 

always seems as though that before a government is elected and 

they sit in opposition, they naturally want everything to be open 

and above-board. 

 

I recall the members opposite, when they were in opposition, 

saying totally the opposite of what they're now saying over 

there about this type of legislation.  They would have argued 

very, very strongly in opposition that legislation that allowed 

the government to do whatever it pleases through the changing 

of regulations through an order in the cabinet, should never be 

allowed.  In fact I think I could probably even dig up some 

quotes from Hansard that would echo those exact words from 

the 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

members opposite, many of whom have returned. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, for political expediency, the government 

in power tries to make life easier for itself, but it puts into place 

the very tool that can destroy all those things that they believe 

as soon as the next election comes, because they will certainly 

be defeated, and most certainly another government will sees 

things differently.  And they will swing that pendulum. 

 

And that is the fear not only for the business community, but 

for the workers of our province.  Because there is no stability in 

a system that can be allowed to be changed helter-skelter from 

one extreme to the other at the whims of a few political 

partisans.  We need stability in our government and in our 

province, and we have to eliminate that ability for the 

pendulum to swing from one side to the other without even 

hitting the middle for a brief pause. 

 

And this won't be a brief pause, quite frankly, if you think 

about it.  This legislation, if we passed it this coming week, 

won't, by the minister's own words, take effect for six months 

to a year because the regulations won't be done.  So you take 

this whole process another year down the road and we're into 

1995 spring already. From 1991 in October we're getting pretty 

close to four years going on here by next spring.  And after 

that, Mr. Speaker, we're on the downhill side to six months to 

an election. 

 

So the legislation might be in actual power for six months, or 

maybe less -- maybe three.  Maybe we'll have a June election.  

Who knows?  Even if they carried it over in '96, it's an eight- or 

ten-month legislation in effect.  By the time it really gets into 

effect and starts to destroy the business community of this 

province and really starts to shrink all of the job base in this 

province, we could have a change in government and the new 

government might take this very same legislation, totally 

change all of the regulations, and it's ball game over for your 

philosophy and everything you intended to do to try to help the 

workers of this province.  And you're actually going to stab 

them in the back by putting in a piece of legislation that is 

drafted wrong and needs to be redone. 

 

It needs to be redrawn; it needs to be retalked about; it has to be 

restructured.  You've got to do everything in this legislation 

above-board, out in the public with the people that are 

concerned and put it together right.  Pull the thing off, rewrite 

it, draw it up over again, or table it and work on it over the 

summer.  Let's get the thing right because it's not going to serve 

your needs. 

 

And even if does for a brief time, it'll be so brief that without 

any question there won't be any benefit, even to your 

philosophical needs.  Because I've already told you how you're 

going to destroy the job base.  So your economic needs are not 

going be served. 

 

You might appease a few union leaders who might vote for 

you, but the reality is that you've got another organization here 

with 40,000 employees that totally opposes what you're doing.  

If all of their employees 

vote against you, what good is your handful of union leaders?  

They can't re-elect your whole government, and the people are 

not so blind and willing to follow any more that they will 

simply say, Barb Byers said vote NDP, so we'll all vote NDP. 

 

That's not the way the voters work any more.  They're going to 

look at this legislation; they're going to say this is no good for 

us.  And they're going to say, we'll get rid of this government.  

So you're not serving any of your needs the way you're doing 

this process. 

 

I want to continue, Mr. Speaker, with the briefing note that the 

minister was supposed to have studied.  And to make sure that 

he concentrates on it, I want to deliver it to his ears today. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

If it is the intent of the province to provide the Act with 

more political neutrality, then the powers of the minister to 

use regulations to define, enlarge or restrict language of 

the Act must be removed.  Similarly, the powers of the 

director of labour standards must be disciplined through 

statute. 

 

In other words, you have to put into the legislation the rules 

that you're going to play by. 

 

You know, this reminds me, this legislation, of playing a ball 

game where you would tear out the centre 10 pages of the rule 

book, give them to one team, and tell them you can rewrite 

them after the seventh inning.  And we'll play by whatever 

rules you come back with in the seventh inning, which of 

course means that you can have 47 outs for one side and only 

three for the other, or something silly like that. 

 

But that's what it reminds me of -- playing a game without the 

rules, or with one side being able to rewrite the rules as the 

game is being played.  And then after you play this game, the 

other team gets to rewrite the rules for the next game.  I mean it 

sounds pretty silly, doesn't it? 

 

But that's exactly what this legislation is; it's utterly, outright 

silly.  When you think about the effects and repercussions that 

it will have, then it becomes deadly serious because it's people's 

lives that are on the line, it's their incomes that are on the line, 

it's their businesses that are on the line, and it is the jobs of the 

workers of this province that are going to be destroyed. 

 

(1500) 

 

This legislation is wrong.  And it has to be redone because 

there are so many arguments against it and so few for it that it 

can't be right.  When you have a solid, united community 

against a piece of legislation, as solidly as indicated by the 

hundreds of pieces of paper that have been sent to me, then it 

has to become crystal clear to you that you are on the wrong 

track. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we should go on with the more 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

legitimate arguments that were presented in the briefing papers.  

No. 5 here says that it was the instructions on collective 

bargaining were also of particular interest to the groups 

involved. 

 

The proposed amendments set a dangerous precedent to 

control the terms and conditions agreed to by employers 

and employees through collective bargaining.  By 

tradition, the practice of the provincial government has 

been loath to intrude in collective bargaining even when 

work stoppages could pose significant threat to public 

safety. Instead, members of labour have preferred to let 

parties to the negotiations reach mutually agreed-to 

settlements.  It is unclear why the provincial government 

would not consider it appropriate to establish minimum 

standards for collective agreements. 

 

I guess there's sort of a self-explanatory argument in that 

statement.  Everyone knows that in this province political 

parties of all stripes, in the past, have been very reluctant to 

interfere in the collective bargaining process.  I have not seen 

an administration that has been targeted as being opposed to 

collective bargaining.  Of course we will have members of the 

NDP saying that there were such administrations because they 

weren't in power. 

 

But the reality is that every government in this province over 

the past 50 years that I'm aware of, has supported the basic 

concept of collective bargaining.  People have been allowed, 

sometimes at great pain to the general public, to beat out their 

own problems in that bargaining process. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, sometimes it's not a very pretty 

process and certainly there are an awful lot of hard feelings at 

times, but the process can work if it's allowed to play itself 

through without too much outside interference. 

 

And whenever it has been possible to allow that process to 

continue, governments of the day have done exactly that -- 

they've stayed clear of it and not tried to get involved.  Because 

certainly it is also true that those governments that have tried to 

interfere in the collective bargaining process have usually paid 

a big price at the polls at the next election, because they get 

marked in Saskatchewan as being people who are not allowing 

the normal bargaining process to work. 

 

So only in those cases where life of people is genuinely at risk, 

have governments ever really interfered at any great extent.  I 

remember in the late 1970s there were some problems, and I 

have some statistical data on that. 

 

In fact that data is worth mentioning at this point, Mr. Speaker, 

because what it indicated was that under legislation in the 

1970s, that is almost identical in terms of what we can see of 

the legislation, to the legislation that was in power and in 

practice in the 1970s. We see a very similar kind of document 

here. 

 

And these statistical datas that I have here, and I'll sort 

through my pile a little later and find them exactly, they show 

quite significantly, that labour unrest in this province was 

extremely high during that period of time and fell dramatically 

when those laws were changed in the early 1980s. 

 

And here we are now, once again, about to revisit the past and 

to bring in the same kind of regressive legislation for labour 

standards that didn't work in the 1970s, but this government 

says will work in the 1990s if you allow us to change the 

regulations whenever we choose behind closed doors.  I guess 

that secretivism is going to make it work this time where it 

didn't work before. 

 

Well I can't agree with that argument at all, because I think it 

failed before because it wasn't workable.  It created friction.  It 

was, in fact, the very tool, Mr. Speaker, that these people talk 

about in the government today; the very tool that split labour 

from management.  It drove that wedge in between people and 

it caused the dissension and the differences between our 

working people and the people in small business and in 

management. 

 

That legislation drove that wedge in so firmly and so deeply 

that there could only be unrest because those people genuinely 

disliked one another.  They didn't bargain in good faith any 

more because they were so entrenched in their bitterness 

towards one another that they couldn't see reality or 

compromise.  All they could see was the red of the debate, of 

argument. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, having that divisiveness in the community 

might have been a political tool in an attempt for a government 

to get the labour movement to support them.  But it failed 

because that government of course was defeated. 

 

And these statistics I referred to prove significantly that once 

that legislation was taken out of place and the business 

community and the workers of the province were allowed to 

freely negotiate and freely collectively bargain their problems, 

between themselves, without legislative interference, without 

government interference, all of that labour unrest settled down.  

And those statistics show very clearly that there was 

significantly less, very significantly less labour unrest in the 

province of Saskatchewan once those laws were cancelled. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, seriously, you need to take a long, hard look 

at what you're doing to the community with this legislation.  

We need to allow collective bargaining to go on as it has in the 

past.  It has a proven track record of success in most cases 

where political interference is not included. 

 

The no. 6 item, Mr. Speaker, extending mandatory benefits to 

part-time workers by extending the same benefits to all 

workers.  This is a very important issue, Mr. Speaker.  Here it 

says that: 

 

There are several alarming elements to these proposals.  

First, benefit is undefined in the Act, leaving definition 

within the subjective realm 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

of regulations or department interpretation.  Will the 

definition follow the narrower, more traditional 

interpretation of benefit or will it be broadened?  Will 

common definitions apply among all industries or will 

sectoral anomalies be permitted? 

 

Now thinking about that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the point that 

we were making.  Exactly the point that there is so much 

inconsistency in this legislation and so many areas of 

uncertainty.  Even the interpretations are not set out.  It is the 

most vague kind of legislation that we have seen in a while.  

And certainly it has the built-in potential for disaster such as 

we've never seen in this province. 

 

Because even the simplest of definitions can be turned around 

and changed and interpreted totally opposite to what the 

minister has suggested.  And if the minister has told the 

business community things in the past few weeks that he has 

already had to change his mind on, what confidence would the 

business community have that the minister would allow the 

definitions that normally are used to be ones that would be used 

in this legislation?  He might come up with a whole new set of 

his own.  Absolutely nobody can take the financial risk of 

taking a chance on this legislation in its present form, Mr. 

Minister.  You're asking too much. 

 

The people of this province just simply cannot afford to have 

such demanding legislation, such legislation of importance to 

business and to labour, go through without writing down 

exactly what the rules are.  The people of this province not only 

need that, they demand that.  They demand that you tell them 

where their lives are going to go and what rules they are going 

to be playing under. 

 

It goes on here: 

 

Second, employer costs go beyond premiums to include 

the administrative resources, financial and human, needed 

to track employees and eligibility criteria.  We have grave 

concerns that as a result of this amendment, part-time 

workers will see fewer rather than greater benefits, as 

employers withdraw benefit programs to reduce premium 

and administration costs. 

 

Just a natural reaction, Mr. Speaker, to a financial dilemma in 

business.  If you find yourself being costed higher for your 

employees, the first reaction of business is to either eliminate 

some of those costs or you have to eliminate some of the 

workers. 

 

You've got a bottom line.  And in business, if you don't come in 

on that bottom line, you soon find yourself in debt.  And we've 

all seen a record in this province of what happens to people that 

get into very much debt.  We've got hundreds of farmers that 

have been through Farm Debt Review Board and all kinds of 

bankruptcies.  We've got all kinds of businesses going broke in 

this province every year, especially over the last few years.  

We've got lots of shining examples of 

why we don't want this kind of thing to happen any more. 

 

And this is exactly what happens.  As soon as the costs go up, 

as soon as the administration goes up, and the paperwork goes 

up, then businesses naturally react.  It's an almost involuntary 

muscle response.  They reduce that cost some place in order to 

survive because they have to match that bottom line.  They've 

got to keep that business out of the red ink or they go broke. 

 

So they'll do whatever they have to to survive.  And there's 

only one alternative, and that is to destroy the very thing that 

this government is trying to build.  They cut back on the 

number of positions that they have for employment or they cut 

back on the benefits by eliminating some of the benefits that 

they give out.  And within the legal parameters that they're 

allowed to do it, they will do it.  And many will even do it 

outside of that area because they feel forced to have to do that. 

 

It goes on here to say that third: 

 

Insurance industry representatives are concerned that the 

benefit amendments are unmanageable, the administrative 

costs could exceed premiums earned, and that the industry 

would withdraw underwritings. 

 

Finally, we fear that the trickle-down theory of benefit 

eligibility could mean that benefit programs are 

dramatically reduced for all employees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is very significant to the workers of this 

province, because in fact a piece of legislation that they are 

being sold on through their union leadership, a leadership that 

is convinced that they need to tell people that they should 

support this, these people are being led down the garden path 

because the trickle effect that is talked about here could in fact 

mean that in the end this legislation that is supposed to protect 

people will in fact cost them the very benefits that they thought 

they were going to get.  Because the system won't sustain it and 

the insurance companies don't know how to manage it. 

 

What does that mean in real words?  It means that the room is 

open for people to abuse the system.  Quite frankly, and in 

plain English, people will be put into a position where they'll be 

allowed to cheat the system.  And they will do that.  Not many, 

probably 1 per cent of the population or less, but there will be a 

certain element of that and it will be significant enough to 

cause the program serious problems.  In fact it may be 

significant enough to cost the program its very operational 

ability. 

 

But in the meantime, the hurt of destroying businesses through 

high costs has already had the bigger effect of eliminating the 

businesses themselves and, in many cases, the jobs that the 

people of Saskatchewan need. 

 

No. 7: advance notice of change in work schedule; 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

automatic seniority for part-time workers; definition of working 

days. 

 

Our work environments do not lend themselves to the 

restrictions imposed by many amendments in the Act.  

Your department is certain to be inundated with 

applications for exemptions, exemptions which should 

then be granted to reflect the conditions normally found 

within our workplace and over which we have little, if 

any, control.  Time has not permitted a more thorough 

analysis of impacts for our sector.  We appreciate that 

there may be amendments that would be applicable to 

public sector employers and perhaps desirable as public 

policy.  These are overshadowed, however, by more 

serious concerns of the detrimental impact of the majority 

of proposed amendments. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here again the issue becomes so 

complicated that there hasn't been enough time for the 

community at large to do a complete analysis, even to write a 

response to the government, even to bring their arguments to 

the minister.  There hasn't been enough time; that's clearly what 

I see here.  They, you know, clearly point out that without the 

time necessary to do all of the research, to do all of the 

studying that has to be done in such a complicated issue as The 

Labour Standards Act . . . and certainly this is a broad, 

sweeping Act that affects the lives of many, many people.  In 

fact I would go so far as to say that, in a roundabout way, this 

particular legislation will affect the life of every individual 

person in the province of Saskatchewan.  If it doesn't affect you 

directly, it certainly will affect you in an indirect way. 

 

For example, we all eat food to live.  If The Labour Standards 

Act requires that the people that handle food have to be given 

more expensive considerations, that expense has to be passed 

on down through the food.  So in a very simple example like 

that, we know that every person in our community, every 

person in the province, will be affected by this legislation.  

From that very simple analogy, you can carry this argument to 

all of the other greater and more important issues -- those 

things that affect you in your life, like buying a home, a 

once-in-a-lifetime proposition for most people but certainly an 

expensive one that most folks don't want to see increased in 

cost. 

 

It goes on to discuss the implications, Mr. Speaker, of the 

connection to The Trade Union Act as it will apply to The 

Labour Standards Act, because the two are part and parcel, 

somewhat the same in that they affect the same general 

community.  And so they wind up by saying that: 

 

We understand that amendments to The Trade Union Act 

may be tabled next week.  If it is the provincial 

government's wish to involve public sector employers as 

strategic partners in the development and implementation 

of labour policy, then our representative associations 

must be provided with advance information on the 

pending amendments. 

 

In other words, here's another Act, that's about to be changed, 

that will sweepingly change the lives of everybody in our 

province, expected within a week, and these people, the leaders 

of our communities in Saskatchewan, are saying no one has 

told them what's going on, no one has talked to them, no one 

has asked for their input. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that's 

unacceptable, totally and completely unacceptable for a 

provincial government to legislate changes to our province's 

laws that affect all of our communities, without talking to the 

people from SUMA and SARM and all of the villages and 

towns, all of the people who are in that third government area 

of administrating the affairs of our province. 

 

None of those people have been talked to.  None of them know 

what these amendments are going to be.  And I can't for the life 

of me understand how the minister can stand in this Assembly 

and say that he consulted with people, when you have so 

pointed a remark as I've just quoted from the public sector 

community, the public sector employers. 

 

They've said it straight, they've said it blunt, they've said it 

politely, but the meaning is clear.  They weren't asked, they 

weren't consulted with, and they weren't listened to.  And 

they're very upset -- so upset that the head of SUMA, the 

biggest urban municipal organization in the province, has 

decided to break with tradition and to establish a new 

precedent, one that he believes has never been matched before, 

and that is to call on the government in a public way to totally 

change the direction that they're going with the legislation that 

they are bringing in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot emphasize too much how important it 

is for the minister to listen to the arguments that have been put 

forth by the general community on this issue.  Because of that 

need, I want to go on to some of the other organizations and the 

points that they want to make more specifically to the minister. 

 

Now we talked very briefly about the regional tourism 

association and the effect that they thought this legislation 

would have on them.  I have a letter from those folks, and I 

think it's only proper that I read some of that into the record so 

that the public will know where the stand of the regional 

tourism association is on this issue. 

 

It begins this way, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The purpose of this letter is to address the effects of the 

proposed amendments to The Labour Standards Act.  My 

interest is specifically related to their effects on the tourist 

industry.  The economic turnaround is just beginning and 

dramatic changes, such as you are proceeding, may result 

in increased lay-offs and new, unnecessary tension 

between workers and employers. 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

The employees of the tourism business in this province are 

the single most important aspect of our sustainability.  I 

remind you that tourism employs more part-time and 

student workers than most economic sectors.  In doing so, 

we match the staffing needs of our businesses with the 

flexibility desired by many of our staff.  These changes to 

the Act put those jobs in danger of being eliminated.  The 

proposed changes will result in less, not greater, benefits 

to the employee as employers are forced to react to 

increased expense and more regulations. 

 

While there are many areas that require revision, I point 

out two that are of great importance: number one, the 

mandatory posting of schedule including break times a 

week in advance; number two, the change regarding 

benefit programs.  Both of these will have very negative 

effects on the employees instead of being of assistance. 

 

The Minister of Labour's name is here and then it goes on: 

 

I strongly urge you to delay any further passage of these 

amendments until you have fully discussed them and their 

impact with the Saskatchewan business community, 

specifically the tourism industry.  TISASK has joined 

other business groups to provide you with some important 

feedback and I hope you will listen carefully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the message from the tourist association is 

fairly clear.  They're saying: Mr. Minister, you have not 

consulted with us, you have not listened to our needs, you are 

in fact doing this legislation arbitrarily, you are doing it 

forcefully, and you are going to hurt the very people that you're 

trying to snow with this whole process -- the working people of 

Saskatchewan.  By trying to tell the working people of 

Saskatchewan you're going to provide them with more benefits 

to make life better, you are in fact going to cost them their jobs, 

especially the young people who work in the tourist industry. 

 

And it is a fact and I agree with the statements made in this 

letter from the tourist industry.  It's automatic that the tourist 

industry is going to thrive more in the summer months in 

Saskatchewan than it will in the winter months.  During the 

winter months our students go to university, at the first part of 

April they begin their examination time, and by the time the 

April showers come and the May flowers bloom the university 

classes are over and the young people are looking for work to 

make a few dollars so that they can go back to university again 

in the fall. 

 

At that time when the flowers begin to bloom, our tourists 

begin to stir and they begin to go out to the lakes to fish and 

they begin to bring in some American tourists and all of the 

folks from across Canada, and they all end up in our provincial 

parks and other places of that nature, places where tourists 

normally 

go.  Who provides the services in those areas, our provincial 

parks?  Most of them are students, those very university 

students that need to get some income so that they can go back 

to school in the fall. 

 

So the points being made by the tourist association are 

fundamentally correct.  Most of the people that will be 

employed by the tourist association will be students, will be 

young people looking for part-time work -- half a year.  The 

reality is, and they make the point, that the scheduling 

arrangements and the changes regarding the benefits programs 

will in fact put the employers in such a position that they may 

have to reduce the number of jobs that they have available. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly cannot be the purpose for 

which this government has brought this legislation into place.  I 

cannot believe that the government deliberately set out to 

destroy jobs when they thought they should change labour 

legislation.  I think that it started out by people saying we 

haven't had a change for -- I think somebody said 17 years, that 

could be off a bit -- but it's been a long time.  Realistically the 

business community has said yes, we haven't looked at this 

problem for a long, long time.  And there are some things that 

are out of tune with the times.  Times change, things go on.  

What we need to do is rethink this legislation, bring it up to 

date. 

 

I believe in all sincerity that the members of the government 

thought that's a good idea because it'll help, but all of a sudden 

we ended up with a few -- well, I guess I'll say it -- radical 

opinions that got stuck into the legislation.  And those opinions 

somehow got caught up and put into the legislation and they are 

destroying all of the common sense that started out in the 

process.  All of the common sense of wanting to do something 

good has suddenly been gotten lost in the shuffle of a few 

radical opinions that will dramatically change the face of our 

job creation structure in Saskatchewan. 

 

The total base of our job creation abilities is fundamentally 

being challenged and perhaps destroyed.  And the tourism letter 

definitely points out support for that concept.  And they point 

out very dramatically and very carefully and very honestly and 

very politely to the minister that we must not go on with this; 

that we must rethink it. 

 

Another plea from another sector in our society saying to the 

government, stop what you're doing and think about what is 

going to happen.  Think about the repercussions.  Think about 

the way that the society of Saskatchewan is going to be 

changed.  Think about the negative things that will happen if 

you put this legislation in.  Think about the young people 

whose jobs you may in fact destroy.  That's what they're saying. 

 

The common plea, the common call from all sectors of this 

society that have written to us and talked to us all have the 

bottom line.  End message to the minister:  stop now before it's 

too late; let's do it right.  Nobody has said let's not do it at all.  

We've had people say table it, study it.  We've had people say 

pull it, tear it 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

up, rewrite it.  I've heard nobody say, absolutely no way, never, 

let's do nothing, forget it, we're out of it, and don't do it.  I've 

never heard that.  Everybody I've talked to has said there are 

some things that need to be done.  Most workers want some 

things to be done.  Most employers agree that they should help. 

 

For example, if a grandparent needs some time off to be with 

his family or if a family member needs to take a little time off 

because a grandparent has died, those are kind of reasonable 

things in our society that most employers go along with.  But 

there's an occasional one that gets a little bit hard-headed, I 

guess, and they don't allow people what is normally accepted 

practice in our society. 

 

And so we need to update our legislation and guarantee that 

workers have those fundamental rights to serve their family 

needs.  And that's what the folks in Saskatchewan have been 

saying.  We want the fundamental needs of people to be 

covered in the legislation, but let's not overkill it.  And that's 

the message that I keep getting. 

 

Another organization that has pointed out to us serious 

concerns is the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association -- a 

very reputable, honourable association that recognizes and 

supports and defends and acts as the umbrella group for a 

significant number of people in our society. 

 

The school trustees association writes a letter, and I think I 

should quote a little of that, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 

that the people of Saskatchewan will know the stand that the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association has taken on this 

issue: 

 

The SSTA asks government for consultation prior to 

passage of the amendments to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

(1530) 

 

Very bold print and a very honest, and I think, legitimate 

request.  They go on to say that: 

 

The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association called on 

the Saskatchewan government today to delay passage of 

Bill 32.  President Dorothy Fortier said school boards are 

very concerned about the potential financial and 

operational impacts of the proposed amendments to The 

Labour Standards Act.  This legislation must be delayed, 

she said, to provide time for adequate consultation. 

 

It has been the understanding of the association that the 

government, through the proposed amendments, intends to 

address particular problems in certain workplaces. 

However, this legislation will have a direct and significant 

impact on the delivery of elementary and secondary 

education. 

 

Mrs. Fortier said that the trustees association has 

undertaken a preliminary analysis of the 

impact on the educational sector and has provided 

government with a report and recommended changes. 

 

Now the government has said that it is not their intention 

to disrupt positive working relationships, and we concur 

with the view of the Minister of Labour. 

 

His name is there.  And then it goes on to say that: 

 

School boards have worked hard with their employees to 

ensure their relationships are fair, workable, and practical.  

These amendments to The Labour Standards Act will 

disrupt these relationships and impact on the delivery of 

educational services. 

 

It goes on just a little bit longer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then 

I want to review the impact of this letter. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

We have made every effort to inform the government of 

our concerns about this legislation.  We are committed to 

working on this legislation with the government, but we 

need adequate time and their assurance that a thorough 

analysis of the impact on education will be undertaken 

prior to the passage of amendments to the existing 

legislation, said Fortier. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the letter says exactly the same thing as all 

the other organizations are saying, only more specifically timed 

and tuned to the needs of the educational system.  So here again 

we have a particular group in our society who are feeling a 

direct impact of this legislation -- a direct impact of a negative 

nature if it isn't done right. 

 

And the same basic request though, at the end, bottom line 

request, as all of the people have asked for and that is for the 

government to stop, to take some time, to consult more, to 

listen more, and to be upfront with exactly how the rules are 

going to affect each one of us as individuals within our own 

scope of society. 

 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association people have 

provided the education for our school children for a long time 

by helping the administration, providing the teachers with 

information, and bringing about a workable solution to 

employer-employee problems over the years. 

 

And certainly while teachers in our province have done a great 

job, they certainly have had some difficult times.  I can recall a 

lot of stories about how teachers used to work for their board 

and room many years ago in this province, that many of them 

were promised wages and of course never got them because the 

ratepayers didn't have the money to pay the taxes. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They were given a chicken at the end of 

the month. 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Exactly.  The member tells me that 

sometimes they were promised a chicken at the end of the 

month and that was their pay; they might get enough food to 

live on.  Certainly they have needed the protection of labour 

legislation in order to be treated fairly in this province.  But 

here we find them calling on the government to take it slow 

with this legislation and do it right.  Joining with all of the 

other people of this province, they say you have not consulted 

in a meaningful way because you haven't listened and you need 

to do it better. 

 

The chamber of commerce, another very well-known group, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  In our province the chamber of 

commerce has become a highly respected organization that 

represents the interests of business throughout the entire 

province.  They go on to talk about the labour standards 

changes as well.  And they say here that the revisions to The 

Labour Standards Act call for many changes, some or all of 

which may affect your business.  And, they say, here are a few. 

 

Now this was a document that was prepared by the chamber to 

be sent out to their membership.  We were fortunate enough 

that they gave us a copy and we enjoyed having the opportunity 

to read it and to study it because it pointed out to the 

membership what they should be looking for.  I think it's 

important that the Minister of Labour also hear this message. 

 

Because what they say is that employers who offer a benefit 

package to full-time employees will have to offer the same 

benefits to part-time employees as well.  This will be done on a 

prorated basis determined by the number of hours each 

part-time employee works.  The prorating will be done in a 

manner described in the regulations, which have not been 

prepared.  It is not known how certain benefits such as dental 

plan can be prorated. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this concern that the business 

community was asked to think about was very real.  It was not 

known if this particular issue could in fact be resolved.  And so 

they set about, the minds of the business community, to 

thinking of ways that they could resolve this problem that 

might be arising in the legislation, with the full belief that they 

would be granted the opportunity at some time to talk to the 

minister and give their point of view.  In other words, this was 

a question paper that they expected fully to be able to come up 

with answers to and then provide the answers to the minister so 

that he could write good legislation. 

 

The bottom line will be when we finish with this, that in fact 

that response never happened.  The minister didn't bother to ask 

them for the answers; he simply wrote the legislation.  And 

we're not quite sure if he did it or if he hired somebody, but 

we'll get to that point too, later. 

 

They go on to say in their second point that employers will be 

required to give part-time employees one week's prior notice of 

their work schedule.  The business community has pointed out 

very clearly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, how in many sectors this will be a deterrent 

for people to be able to get work. 

 

Because quite frankly, in the McDonald's chain of restaurants 

. . . and I've never run one, but I've been a frequent supporter of 

the business.  My family enjoys the product and I do as well.  

And so as an observer, often with a hamburger in my hand, I've 

watched that many of the employees are school-aged children 

who probably are attending high school or perhaps university. 

And I've also noted that in the peak time there would be five, 

maybe six or seven more people working behind the counters 

than there was in the slacker time of the day. 

 

If I came in at 3 o'clock in the afternoon I could find maybe 

two young people working.  But if I came in at 5:30, there were 

probably seven or eight.  In other words, the management was 

calling in those people to serve the community and the public 

their meals at that peak time of the day -- a part-time job. 

 

In discussions with people who employ some of these part-time 

people, they say there are some natural hazards in this business 

in that when you deal with young people, there are sometimes 

unforeseen circumstances that come up.  No one has said that 

they blame young people for this.  It's simply a fact of life. 

 

You say to them, look, come on down and you can work 

between 4 and 7 tonight at my restaurant and we'll pay you the 

wages and we'll keep track of it.  And then that person says, 

okay.  So we've got seven people lined up that are going to 

come in for the night.  All of a sudden a ball game comes up, 

and golly, it sure would be nice to hit a home run tonight 

instead of work.  So one young fellow maybe decides he'll stop 

and play ball.  Or maybe one of the young ladies will decide 

that gee, those dresses look nice in that store.  Maybe I can just 

take a minute and go in and look.  And the first thing you know 

an hour's gone by and she doesn't make it to work. 

 

What is the fellow in the restaurant supposed to do?  Two 

people don't show up to work; it's a perfectly natural human 

thing to have happen. Is he now supposed to pay both of those 

people full wages because they didn't show up?  He has to call 

two other people to fill their place.  How is he supposed to do a 

schedule for that sort of thing? 

 

We're dealing with young people's lives that are just naturally 

not going to always be predictable. 

 

The fact that it isn't predictable, we have to accept.  We only 

work with our young people and allow them to do these things 

because we want them to know that we care for them, we love 

them, and we'll let them get away with stretching the rules.  But 

yet we will teach them a pattern of life that they do work for a 

living. 

 

And they will of course be told that if you stop and play ball 

too many times, we'll have to get somebody else to take your 

place.  And I'm sure that happens too.  But it does I think in a 

very, very simplistic way show the problems that you will run 

into in many sectors of 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

our industry if you legislate a hard and fast law that becomes 

the rule in a very broad way. 

 

Then the argument would be used, well in the regulations we'll 

exempt certain people.  And that might be okay if the people of 

the province knew that those regulations in fact were going to 

be put into place.  And so the community has said, Mr. 

Minister, provide us with a list of the regulations.  Show us 

what the rules will be.  If we are to be exempted, we want to 

know; we want to have something that we can put faith in; we 

don't want to write you a blank cheque. 

 

I don't think that's unreasonable for people in this day and age 

to say to the government, we won't write you a blank cheque.  

How many of you would sign a blank cheque and give it to me?  

You'd be a lot luckier giving it to me than a lot of other folks; I 

guarantee that.  Because I truly would take care of it.  I'd cash it 

for no more than I could find out you had in your account and 

I'd only spend it on good things, I guarantee that.  But you 

wouldn't write me one.  Nor will the business community write 

a blank cheque for the government.  And I think that's 

reasonable. 

 

It goes on to say that employers will be required to fill all extra 

work requirements with their part-time workers and will have 

to allocate this work on the basis of seniority. 

 

Here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we find some very serious 

problems, unless you put into regulations very basic and 

fundamental changes that can be made.  You must have leeway 

for those exceptional things in life that won't work into a hard 

and fast rule.  If you have to give the job to the most senior 

person, it may be that that person is not trained for the job that 

he's being called back for. 

 

I'm trying to think of a very simple analogy here and I think I 

have one.  If we go back to the same McDonald's situation, 

perhaps you have one very young man who cooks hamburgers 

great as they come, just tasty.  To perfection -- not burnt, not 

raw -- just exactly right.  And he does it very well. 

 

But you also have another person who really does a good job of 

sweeping up the floors.  He never misses a speck.  He cleans it 

up perfect.  But he's older and he's been there for two years 

longer, but he can't cook a hamburger.  No matter what 

happens, he just cannot get it right.  He burns them or he leaves 

them raw or he scorches them or he gets too much salt in them.  

But under this rule, if those two people are both out there 

waiting for work and the employer needs one of them to come 

and cook hamburgers, he has to ask the senior worker.  The 

floor sweeper has to be asked first to come in and cook 

hamburgers. 

 

Now that doesn't make any sense.  Of course it doesn't.  And 

it's an oversimplification.  But it does sort of give you an idea 

of how this thing, if you magnify it into the business world, 

how unrealistic it could become. 

 

That's why the business community has called for a  

very concentrated study of how these things will impact our 

entire society and our entire community.  That's why they've 

asked the government to take another look at this whole 

situation.  And I think it's important that they do that. 

 

They go on to say that you have to watch for the maximum 

notice requirements or requirements for pay in lieu of notice on 

termination having significantly increased.  For example, under 

the present legislation a two-year employee will be entitled to 

two weeks notice.  The same employee will be entitled to six 

weeks notice under the amended Act. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly here again we need to 

study the implications, the impact.  Will it always be possible 

to give six weeks notice instead of two weeks notice?  Will it 

be practical?  Will you, for example, know . . . and I'll use the 

construction industry this time, to get away from food, because 

I'm making myself hungry.  In the construction industry we 

often work late into the fall.  If the weather is nice, we build 

roads.  We hire a lot of students in the construction industry for 

all kinds of work out there on the roads.  They may even get 

lucky enough to get one of the better jobs of running a 

bulldozer. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now supposing that bulldozer only can go until the ground 

freezes.  How many years have we seen it happen in 

Saskatchewan that we will freeze solid about November 7?  

Very significant date; I always remember it because it's my 

birthday.  And that's the day we usually are froze pretty solid.  

Some years though, we have dramatic weather in this province, 

as everybody knows, and by October 15 we can have a foot and 

a half of snow on the ground and nobody can move anywhere. 

 

The student who is employed by this contractor could quite 

easily maybe guess the weather by listening to the forecast two 

weeks ahead and say, boys, I'm going to have to shut her down 

in two weeks because the ground's going to be freezing up; 

we're going to have to quit work. 

 

But when you have the variance in weather that we have in that 

industry and how it affects that industry, there's no way that 

that contractor could know six weeks ahead what kind of 

weather we're going to have and what prospective day we 

might have a freeze-up. 

 

And it can happen in two or three days.  I've seen that, as a 

reeve of a municipality, having worked with contractors out in 

this kind of weather.  We have in fact had to, one morning, 

walk out to the site and say, it's game over, boys, we froze up 

last night, we can't get the outfits running, we got to quit.  How 

would you give six weeks notice to your crew under those 

circumstances?  You would have to give them six weeks notice 

and pay them an extra six weeks while they sat around and did 

nothing. 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

And so it's not workable.  And you will say to us:  well we'll fix 

it with the regulations.  Very fine and very good.  Then write 

the regulations and show us which industries will be affected 

and which ones won't be affected.  Show us what those 

regulations will be and how it's going to help. 

 

They go on to say:  Notice, or pay in lieu, has also been 

increased for temporary lay-offs.  And that's something that 

needed to be studied by the business community because, here 

again, this can very seriously affect the bottom line on 

profitability. 

 

Directors' liability for wages under the present legislation 

is limited to six months pay.  Under the amending 

legislation, directors' liability is unlimited and wages are 

defined to include pay in lieu of notice. 

 

Very significant potential here.  I think we need to go over that 

one more time: Directors' liability for wages under the present 

legislation is limited to six months . . . Understanding that we 

do now have legislation that protects in this area. 

 

Now under the amending legislation, directors' liability is 

unlimited.  That means it could go on for two years, three 

years, four years.  No limit -- unlimited means exactly that. 

 

And it's also defined . . . wages are defined as, include pay in 

lieu of notice.  In other words, if the directors of a company are 

the people in charge of a company that for some reason has an 

administrator who doesn't do his job right, perhaps an 

accountant or a bookkeeper who is supposed to issue notices, 

goes to sleep at the switch and doesn't get his job done, then in 

fact the directors are responsible for that person's mistakes not 

only in terms of legal responsibility but financial responsibility, 

and they could be asked to pay out of their own pockets the 

wages of those workers, under some circumstances. 

 

Totally unacceptable to the business community because it 

destroys the basic, fundamental characteristics of how 

corporate businesses are run.  And I know that a lot of people 

will say, oh well, shucks, that's just corporations; why worry 

about them?  Reality of life is, Mr. Speaker, that almost 

everybody that has any kind of a business now runs it under 

some corporate structure because that is the business way in 

which to handle your financial affairs. 

 

A lot of farmers even run their farms as corporate entities 

because that's a way of keeping better accountability of the 

business part of their operation and keep it separate from their 

own personal expenses.  It's a lot easier to control your 

budgeting, a lot easier to keep track of how much actual cash 

you have to spend.  And so most people do that. 

 

I notice the member that used to be in the credit union is 

agreeing with me.  At least I think he is.  It's hard to tell from 

over here.  But he's definitely, definitely got to know that a 

corporate structure is something that a lot of people work with.  

And even under the cooperative 

movement, the co-ops themselves are designed after the 

principles of a corporate operation.  They simply have a few 

different rules on how they pay their taxes and that sort of 

thing.  But basically and fundamentally, they run as corporate 

entities. 

 

It goes on to say employers will be required wherever possible 

to arrange alternate employment within their organizations for 

workers who become disabled.  Now this of course is 

something that the business community has to consider, 

something they have to study.  They have to come to an answer 

for a very basic, fundamental problem that can happen to any 

business. 

 

It's a simple fact of life that occasionally people do get hurt, 

and employers have to factor that possibility into their plans.  

Because companies don't just happen, Mr. Speaker -- they're 

planned for.  They are planned ahead.  They have to take into 

account the most probable possibilities of all those factors that 

they know and come to some kind of an estimation of what the 

future might do.  Good businesses are the ones that are able to 

do that. 

 

They say that absenteeism due to illness or injury is no longer a 

ground for termination unless it amounts to more than 12 

weeks in a 52-week period, or 26 weeks if the employee is 

receiving workers' compensation. 

 

Here again, we get into an area where one piece of legislation is 

somewhat affected by other legislation, and we get into the area 

of workers' compensation and the need for the business 

community to take into account how these two pieces of 

legislation will work together and how it will affect their 

individual operations. 

 

It goes on to say that new rules have been imposed which will 

govern the timing of shifts and meal breaks. And we've dealt 

with that, Mr. Speaker, under some of the other letters that 

were sent to us by some of the other interest groups in the 

province.  And they simply make, I think, the same argument 

that meal times and shift work are things that have to have 

some ability to have flexibility. 

 

For example, if a person is diabetic, they obviously need to eat 

at a specific time.  And certainly, most employers would say 

that if the government were going to put into legislation that an 

employer who knowingly employs a diabetic should allow that 

diabetic to eat at the proper intervals so that his disease can be 

kept under control . . . At the same time though, people who are 

not diabetics can often work an extra half an hour without 

stopping to eat, and they may decide that they want to do that 

in order to finish a job and may, in fact, ask the employer if 

they can work a little longer to complete a job before taking a 

meal break.  That may be a collectively bargained position. 

 

Those kinds of flexibility are necessary in order for business 

and labour relationships to flow smoothly.  You have to allow 

the opportunity for people to come to some amiable agreements 

on their own, even 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

 you have some broad guidelines -- and specific guidelines for 

specific problems -- but not trying to cover everything all at 

once.  Because once you try to spread legislation too thin, too 

far, you're bound to run into trouble.  And I think that's the 

point people are making. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

The requirements benefiting employees in this Act are 

now minimal legal standards.  Collective agreements 

containing provisions which, taken in isolation, do not 

meet these minimal standards will thus be altered so that 

the standards are met without any corresponding 

adjustment to favour the employer. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, what they're saying here is that 

once you establish a minimum then you're going to have to see 

down the road how we might have other things happening as a 

result of those minimums having been drawn.  Now collective 

agreements that are taken in isolation then are taken as, I think, 

meaning specific problems, specific areas, certain kinds of 

businesses that are fundamentally different in the way that they 

operate, other than all of the others around them. 

 

The only thing that comes to mind of course at this moment 

might be a mortuary.  You don't need too many of them and the 

work there might be somewhat different than in a lot of other 

areas.  So I would suggest that you might have some kind of an 

isolated situation that needs to be taken into consideration for 

the workers that work in that type of a work theatre. 

 

The comments go on -- that if you are concerned, please take 

action today.  And the action, of course, was to call the minister 

and to tell him about the common concerns, the common needs 

that everybody is going to need in this area of labour 

legislation. 

 

In a follow-up a few days later, we had The Labour Standards 

Act update.  And it goes on as well, from the Saskatchewan 

chamber: 

 

Following an ongoing lobby campaign and negotiations 

with the government to bring about changes to Bill 32, An 

Act to amend The Labour Standards Act, on Thursday, 

March 31, 1994, the government informed businesses and 

labour of a number of changes which will be introduced as 

House amendments. 

 

The attached document outlines technical House 

amendments proposed by government with the chamber's 

comments listed in the right-hand column.  The purpose of 

the proposed technical House amendments indicate the 

government heard and understood some business 

concerns; however, the following points are important. 

 

So I want to just bring to the minister's attention these 

points because we've had some feedback, Mr. Speaker, which 

would indicate that they don't feel that the minister actually 

took into account the debate and the discussions that were held 

relative to this document. 

 

The Bill is being rushed to third reading with the major 

impact by regulations.  Regulations do not have to be 

debated.  It would be desirable to have the Bill and 

regulations debated in the legislature as a package.  Efforts 

should continue to be made to convince the government of 

this. 

 

I don't think there's anything I could say that would make that 

any more clear than the way it is written right there.  Bring 

forth the regulations, bring forth the amendments, bring forth 

the Bill, bring them all at once. Let's talk about the whole 

package out front, in the open, with everybody listening.  That's 

what they've said. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

If the Bill receives third reading, the regulations will 

determine how the law will affect your business and 

industry.  We will continue to monitor the process that is 

developed for drafting of regulations. 

 

In other words, no implication of knowing what's going on 

here; simply saying we're going to have to monitor it. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 Two controversial sections of the Bill, most available hours 

and benefits for part-time workers, will be referred to a 

commission for a report later in the year.  Target date is 

October 1994.  Members with part-time employees should be 

prepared to provide information to the commission on these 

issues and their impact on your business. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, what they're saying is that nobody 

really knows what the effect on business is going to be of many 

of the changes that are coming in this legislation.  All of this 

consultation that supposedly went on hasn't really found out the 

answers to what effect this legislation is going to have on the 

people and the businesses in our province.  People have 

speculated on how disastrous it can be, but nobody knows.  

And it's the fear and the uncertainty that are so important here. 

 

 The Bill will not be proclaimed until the fall of 1994 at the 

earliest.  Members should continue to tell their elected 

representatives about the implications of Bill 32 to their 

operations. 

 

A very simple letter from the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce that alerts the 

membership to continue to try.  What she's saying is don't give 

up.  Keep on trying to save your business and your province 

because it's a good province and 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

these are the things that we need to be most concerned about at 

the moment. 

 

Just to make sure that the minister realizes that his only 

opposition to this Bill does not come from umbrella groups 

representing large numbers of people, we also have several 

communications from people in the business sector more on an 

individual basis, people who are talking about their own 

specific business in the community. 

 

One such note that I have here comes from the Price Club in 

Regina.  It's dated March 1994, March 30, and says:  To Whom 

it may concern: 

 

(1600) 

 

I think it's important that the minister and the members 

opposite take note of what this individual has to say.  It says: 

 

 Re: The proposed changes to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

 The following comments are not based on a thorough 

analysis of the proposed changes, but rather a cursory 

assessment.  I agree with many of the changes proposed, 

however I do have grave concerns with changes in the 

following two areas. 

 

 First, benefits.  In the extremely competitive wholesale/retail 

sector in which controlling the human resource cost within 

legislated guidelines is of critical importance, I am concerned 

with the long-term negative ramifications of the proposed 

benefits to the part-time employees. 

 

Once again we find people with problems with this legislation 

that will hurt the employees as well as the employer.  Mr. 

Minister, or Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

 Number two, seniority relative to assigning additional hours.  

I philosophically oppose legislation legislating seniority as 

the primary factor when assigning additional hours.  I believe 

this undermines the rights of a non-unionized employer who 

has good relations with the staff. 

 

I think that is pretty self-explanatory, Mr. Speaker, and I don't 

think that I need to go into a long explanation of what this 

individual is trying to point out to the government because he 

has said it in his own words very specifically, very clearly, and 

very decisively.  And he wants the minister to take into account 

the negative impact that this legislation will have on his 

particular business.  So, Mr. Minister, we hope that you in all 

sincerity will do that. 

 

We have of course a briefing from Jim Chase, the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association of Saskatchewan here 

in Regina -- Jim Chase, the president.  He says: We are 

forwarding our brief 

interpretations of the amendments to the Bill we understand are 

forthcoming. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 You no doubt have the paper released by the government on 

March 31.  You will note that there are two issues not 

addressed which we have asked the government to 

reconsider.  We will be available to discuss these 

amendments and of course we are going to be doing that. 

 

So here you have again an umbrella group representing many 

hundreds of companies in our province who employ thousands 

of workers from time to time and throughout the years. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that I will go through these and make 

comments on them.  But first I want to deal with a few more of 

the smaller operations just to make sure that the minister has a 

basic idea that not all of these arguments are coming just from 

the big umbrella groups.  Certainly the points that Mr. Chase 

makes are extremely good and we will get to them as we go.  I 

think they're more appropriate though, in a wind-up of our 

conclusions as we go. 

 

We have people in the small-business community; for example, 

I have picked out a letter here from the Bow Manor Motor 

Hotel down at Oxbow, Saskatchewan.  I don't know if I've ever 

even been in that establishment, but I know the town and its 

whereabouts.  And I think it's only proper that I just go on to 

read into the record some of the comments and thoughts herein. 

 

It begins: 

 

 In regards to Bill 32, I must admit I have some grave 

concerns.  To put it into context, my concerns, my wife and I 

have been in the hospitality industry for the past 15 years in 

rural Saskatchewan.  Being self-employed means to work 

seven days a week, 24 hours a day.  Our entrepreneurial spirit 

employs 30 full-time and part-time people, and our salaries 

are close to the $1 million mark. 

 

 The end result, however, are that in some months our 

take-home pay is less than that of our employees.  Business 

in rural Saskatchewan is hanging on by its toenails.  The 

climate is not conducive to afford management the security of 

having work tomorrow.  Bill 32 is asking employers to 

guarantee employees far more than we ourselves can expect, 

and with thousands of dollars invested. 

 

 The parts of the Act that concern me the most are as follows.  

One, any period of 24 consecutive hours will be known as a 

working day, meaning that the worker cannot start his next 

shift until the same hour or later on the following day without 

running into overtime.  The largest portion of our employees 

are second-income members of a household.  The 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

off-farm or second-income job is desperately needed in 

these households, but the flexibility of fitting it into the 

spouse's shift, the farming seasons, children's school hours, 

and extracurricular activities makes it almost impossible 

for employees to work within that 24-hour rule. 

 

 As long as they have 12 consecutive hours between shifts, as 

the rules are now, my employees are more than satisfied with 

their shifts.  This allows them the flexibility they need in 

order to have family time as well as work time to support the 

family.  I am sure that you agree with me that family time is 

very important, because without it there will be even more 

problems to face.  All schedules now are (I think that's) 

actually agreed upon by everyone. 

 

The number two point that this person makes, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the mandatory one week's advance notice to any change in 

the work schedules, including the precise start and end time of 

meal breaks, is very important to this man's particular industry. 

 

He goes on to explain it this way: 

 

 Our business operates on a fill in for illness or emergency 

situation.  It is impossible to staff on the likelihood that 

someone will be sick.  Operating short-staffed is hard on 

those that are at work.  Because of this, it is impossible to 

give one week's notice of shift change.  People or their 

families do not plan on being sick or getting hurt.  It will put 

unfair stress on management as well as on the Department of 

Labour to get the written authorization to vary these 

schedules in an "under the circumstance clause" on an almost 

daily basis. 

 

Pretty well self-explanatory, that concern, Mr. Speaker, 

because here again the amount of bookwork, the costs 

involved, are simply going to be too great for these 

small-business people to be able to cope with.  Very, very small 

profitability in the communities in rural Saskatchewan to begin 

with, and now we're asking them to take on yet another burden 

of cost and expense.  Another burden of more bookkeeping; of 

more telephoning; of more negotiating; and simply, probably to 

the point where it's impossible to comply with the rules as they 

are set up. 

 

 Number three (he goes on), the prorated calculation of public 

holiday pay for all employees.  Holiday pay in the past has 

normally been paid to those who would have worked on that 

day if it had not been a holiday.  Bill 32 proposes that 

everyone gets paid, even if that person would not have been 

working on that day.  A payroll grab of about 5 per cent or 

additional costs of about $11,000 per year will be felt in this 

time when higher costs on everything else are trying to be 

dealt with. 

Very clearly a real problem, Mr. Speaker, for this small rural 

community and the business that this gentleman is running over 

in Oxbow.  He goes on to say that: 

 

 In closing, these problems that I have mentioned will 

compound management stress and extend already pressed 

managerial hours of work because it will mean less 

profitability to hire more people and therefore less viability 

for the small business. 

 

 All of this, combined with other negative effects happening 

in Saskatchewan such as low grain prices, rising utility rates, 

costs of our renovations (I'm not sure about what that word is; 

it's photocopied and it's not very clear) due to government 

centralization.  Bill 32 as it stands may be the final blow to 

small businesses in rural Saskatchewan.  Bill 32 must be 

withdrawn or at least substantially altered. 

 

Very poor print there but the message is clear, Mr. Speaker.  

This is another case where an individual from Oxbow, 

Saskatchewan, is saying that this government has declared rural 

revenge on rural Saskatchewan and he cannot live with that and 

he cannot continue to financially exist if this legislation goes 

into effect in its present form. 

 

He goes on to say that he looks forward to speaking with you in 

the near future and trusts that you will weigh these 

considerations and act accordingly.  Here the message at the 

end becomes very much exactly the same as the request of all 

of the other business groups who have expressed their interests 

and their specific needs, many of them varying considerably 

but nevertheless the same bottom line: Minister, hear our 

message, hear our words, listen to what we have to say, and do 

something about what you hear; we don't want to be ignored 

because we can't afford to stay in business if you don't take into 

account our specific needs. 

 

The warning is loud, the warning is clear.  The union leaders 

who are being paid off by this administration for their support 

in the last election, will of course ultimately be the losers. If 

they kill the goose that lays the golden egg, they themselves 

will certainly be the ones that will pay the price.  Because a 

smaller job base means less members in the union and less 

control over less people, certainly is not what the union leaders 

have been looking for. 

 

So I'm saying to them today that while their intention was to 

get stronger, in fact by getting legislation that gives them what 

appears to be what they want, they may in fact be destroying 

that very same possibility; destroying the goose that lays the 

golden egg. 

 

And rural people consider it to be a fundamental split created 

by the minister and the leaders of the union movement.  They 

are saying that a wedge is being driven between rural and urban 

Saskatchewan once again, and they are calling it a revenge on 

rural Saskatchewan.  A revenge that they believe they cannot 

tolerate because this province will lose its job 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

base and its tax base. 

 

I have another transmission from yet another small business, 

The Bird Machine of Canada.  Now this appears to be a 

business in Saskatoon and they express their concerns.  The 

subject is: Revisions to The Labour Standards Act.  It goes on 

to say that: 

 

 The proposed changes to The Labour Standards Act will have 

a significant effect on our business.  The particular concerns 

are as follows.  Number one, we do not employ part-time 

workers but our full-time workers have their shifts changed 

on short notice due to a fluctuating work load.  It is my 

understanding that we will be required to give our employees 

at least one week's notice prior to a shift change. 

 

 Our customers often ask us to do work for them on a very 

short notice which requires me to change the shift schedule at 

the end of the week for the following week.  If we must give 

a week's notice for shift schedules, we will have to schedule 

people on the undesirable evening shift whether we need 

them or not.  This will make the employees discontent rather 

than solving any problems. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here we have yet another problem that is 

fundamentally different than all of the others that were pointed 

out in the many letters and correspondences that we've gone 

through earlier. 

 

(1615) 

 

Here we have another unique situation.  In this man's business 

-- I'm presuming that this is a gentleman that wrote the letter, it 

may have been a lady; I'll presume it was a man -- in this 

gentleman's business he quite clearly states that they don't have 

part-time workers, whereas most of the other people who have 

expressed their opinions of problems, have had the area of 

part-time workers as their major problem and major issue of 

concern. 

 

These people say that in fact it is the full-time workers who 

will be having the problem and that the government needs to 

consider how this legislation is going to affect these full-time 

workers and the relationship between management and labour 

in the Bird Machine Company. 

 

His no. 2 concern: 

 

 A change of the notice requirement for lay-offs to be much 

longer than the current notice period will require me to issue 

lay-off notice, not knowing if the lay-off is actually required. 

 

Now I used an example earlier, Mr. Speaker, about how the 

construction industry would run into problems with these 

lay-off notices and now we find another individual with the 

same problem but a much clearer definition of how the problem 

will in fact occur. 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to introduce four 

young gentlemen sitting in your gallery, Jeff and John Goohsen 

and Clint and Justin Guenther, who have come in this afternoon 

to observe proceedings and I'm sure they are listening with 

interest, especially Jeff and John, as their dad is debating here 

this afternoon, and his nephews.  And we want to welcome 

them and I invite all members to welcome these young 

gentlemen to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If I'd have known 

they were coming, I'd have asked them to bring my glasses. 

 

I certainly am glad to see my family here today and I hope they 

take note of how interested the government is in everything I 

have to say, especially on this labour issue that is so important 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I guess we'd better get on with the 

subject at hand because it's so important to the people of 

Saskatchewan to have their opportunity today to express 

through my words their feelings and their needs, their feelings 

with regard to the labour legislation and their need to be heard 

by the minister and their need to have the minister actually 

listen to their concerns and to act on them and not just simply 

pass them off. 

 

I was quoting from a fax transmission that we received, a sheet 

here from the Bird Machine Company wherein they were 

pointing out their individual problems and the way this 

legislation will affect their industry and their business.  He goes 

on to say: 

 

 As already mentioned, the fluctuating workload from my 

customers is unpredictable.  There is a core group of 

employees that are never laid off, but there is a group of at 

least senior who do come and go depending on the workload.  

With the requirements for a longer notice period I will have 

to issue lay-off notices to be sure I comply with the 

legislation.  However when the time comes for the lay-off, I 

may still need this person. 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

That certainly has to be a serious problem for this type of work.  

And obviously there will be a request from these individuals 

for the regulations to be changed such that there would be a 

special ruling or an exemption for this particular company. 

 

Now I'm going to make a suggestion, Mr. Speaker, that with 

the evidence that we have mounting and the piles of material 

that we have had to go through, the exceptions to the rules are 

becoming so numerous that we will have to have so many 

regulations, so many regulations governing the individual 

problems in our province, that in effect it will be 

unmanageable.  Nobody will ever know for sure who's exempt 

from what because we're going to end up with hundreds and 

hundreds of regulations to take care of all the specific, 

individual problems that are occurring in our province and 

being brought to our attention. 

 

 Now this issuing of lay-off notices will create great 

uncertainty amongst the less senior of my employees which 

. . .  

 

Oh I'd better finish this.  Okay. 

 

 Because of proposed changes, I am very concerned that they 

will not have the desired effect on an important work 

environment, and ask that you reconsider these changes. 

 

Once again a plea from the public for the minister to listen to 

their problems and to put into the legislation the necessary 

changes that will allow his business to continue to work so that 

he can be fair to his employers, especially his senior employers 

in this case. 

 

Now we've talked at length about areas where younger workers 

were going to be hurt by this legislation.  Now we have a very 

clear and distinct example expressed to us about a problem that 

will result in seniors having a problem at this particular 

business.  And that will go into many other business areas as 

well, Mr. Speaker.  So we have still more people being affected 

negatively by this legislation. 

 

Now just to go on, so the minister knows that we haven't just 

picked a couple of these things up, that there are many of them, 

and he has to know that this is a public pressure demand on him 

from many sectors so that we can ensure that he will take it 

seriously and do what has to be done, we have from . . . I'm just 

trying to decide if this is the one that I thought.  Oh yes, 

Precision Service & Engineering Ltd., and this would be from 

North Industries Park in Prince Albert, another fine city in our 

province that has also taken note of the labour legislation. 

 

It goes on: 

 

 Re Bill 32, An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act.  As 

a fairly large employer in Prince Albert we have always 

enjoyed a good relationship with our employees by paying 

them good wages and treating them fair, not by wielding a 

big stick.  It appears as if the 

 provincial government could learn from this on dealing with 

employers in the province, as this legislation is guaranteed 

not to improve relationships or cooperation with business. 

 

 There are some parts of this Act that will affect our 

operations that we believe have been poorly thought out.  The 

following items are ones that we are very concerned with. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here we have now from Prince Albert, 

another city in our province, deep and serious concerns about 

this labour legislation and the effect that it will have on the 

people in our province.  And I think it is incumbent upon the 

minister to take a close listen to the problems that these people 

are expressing.  Because without any doubt, when we finish 

with going through these items, the bottom line is going to be 

the same. 

 

I haven't read all the way through this, but I'm going to make a 

prediction that the bottom line will be, stop what you're doing 

and research it, correspond with people, talk to people, and let's 

try to do it better.  Let's get it right. 

 

 Dismissal for illness and injury, part (1).  This part of the Act 

does nothing to address an employee who has several 

sporadic illnesses such as missing three days of work at a 

time, 14 to 15 times a year.  As an employer who relies on an 

employee being at work to do a job, how could you live with 

absences such as that?  Part of the job performance is being at 

work and able to do the job, and if an employee is constantly 

absent because of illness, an employer's only recourse is 

dismissal. 

 

Now here is an argument that is considerably different than 

those that we have heard from other segments of society.  But it 

is a specific concern related to this person's business and the 

people that he employs.  So here again, we would probably find 

these people asking the minister to bring in a regulation that 

would offset this problem that is being created for his business. 

 

I don't know how many regulations we're up to now, but I 

suspect that it's going to be in the tens of tens and perhaps even 

the hundreds.  Because here we have another example of how a 

blanket legislation will not serve the needs of this particular 

industry. 

 

The number two problem, the reassignment of disabled 

employees. 

 

 The problem I have with this section is that the employee is 

being made a ward of the employer.  There is nothing to 

differentiate between an employee becoming disabled 

because of an accident on or off the job, sickness or physical 

deterioration.  Most employers try to accommodate 

employees who become disabled, but to legislate this into the 

Act is like asking for a revolt among employers in the future, 

not to mention a legal 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

nightmare. 

 

Certainly here again, Mr. Speaker, another very specific area of 

concern and interest to the community of Prince Albert and 

Precision Service & Engineering Ltd.  They find here, in their 

business, a specific problem and a specific area of concern that 

the minister needed to be brought aware of.  And he doesn't 

seem to have built this consideration into the legislation nor has 

he given any comfort to these people that he has heard their 

message. 

 

So I say to the minister, hear the cry of the people today.  The 

message they are giving you is that there are too many 

problems being created with your legislation and not enough 

attention being paid to the need for solutions. 

 

He goes on to say that there is a third problem area. 

 

 The lay-off notice provision is also a problem for this 

industry.  This increase in break in service to 13 weeks from 

14 days is extremely poorly thought out.  It is obviously put 

in place by someone who has never had to run an operation 

where temporary lay-offs due to lack of work are a fact of 

life. 

 

 With this type of provision in place, virtually all of our 

employees would require a maximum of 10 weeks notice.  In 

times of poor economic or possible lack of work, we would 

be forced to give lay-off notice to most of our people once a 

week.  Do you know what kind of effect that could have on 

morale of an operation?  When an employer has to lay off 

workers because of lack of work, they are generally losing 

money already, without further penalizing them with these 

types of restrictive conditions.  If the break in service time 

must be increased, four weeks is a much more reasonable 

time. 

 

 Please review the above changes in the legislation with a 

view in mind of the employer who must try to operate a 

business and make a profit.  Without these businesses and the 

profits they make, there will be no need for any legislation as 

there will be no employees to protect. 

 

I think that's a very clear message, Mr. Speaker, for the 

minister.  Because if there are no businesses, there are no jobs.  

And if your legislation is going to destroy the business base of 

our province, then we have no need for legislation because 

there won't be any workers left in the province. 

 

Coming from the Battlefords, another message -- another 

message, Mr. Speaker, requesting the attention  of the minister.  

The message that we have is that this message to the minister 

either wasn't read or didn't sink in, because people don't believe 

that the minister is acting on their behalf in taking into 

consideration their needs and concerns. 

 

I'll just quote a little bit of this letter so that the minister 

knows how serious the people from the Battlefords and the 

Battleford Chamber of Commerce, how serious they are about 

this matter.  They say in their letter: 

 

 As our members continue to review the proposed changes to 

the labour standards regulations, there is growing concern of 

a negative impact to individual businesses and the 

Saskatchewan economy in general. 

 

 Additional non-statutory benefits such as medical benefits 

will be difficult to secure and impossible to administrate.  

Scheduling of part-time workers with an extended notice 

requirement and seniority-assured work will significantly 

reduce the existing part-time labour force. 

 

A clear message, Mr. Speaker, from these people in the 

Battlefords, telling the minister of the problems that his 

legislation will create for their city and for their businesses and, 

most importantly, for the employees themselves. 

 

They go on to say that: 

 

 We have been advised that existing businesses with head 

office jurisdictions in other provinces with less demanding 

labour legislation will be seriously looking at withdrawing 

their services from such a demanding workplace atmosphere. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now that's pretty significant, Mr. Speaker, because what they 

are saying is that businesses that now have a head office in 

another jurisdiction may in fact simply say goodbye to 

Saskatchewan and pull their operations out of this province. 

 

We've warned the minister about this possibility and the fact 

that it could be a reality.  Now we have the people themselves 

sending us letters saying, Minister, this is reality; the people 

who run these businesses simply will not tolerate the headache 

and the adverse business atmosphere; they will pull their 

operations out of this province and they will leave. 

 

Now he goes on to say that: 

 

 We respectfully submit to you that the proposed changes to 

the provincial Labour Standards Act will increase 

unemployment.  Implementation must be delayed and some 

of the proposed changes modified to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan business. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, here we have Donna Challis, 

president of the Battlefords Chamber of Commerce, sending a 

letter to the people in the government, begging them to listen to 

their advice; soliciting the minister to make the necessary 

changes in public to this legislation, so that people will know 

what the rules are before they sign this blank cheque 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

that the government is asking for when they say they want this 

legislation to be passed in its present form, without 

amendments, and without the regulations being on the table for 

everybody to see. 

 

But I sense, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is not yet convinced 

that his changes are needed.  And with that view, I want to 

bring to him the message of yet another small-business person 

in our province.  Because their needs need to be heard, and the 

minister needs to have the opportunity to be able to say that he 

has heard from the people. 

 

And if he can't take the time to understand it all because it's so 

overwhelming, he at least will have it in the record of Hansard 

and he can get his officials to study it later and they can come 

up with some worthwhile suggestions on how he can revise his 

legislation and make it workable for this province. 

 

I have a letter here from Melfort, another beautiful town in 

Saskatchewan, the Thomson Meats Ltd.  It says a tradition of 

quality, and I'm quite sure it is.  It goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say 

that: 

 

 After our February 10, 1994 meeting at our plant here in 

Melfort, I must tell you how badly betrayed I feel when I read 

over your new labour Act proposals. 

 

Betrayed is a powerful word, Mr. Speaker, and these people 

feel that they must put it in writing to the minister so that he 

can hear exactly how they feel about the way he has treated 

them.  But to be fair, I better continue and bring the whole 

message: 

 

 In our discussions you stated you were going after the large 

companies that abused part-time workers.  We could not 

argue with that. But what in fact you have done is said that 

every employer in Saskatchewan is a mean-spirited criminal; 

we don't treat our employees fairly; they need government 

protection 

 

 Get your head out of the sand.  Your inputs are coming from 

old line union bosses who are so out of touch with the 

working men these days that their only real interest is to 

protect their cushy lifestyle.  I would have thought 

dictatorship on all of our Crown corporations should be 

enough to keep them happy and comfortable. 

 

Powerful statements, Mr. Speaker, from disgruntled taxpayers 

and unhappy citizens in our province.  People who are 

betrayed.  People who feel that the union bosses are being paid 

off with cushy lifestyles at the expense of the ordinary 

businessman in our province. 

 

And at the expense of course in the end, the ultimate end, at the 

expense of employees themselves, the very people that these 

union leaders claim to defend, when in fact this gentleman 

predicts that all they're after is a cushy, dictatorial lifestyle for 

themselves.  Possibly true.  Something we must take into 

account. 

Well this man seems to have put the target on it so well, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think I should continue and put the rest of his 

thoughts into Hansard: 

 

 Your government keeps telling us to compete globally; 

export value added products; be efficient, smart small 

businesses; hire people; and on and on. 

 

 Do you forget, or did you ever know that we Saskatchewan 

small businesses already operate with an unlevel 

playing-field, and now it will be much worse.  Try to 

schedule under your new rules lay-off notices of 13 weeks.  

Where is small business to get the crystal ball that you must 

have to operate like this?  And why the cut-off of 20 

employees?  Is 40 employees a large company?  Good 

question.  Why isn't your media full of stories of small 

Saskatchewan companies abusing their workers?  If they 

were, it might demonstrate a need for this type of action.  

Who asked for this anyway?  Why do you not include 

something for employer rights? Are we really that bad? 

 

This gentleman asks very, very important questions.  I think 

what he's saying, Mr. Speaker, is if it ain't broke, why are we 

fixing it?  And if it is broke, how come nobody's told us what's 

broken? 

 

I think this is a very reasonable request of questions that need 

to be answered for the general public.  Why fix it if it isn't 

broken, and if it is broken, which parts are broken?  And 

identify them clearly and distinctly in public and let the people 

know what's going to happen and what the resolution to the 

problem is going to be.  In other words, put your amendments 

and your regulations on the table for everyone to study and to 

understand. 

 

His letter goes on to say that: 

 

 No one will gain from this move.  You may pick up a few 

votes at the start, but did you really need them?  Small 

business is expected to pull us out of this depression.  Why 

are you trying to kill it? 

 

 I may sound upset, and I am.  When we met with you we did 

not have a hidden agenda as you did.  We were prepared to 

support you and your changes.  Why the double-cross? 

 

Signed by Lorne Thomson, the general manager. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'll challenge you to answer this man and the 

several questions that he has asked you, because they are 

legitimate questions and I think they demand that you pay 

attention and answer his queries and his inquiries and his 

concerns.  A man who now, Mr. Speaker, not only feels 

betrayed, but badly betrayed. 

 

A man who took time out of his business life to meet with 

ministerial officials, to meet to discuss the proposed changes, 

who was told how those changes 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

were going to work, who had an explanation given to him in 

such a nice way that he agreed with them; only to find out that 

when those people went back to the big city of Regina they 

draft legislation that says totally the opposite to what he was 

promised. 

 

And his words will echo through this province for generations 

to come when this government has finished -- the government 

that betrayed the people.  This, the government that badly 

betrayed Lorne Thomson of Thomson Meats in Melfort, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There has been and remains a constant need, Mr. Speaker, for 

the people in this government to know and understand the 

depths to which the discontent over this legislation sinks 

through this province.  This problem is so serious and so 

controversial that we need to put to the minister every possible 

argument. 

 

And so I want to go on to express now the concerns and the 

needs of one of our bigger corporations.  We have just done a 

few of the smaller business operations and their concerns and 

they are, realistically, somewhat different than the concerns 

that the big umbrella groups had, which we talked about and 

discussed earlier. 

 

But now I want to bring to the attention of the minister, Mr. 

Speaker, the concerns of one of our bigger industries who 

speaks for itself -- the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  

Here we have a letter that goes on to explain their points of 

view. 

 

And I think I'll just quote a little of it so the minister will 

understand where the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

stands on this issue -- the Allan division, re Bill 32, An Act to 

amend The Labour Standards Act. 

 

 Bill 32, as it currently reads, will be a major set-back to any 

hope of economic recovery in Saskatchewan.  Not only will it 

deter any enterprise who has thought about establishing a 

business in this province, it will drive away many that are in 

operation now. 

 

A very clear and loud message, Mr. Speaker, to the minister in 

charge of Labour.  To the Premier of this province this should 

be a loud and clear message from one of the bigger 

corporations in our province. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 The following outlines are concerns regarding the proposed 

amendments to The Labour Standards Act as they 

specifically relate to the potash industry in Saskatchewan.  

Our industry is a major contributor to the economy of 

Saskatchewan.  It is important to note that mining is the 

second largest industry in the province, next to agriculture. 

 

 As you are no doubt aware, the potash industry over the past 

13 years has been coping with a worldwide over-surplus 

situation which in turn 

has depressed prices.  The net effect has seen our industry 

undergo significant periods of lay-offs and permanent 

manpower reductions in order to remain competitive. 

 

Here, Mr. Speaker, we have one of the largest corporate groups 

in our province, one of our major employers in this province, 

one of our major money makers in this province, I dare say one 

of the bigger taxpayers in this province, expressing absolute 

concern about this legislation and its effects on their industry.  

It goes on to say that: 

 

 It is also important to note that our industry compete in the 

global market-place.  As our cost of production increases, we 

cannot simply pass off these higher costs.  To do so would 

price ourselves out of the market-place, resulting in further 

lay-offs and workforce reductions. 

 

 My concern is that Bill 32 will significantly increase our 

costs and place unnecessary constraints on our ability to 

operate.  These amendments are being passed through the 

legislature without proper review, costing, and consultation.  

The regulations themselves have not been drafted yet, which 

may have even higher cost implications for employers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister must soon be getting the 

message that the business community as well as the umbrella 

groups of this province, as well as the third level of government 

in this province, as well as the employers themselves, and even 

Barb Byers, is unhappy with your legislation.  It must be clear, 

crystal clear to you by now that it's time to table this legislation 

until the next legislature is called.  Tear this document up and 

start over.  Do it right.  Go back to the drawing-board with the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

Here we have the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

shivering in its boots as they go on to say in their letter: 

 

 It is imperative that employers be given more time to study 

these amendments and to point out to the lawmakers where 

potential problems may develop.  These amendments will 

invariably have an adverse impact on the workers of 

Saskatchewan (and one group which this Act is supposedly 

designed to help.) 

 

 An example of this are the revisions to section 43, which 

increases the period of lay-off notice to a maximum of 10 

weeks.  Because of the cyclical nature of our business, we 

have negotiated into our collective agreement shortened 

periods of lay-off notice for short-term shut-downs in order to 

better handle fluctuations in the market-place and ultimately 

reduce the negative impact of extended lay-offs on our 

employees. 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

 These proposed changes to lay-off notice periods will 

jeopardize this situation.  We will no longer be able to react 

to changes in market conditions, resulting in the potential for 

extended periods of lay-offs or permanent closure. 

 

Here, Mr. Speaker, we have clearly a very significant problem 

that the Potash Corporation faces because of the uniqueness of 

part of their business structure.  Once again these people will 

be back to the government saying, we need a regulation that 

specifically takes care of our problem.  I'm not sure now if 

we're at regulation 50, 60, 100, or maybe 200. 

 

How many specific, individual problems will we come across?  

We certainly may end up writing a book of regulations.  And 

that book simply may be so large that no one will ever be able 

to understand how many changes are in it or how it affects the 

general population when it's finished.  We are in a mission of 

utter chaos. 

 

It goes on though to say that: 

 

 The revisions to section 72 is also significant, to say the least.  

Many of the employers in the potash industry have been 

unionized for over 25 years.  This long history of collective 

bargaining has addressed many of the concerns that affect 

individual employees.  The revision to section 72 virtually 

erodes away these many years of collective bargaining in 

areas such as lay-off notice, notice of schedule change, 

statutory holiday pay, absenteeism control, to name just a 

few.  Legislation such as this compromises the principles of 

free collective bargaining and explores areas that are best left 

to the parties involved to resolve in a manner best suited for 

their particular industry. 

 

There is a very clear and concise solution, Mr. Speaker, to the 

problems that exist -- let the people who have the problems 

solve their problem through collective bargaining, the way 

they've done it in the past 25 years. 

 

I think the message is clear.  These people don't believe that the 

machine is broken and they don't believe that this minister 

should try to fix it.  And if he does try to fix it, they believe that 

he will probably put the parts on the wrong places and destroy 

the whole operation. 

 

The letter concludes: 

 

 Bill 32 is unacceptable as it reads now.  One, technical flaws 

in the legislation have to be corrected. 

 

 Regulations have been developed so that a full cost impact 

can be calculated. 

 

 Three, further consultation with business can be conducted to 

make the legislation workable and cost effective. 

And it says here that if you wish to discuss this further, they 

would be quite happy to meet with you, Minister.  I sincerely 

suggest to you that you take them up on that offer and that you 

drive up there tonight, because this is too pressing a problem to 

wait till the morning.  Take them up on their offer; get over 

there and find out what you can do to solve the problems in this 

province rather than to be the creator of these problems. 

 

Well, Minister, as we go along in this debate, I find that I have 

so many documents of complaints that I rather doubt if we'll 

get them all included, but I'm going to try to get some of the 

more important ones finished. 

 

We do need to put on the record a few of the comments from 

the McDonald people that I talked about earlier, because there 

are several areas of concern and several different operations 

throughout the province.  And to make sure that you understand 

that it's not only one or two people, that there is a broad 

spectrum of people out here, of a broad base of concern, we 

need to follow this further. 

 

I'll quote from a letter that we have here from Alex Marion's 

restaurants.  I believe they're here in Regina -- at least that's 

their address.  And it starts out: 

 

 As an independent owner-operator of a quick service 

restaurant, I am writing to express my outrage with The 

Labour Standards Act amendments introduced on March 11, 

1994. 

 

 For myself and other members of the food service industry, 

these amendments represent onerous and costly measures that 

will ultimately hurt employees, as we will be forced to cut 

back on the number of people we employ in order to find a 

more economical and feasible way to run our business 

successfully.  This could result in the automation, or bringing 

ready-made products from other provinces.  This move would 

no doubt jeopardize this province's economic position. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, another point of view that expresses the 

problems that can result.  Here we have the fast-food industry 

telling the minister loud and clear, that if they can't survive 

with the labour laws here, they'll simply start having the 

hamburgers manufactured and assembled in Manitoba and 

truck them into Saskatchewan.  Truck them into Saskatchewan 

in the frozen state and then they will have an automatic 

machine that will feed them through the fireplace, heating them 

up and dumping them into your car as you drive by.  And you'll 

have self-serve.  Put two bits in the machine and out comes a 

hamburger, probably two loonies but . . . 

 

And no jobs.  I can see it happening.  You're driving by 

McDonald's, you throw two loonies in the machine, out comes 

a big mac.  Not one person gets employed.  The truck backs up 

to the back door . . . 

 

You remember, some of you farmers must remember, 



April 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

the bale loaders they came out with here a few years ago.  New 

Holland manufactured them.  Exactly the same process -- this is 

the industrial revolution at its best.  The machine drives along 

and picks up the bale and puts in a stack on the machine.  After 

a while the farmer takes the load and he dumps it off in a stack 

neatly and he drives away.  Not a human hand touched the bale. 

 

But alas, some farmers said, I need to put these bales up in a 

loft in the barn and I don't want to have to pick them off the 

pile and put them on the elevator, so New Holland invented a 

machine that unloads the load, one bale at a time, dumps them 

on to the conveyor up into the loft, never touched by a human 

hand. 

 

Why not a hamburger off the truck on an assembly line, 

manufactured in Winnipeg, comes to Saskatchewan, backs up 

to the door, pushes the button, the door opens, and the machine 

starts delivering hamburgers, poppity pop into the storage area 

on conveyor belts; from there they go through the fireplace into 

the coin machine and you stick in two bucks and out comes a 

hamburger.  Not one kid employed in the whole province of 

Saskatchewan; the entire McDonald's industry can survive 

without labour. 

 

Is that what you really want, to destroy every job that every kid 

in this province has probably worked at at some time or other 

after school?  No opportunity to make a dime.  No opportunity 

to make a little money for gas to drive the car out to get your 

girlfriend.  What a sick society we are trying to develop when 

we force our industries to automate every job and destroy them 

and have nothing left. 

 

The people from McDonald's are telling you loud and clear, 

shake your head, there's a reality out here that could happen.  A 

reality that we can eliminate the jobs and we can still survive.  

Is that what you really want -- no more jobs, no more people 

employed?  I think not. 

 

It goes on clearly, and I want to give this man an opportunity to 

be heard on the record: 

 

 It is clear that the proposed amendments will result in 

significant increases in labour costs, making it almost 

impossible for business operators to sustain their current 

employment levels.  Higher labour costs will also put upward 

pressure on the price of goods and services in Saskatchewan, 

giving neighbouring provinces a competitive advantage in 

business. 

 

Can it be any clearer than that?  You're giving competitive edge 

to the people who don't manufacture or work in this province.  

Competitive edge to the people in other areas of the country 

and of the world. 

 

It goes on, on a more specific level: 

 

 The implications for the food service industry are disastrous.  

You are imposing regulations on 

food service operators which become of the nature of the 

industry, e.g., high proportion of part-time employees, 

seasonal fluctuations will result in excessively high labour 

costs and restrictions on our ability to operate efficiently. 

 

Can it be any more clearer than that, Mr. Speaker?  They have 

no ability to operate efficiently and be competitive in business. 

 

For example, it goes on: 

 

 An unexpected stretch of good weather can bring about a 

dramatic and immediate increase in food service sales.  How 

can operators meet this increase in demand and also provide 

employees with a one-week notice of scheduling change?  By 

eliminating an employer's flexibility in scheduling, you are 

denying any employees the opportunity to work additional 

hours, and you are reducing the level of service operators can 

provide to their customers.  This measure is simply not 

workable in the food service industry. 

 

So here once again, Mr. Speaker, this gentleman clearly points 

out the flaws of this legislation and its inability to work in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  But he goes on: 

 

 Given the punitive impact these proposals will have on 

virtually all areas of the business sector, the integrity of your 

stakeholders' consultation is highly questionable.  It appears 

that the proposals are intended to address the government's 

perception that employment standards violations are 

widespread.  This is simply not the case, and it is 

irresponsible of the government to develop and impose 

legislation in this manner.  Further, many of the legislative 

proposals go far beyond the concept of minimum standards. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here we clearly have a very upset person in 

the food service industry who writes to us that: 

 

 It is imperative that you consult further with the food service 

industry to develop legislative amendments which are 

balanced, workable, and conducive to the economic 

revitalization.  In the absence of responsible action by you on 

this matter, how can I continue to run a viable interest and in 

turn do my part to provide jobs? 

 

There are significant questions being asked, Mr. Minister, by a 

legitimate businessman who wants to know from you how he is 

to exist under your labour law in the future.  What you need to 

do, sir, is to tear up this legislation, go back to the people and 

talk to them, and redo this whole mess. 

 

There's no question in my mind, from the tons of 

correspondence and the many calls that we've had, that people 

in this province are absolutely united in their request that you 

change this legislation and that 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1994 

you start consulting with people with your ears open and take a 

lesson and listen, rather than to impose your will for purely 

political reasons -- to pay off the union leaders for their support 

in the last election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You're paying them off, everybody knows 

that's what you're up to. 

 

And it is, without any question, the wrong thing to be doing 

because the people of the province have not been snowed by 

this action.  They know full well what you're up to and they're 

not going to tolerate you giving cushy jobs -- as one person put 

it in their letter -- cushy ways of lifestyle for the union leaders 

at the expense of the rest of the people in this province; while 

the workers lose their jobs, while their collective bargained 

agreements are destroyed by your legislation -- agreements that 

they hammered out themselves, that they put together in 

negotiations, long and hard hours of work that you're going to 

destroy with this legislation. 

 

Those people have a right to be heard.  Those people have a 

right to be listened to.  And they have a right to have the 

legislation that will protect the work that they've done in the 

past.  They are not asking you to fix what isn't broken; they're 

asking you to allow them to coexist in a world that can only 

function with a coexistence policy and a coexistence style of 

labour legislation.  You cannot appease one side totally, 

without balance, and expect this province to survive 

economically.  You cannot expect the people of this province to 

do . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


