




















































Hansard: April 27, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1871 

 April 27, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to rise this afternoon and introduce to you and all 

members of the Assembly, 81 grade 7 students from the 

schools of St. Alphonsus, St. Paul's and St. Mary's from 

Yorkton.  They're seated in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

they are accompanied this afternoon with teachers Mr. Leroy 

Persick, Mr. Steve Kozicki and Miss Barb Zwirsky, along with 

chaperons Ms. Janet Varga and bus drivers, Mr. Dave Dubnyk 

and Mr. Brad Hanson. 

 

This is one of the largest delegations, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Assembly and I'll be meeting with them shortly for 

photographs and refreshments.  In the interim I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, if you could pass the hat in the Assembly to help 

defray some of the cost of the refreshments. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming the students from Yorkton. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 23 

grade 6 students up in your gallery, along with their teacher, 

Diane Dubé and Annette LeNouail.  Diane and Annette make it 

a regular habit to attend every year and I'm pleased to see them 

here again. 

 

I would like all the House to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to introduce some guests in your speaker, Mr. 

Speaker . . . in your gallery, Mr. Speaker -- I'll get that right yet 

-- Rebecca Buckton and Connie Buckton who are 

small-business people from the town of Elbow who are 

struggling like many businesses in small town rural 

Saskatchewan and have come down here to witness 

proceedings in the House this afternoon. 

 

So I would ask all members to please help me welcome the 

Bucktons. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Professional Secretaries Day 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today is 

Professional Secretaries Day.  In any office, be it political, 

business, educational, or service industry, 

all work would come to an immediate halt if it were not for the 

person or persons who keep the operation glued together -- the 

secretary. 

 

Today's high speed, demanding and increasingly technical 

world, the professional secretary is truly a professional in every 

sense of the word.  For one thing, the technology they use as a 

matter of course defies the intelligence of an Einstein.  I dare 

say most of us still have fear struck into our hearts by a 

portable typewriter, a sorting copier, merging computer, or 

speedy fax machine -- all "star wars" equipment that our 

secretaries use as a matter of course.  They are whizzes and we 

are not, and we would be lost without them. 

 

On top of this of course they bring the human touch to the 

contact our offices have with constituents or customers.  And 

so to our caucus office and constituency secretaries and 

constituency assistants, I know I am joined by all members of 

the Assembly in saying thank you.  On this one day we 

recognize what you do for us all year round.  Thank you to our 

secretaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Red Wings Win 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday my 

colleague, the member from Moosomin, offered his 

congratulations to the Weyburn Red Wings for winning the 

Anavet Cup which is the tier II junior hockey championship 

series between Saskatchewan and Manitoba.  Some hon. 

members may have wondered where I was yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker.  Well I was back at home savouring the celebration 

victory together with the Red Wings. 

 

Today it is my first opportunity in this House to congratulate 

the players, the co-coaches, Ron Rumball and Dwight 

McMillan, and the Red Wing organization, including the many 

volunteers it takes to sponsor a community junior hockey team. 

 

The Red Wings advanced to the national Centennial Cup series 

commencing Tuesday, April 29, at Olds, Alberta.  The Red 

Wings' victory over the St. Boniface Saints bodes well for 

them.  Ten years ago the Red Wings won the Centennial Cup, 

having defeated the Saints on their way to victory. 

 

I wish the Wings well and I wish them the best of luck in their 

final play-offs.  It's only fitting for me to conclude my remarks 

by saying: go, Wings, go.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Increase in Saskatoon Charity Bingo Revenues 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to inform the 

House today of some goods news for Saskatoon charities.  As 

most of us know, many people in our communities work very 

hard at bingos, raising 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

money for worthwhile community activities.  And preliminary 

charity gaming figures for 1993-94 are now available from the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 

 

I'm pleased to report that charity revenues from bingo activities 

in Saskatoon were up by more than $239,000 in the last year, 

giving Saskatoon charities nearly $5 million in bingo revenues.  

That amounts to a 4.8 per cent increase in charity fund-raising 

through bingo after expenses and prizes have been taken out.  

And what it means, of course, is more money for important 

organizations and programs which serve the people of 

Saskatoon.  These figures do not include charity revenues 

raised through other licensed gaming activities such as Nevada 

tickets, raffles, and casinos licensed by the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority. 

 

These figures are an increase of more than 1.2 million.  The 

charities and exhibition associations received almost 53 million 

from bingo and other gaming activities.  In contrast, the 

province collected only 10.5 million in licensing fees from 

these activities.  So most of the money goes to charity and 

sporting organizations. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Tribute and Recognition to the Province's Secretaries 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

join with my colleague across the way, the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser, in recognizing that this is a kind of a 

special day that we set aside to pay tribute to some of our 

unsung heroes.  And I'm certainly not referring to those that do 

battle in war and so on, but to those folks who work hard and 

diligently, long hours, nights, evenings, Saturdays, to make 

sure that the work gets done, and in the end, Mr. Speaker, make 

the rest of us in this legislature look so good and wonderful and 

as if we know what we're talking about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I take great pride in also paying tribute and 

recognition to all of the secretaries throughout the province.  

But more so, Mr. Speaker, I think I would be remiss if I did not 

at the same time pay special attention to the highest-paid 

secretary in our province, the Provincial Secretary.  I don't 

think that we should forget him as well. 

 

But all kidding aside, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to the 

secretaries of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

St. Walburg Elks Hall 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to take this opportunity to speak about the grand opening 

of the new St. Walburg Elks hall this past Saturday.  The 

ceremonies in the beautiful new hall were quite entertaining 

with representation from within the Elks and the Royal Purple 

on hand from across Saskatchewan. 

I want to specifically mention Lady Judy Helperl of the Royal 

Purple Lodge #201 in St. Walburg and Exalted Ruler Brother 

Lyle Knight also of St. Walburg.  Claude Lalonde was the 

master of ceremonies and throughout the evening received 

many accolades as the work he did in raising money was quite 

remarkable. 

 

The new Elks hall cost about 600,000 with absolutely no 

government funding.  Presently there is only 120,000 of this 

still outstanding.  It is expected that this sum will be paid off 

within just two years, Mr. Speaker.  It is really quite amazing to 

think that such a small community of St. Walburg has already 

raised and paid off $480,000 of the bill with no outside 

funding. 

 

A few years back the Stabler report on communities named 62 

viable communities within Saskatchewan of which 52 were 

rural and 10 were major cities.  St. Walburg was one of the 52 

rural communities deemed to be viable.  Their facility is one 

that would be the envy of any major centre, let alone a small 

town.  The community spirit of St. Walburg is obvious and the 

Stabler's findings were confirmed for me last Saturday. 

 

To all the Elks and the Royal Purple in St. Walburg, my 

congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Pork Production in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm pleased to 

recognize that a new strategy has been put in place that will 

support the expansion of the pork production industry in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The goals of the strategy include helping the industry to attract 

capital for expansion; increased public awareness; addressing 

environmental concerns including odour control; and the 

creation of manpower training and development skills. 

 

In addition an industry task force has been created with the 

responsibility of setting up a fund through which investments 

will be made in pork production projects.  An office of 

specially trained staff will be set up in the Saskatoon Rural 

Service Centre in order to increase awareness and assist related 

production. 

 

Some other good news, Mr. Speaker, from the pork industry is 

that a recent study by Ernst & Young has concluded that 

Saskatchewan has many competitive advantages which make 

expanding pork production attractive.  Included in these 

advantages were low cost of production, high quality product, 

very high productivity, and low density of population, which 

reduces health problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Pork International sells more pork 

than we produce so the demand is obvious.  The expansion of 

the pork industry supports our government's Agriculture 2000 

strategy in all sectors.  It is a fact that this type of expansion 

creates jobs for rural Saskatchewan and adds value to our basic 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

agricultural products.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Liquor Franchise Policy 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I direct 

my question to the minister in charge of the sin bin, the liquor 

and gaming commission.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, last 

month Connie and Bill Buckton, who run the Elbow Hotel, 

were told by your officials that the liquor commission was 

about to yank their liquor vending licence in an effort to 

increase liquor sales in that community. 

 

I asked you to check into that matter, and the Minister of 

Economic Development at the time took notice on your behalf.  

And even though that occurred many weeks ago, Mr. Minister, 

we and the Bucktons have heard nothing, have received no 

answer whatsoever. 

 

The liquor commission, Mr. Minister, is going to pull their 

licence, a move that is going to certainly destroy their business.  

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, why is that happening?  Why do 

you want to close down another business in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd be 

pleased to answer the question of the member from Rosthern.  

But let me first of all correct some of the background which 

you put before the House. 

 

The licence was issued on a temporary basis, as you may or 

may not know, and the people who received the temporary 

licence were informed that in fact the franchise would be 

advertised and businesses in that community would have the 

opportunity to bid on the franchise.  That process followed with 

four applications.  The regional manager conducted interviews 

by the applicants on March 23, and subsequent to that the 

Liquor and Gaming Authority made a decision with respect to 

the franchise. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that franchisees are well 

aware of the fact that liquor franchises are not for sale in 

Saskatchewan as they are in Alberta.  We examined, based on 

many different criteria, the franchise viability, the location 

within the community, the existing operations, and the ability 

to provide quality service.  And that is the basis on which the 

decisions are made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You've been 

quoted, Mr. Minister, as simply saying that you're responding 

to needs of the community, and I would like to know who in 

the community of Elbow have you spoken to about this matter.  

It can't be the 350 people who already signed the petition 

opposing this move.  And that petition has been delivered to 

your office already, Mr. Minister.  It can't be the Elbow 

Town Council who keep supporting this franchise or who want 

the franchise kept in the hotel.  Who in the community is 

asking you to make this move, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of Elbow are telling you they cannot 

afford to lose another business in this community.  Why don't 

you listen to the people of Elbow instead of taking all of your 

direction from your cabinet colleagues who simply have dollar 

signs in their eyes and want more commission on the liquor 

sales? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me answer 

that by saying firstly that I have been personally petitioned and 

have spoken with no one personally.  That is the job of the 

people who work for the Liquor and Gaming Authority.  And 

as I have indicated, the regional manager would see that as 

being his job and in fact would do that as being his job. 

 

But let me, Mr. Speaker, speak to what we have done as a 

government with respect to small business.  Since we were 

elected in October of 1991, we have done a dramatic reduction 

in the small-business tax load.  We have eliminated the PST 

(provincial sales tax) for meals.  And I want to say with respect 

to the hotels industry, we will be injecting in the 

neighbourhood of $15 million a year into rural hotels and urban 

hotels on the video lottery terminal program. 

 

Let me say, in the last week's examination of revenues from 

VLTs (video lottery terminal), the establishment to which you 

refer would, over a period of one year, generate $22,700 in 

revenues over an annual period.  The commissions on franchise 

in the community of Elbow were something over $14,500 net. 

 

So to make the argument that the fair process that we have used 

to determine a franchisee for that community is putting a 

business out of existence, is simply not correct, based on the 

facts that I've just shared with you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you much. Mr. Minister, 

for a long time I thought that you were at least a partial 

businessman who understood how businesses operate.  And 

when the line gets thin, $14,000 -- or whatever it happens to be 

-- is a tremendously big figure between making it and not 

making it, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Bucktons have been told that the real reason for you 

pulling their licence is that liquor sales were down.  Your 

officials and you even have a name for that; it's called 

open-shopping concept -- making liquor more accessible in 

order to increase the sales and the consumption, Mr. Minister. 

 

Would you think . . . let's put it this way, Mr. Speaker.  You 

would think that an NDP (New Democratic Party) 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

government that professes to promote wellness, declining 

liquor sales would be looked at favourably.  But I guess your 

government's financial wellness depends so heavily on liquor 

and gambling that you cannot afford to pay much attention to 

what's best for the families and for the communities. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it so important for you to suck out every 

possible dime in liquor revenue out of Saskatchewan that 

you're prepared to send down the tubes another small business 

in rural Saskatchewan?  Are you prepared to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say one more 

time to the member opposite that the business to which you 

refer should generate, and probably will in the next fiscal year, 

net revenues of around $22,700 from the video lottery terminal 

program.  And the fact is that the net from the franchise in that 

community has netted in the neighbourhood of $14,500. 

 

But let me say this to the member opposite: that I find this line 

of questioning from him especially difficult to take when in 

fact you were the government that introduced liquor advertising 

to this province in the 1980s -- the program that you sponsored 

and supported as a member of the cabinet and as a member of 

the back-bench in the former administration. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that this decision was made based on 

the criteria that I have put forth to this House  It was done by 

the Liquor Authority without political interference; and if the 

member opposite is asking me to make a ministerial decision 

and politically interfere with a decision made with the selection 

of this franchise, then I say to him, that that just simply will not 

happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, I would say to you to get involved in this issue 

because there are many, many inconsistencies here.  We're 

hearing over the news now that there are two petitions going 

around . . . (inaudible) . . . That one is for and one against, so 

why should I get involved?  That both those petitions, an urban 

and a rural one, are in favour of leaving the franchise where it 

is, Mr. Speaker.  We've been told by the owners that it was the 

liquor commission that approached this grocery store for the 

franchise, not the other way around through advertising.  So, 

Mr. Minister, a lot of inconsistency. 

 

I'm going to ask you a very simple question now, Mr. Minister.  

Will you commit that you will meet with Connie Buckton 

today, this afternoon?  She made a special trip to Regina to see 

you.  You meet with her.  You explain to her why this avenue 

of support to financially keep her struggling business afloat, 

why that decision has been made by you to take it away from 

her.  Could you make that commitment, Mr. Minister, to meet 

with her this afternoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Rosthern that I would be more than pleased to 

meet with Mrs. Buckton this afternoon to explain the position 

as put forth by the Liquor Authority. 

 

But what I will tell her is the same that I will tell you.  If you 

are expecting political interference in the decision-making 

process, that simply will not happen.  The Liquor and Gaming 

Authority has a set of regulations and criteria by which they 

select franchises.  We don't do these selections in the minister's 

office as your administration did for the years that you were in 

power.  Those days are over, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Interprovincial Trade 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, we seem to be getting some very mixed messages 

from you when it comes to the matter of dropping 

interprovincial trade barriers.  Back in January you are quoted 

widely in the press as being all in favour of dropping trade 

barriers.  In fact you said by the end of June that Saskatchewan 

would be in a much better place.  And matter of fact it was one 

of the few areas that the members of the official opposition 

congratulated you on in the throne speech. 

 

But now we see you're calling the plan to drop trade barriers 

naive and saying that those who believe in it probably also 

believe in the Easter Bunny.  Why the change of heart, Mr. 

Minister?  Why are you now blocking the positive effort of 

other provinces to open up provincial borders to freer 

interprovincial trade?  Why are you doing that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member clearly, that those of you on the Conservative benches 

while in government supporting the Free Trade Agreement, as 

you did with the United States, never taking into consideration 

the issues that we are now facing with the attempts to cut off 

exports of durum wheat to the United States, clearly indicate 

that no matter how hard we try to lower the barriers, which we 

are doing between provinces, that there will always be areas 

where we will want to look at and consider existing provisions 

where some of our workers, for example in northern 

Saskatchewan, might be protected by the surface leases as it 

would work in regards to the expanding uranium mines. 

 

When it comes to lowering barriers as it would protect the farm 

land in Saskatchewan, when it would protect the utilities in 

Saskatchewan, I say that as we lower barriers there are areas 

that we will want to protect. 

 

Now I want to be clear that we have taken the position of 

lowering barriers.  We're doing that.  There are very, 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

very few areas of contention between the western provinces.  

And I say to you, that if you believe that all barriers should be 

removed or in fact will ever be removed, I say to you that 

simply isn't a reasonable position to take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

are the one that are flip-flopping on the issue.  You know full 

well that if there were no Free Trade Agreement in place today 

that it would be much more difficult between the Americans 

and ourselves on a whole host of issues. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you baulking at this now, after you 

wholeheartedly endorsed the process?  Is it because of the 

disastrous economic climate that you're creating in this 

province through labour laws, higher taxation, higher utility 

rates?  Isn't it the fact, Mr. Minister, after you get done 

wrecking the Saskatchewan economy that you're going to have 

to practise protectionism in this province because you have 

priced Saskatchewan out of the market-place.  Isn't that the 

reason, Mr. Minister, that you're now balking at the very ideas 

that you were leading the charge on earlier this year?  Isn't that 

the reason, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, at every meeting that I 

have attended dealing with trade barriers, and I know the 

deputy leader of our government has attended meetings, we 

take the same position -- that we are in favour of lowering 

barriers between provinces.  But obviously there are areas of 

concern where we will want to protect, I say again for example, 

the opportunity to have affirmative action for working people 

in northern Saskatchewan.  And I must say that the ministers at 

the meetings I have attended are totally in support of the 

position that Saskatchewan has taken. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that when he talks about 

the climate in Saskatchewan and talks about the climate in 

Alberta, it seems to me that the members of the Conservative 

caucus are attempting to follow along the lines of Ralph Klein 

in taking over the Reform Party position in an attempt to 

salvage what's left of that rump party over there. 

 

But I tell you, Mr. Member, it simply isn't working because a 

Conservative is a Conservative is a Conservative and you will 

have a difficult time explaining what your trade policy was on 

which you lost the last election in 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

minister doesn't have to stand in this House and explain about 

his love of travel and his wont to go to meetings all over the 

place -- we all know about that. 

The simple fact is, Mr. Minister, as you go to these meetings 

you, on one hand, endorse the concept of dropping 

interprovincial trade barriers, now you're saying that people 

that believe in that are compared to the Easter Bunny.  

Yesterday your Premier was comparing business people in this 

province to Chicken Little. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Minister, that this province has a very serious 

economic problem on its hands.  You've got over 81,000 people 

on welfare, you're minus 12,000 jobs; the only way you're 

going to rectify that, Mr. Minister, is to get on with reality and 

get on with dropping interprovincial trade barriers so that 

people in this province have some hope. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, clearly I think it's important for you to stand 

in this House today and unequivocally say that you support the 

process and that you will stop denigrating those provinces in 

Canada who are not NDP who are pushing this process 

forward.  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that the 

member gets up and talks about all the trade barriers but never 

mentions which ones he's talking about.  Is he talking about the 

affirmative action program, which requires 40 per cent of the 

employment created at the mine expansions in the uranium area 

in northern Saskatchewan to be done away with?  Is that what 

he's saying? 

 

Now if that is the case, and if the Leader of the Liberal Party 

takes that position, because I know she has strong opinions 

about lowering trade barriers, if what you're saying is that you 

want the surface leases or the agreement with the uranium 

mines changed that would not require 40 per cent local 

employment or northern employment, tell us about that. 

 

But I want to say that you can't have it both ways.  You can't 

say get rid of all the barriers but we want to hire Northerners as 

part of our economic strategy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Crown Land Leases 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Minister of Agriculture this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday I posed some questions to you about 

the way your department discriminates against farmers on the 

basis of age.  One farmer lost his bid to lease Crown land by 

only two rating points, and we contacted your department 

again.  And the Department of Agriculture said to us that they 

couldn't give us any information because you told them not to, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, all we wanted was further factual information.  

And I want to know if this is your idea of open, honest, and 

accountable government. 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I outlined 

quite clearly what our policy is on land allocation yesterday.  

Age is indeed one of the three criteria that we use in selecting 

applicants.  We defend that.  I think we have a problem in this 

province where the average age of farmers is something like 60 

years old.  And if the Liberal leader is suggesting that we don't 

encourage young farmers, I would like to hear that. 

 

We do not give out information on individual clients, if that's 

what she was asking for, but the policy is very clear.  One of 

the criteria we use is age selection, and somebody has 

complained to the Human Rights Commission about that.  And 

it's a policy that's been around for 50 years or so, like right 

from Liberals to Conservatives and NDP have always used age 

as a criteria.  And we believe that's good public policy and we 

intend to keep using it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

you know full well that the request for information had nothing 

to do with a specific individual.  I have with me a copy of the 

new agricultural Crown land application-for-lease form, and 

that's been made available to farmers this year, Mr. Minister.  

On its first page it asks for farmers' date of birth. 

 

I also have with me a copy of the lease application form from 

1989, Mr. Minister, and nowhere on the entire application does 

it require an applicant to state their age and date of birth. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to know exactly when this policy started 

and how many farmers have lost leases due to the age 

component on this policy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as I have stated 

earlier, to my knowledge, going back to Ross Thatcher days, 

that has been a criteria and continues to be so.  We do not 

eliminate people on the basis of age, but age is one of the 

criteria that we use in selection.  So we use distance, resource 

base, and age in some combination. 

 

We have changed the form -- that's true -- we have changed the 

criteria somewhat.  And as I pointed out yesterday, we have 

given the local RMs (rural municipality) the authority to weight 

those factors differently if they so choose in order to suit the 

local area.  But age has been a criterion and will continue to be 

a criterion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I pointed out to 

you yesterday, Mr. Minister, that one of the farmers you've 

discriminated against has taken his case to the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission.  The commission wisely set aside 

the matter so that it could first rule on an application by your 

very department.  Your department wants an exemption from 

the Human Rights Code. 

Outside the House yesterday you said you didn't even know 

that an application had been made.  Now someone in your 

department, Mr. Minister, recognizes that the leasing policy of 

your department is in direct violation of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code, because last week the Human Rights 

Commission had a hearing on your request for an exemption. 

 

Mr. Minister, who exactly applied to the commission and on 

whose authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there indeed has been 

a complaint to the Human Rights Commission.  I think a 

complaint does not necessarily mean there's a violation.  And 

the Human Rights Commission has not ruled on it.  If there is a 

violation and we are ordered not to pursue our policy, then we 

will obviously have to abide by the rulings of the Human 

Rights Commission.  In the meantime we are strongly 

defending our public policy, which is to help young farmers get 

established. 

 

If the Liberal leader is opposed to that policy, say so, but do not 

denigrate the civil servants who are acting in good faith and are 

defending our public policy and which we do not hide from.  

We think that there is very good merit in having young farmers 

established in this province and we will tend to continue that 

until we're ordered to do otherwise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now just help 

me out with what you just said, Mr. Minister.  In this House 

yesterday you made it clear that you support the policy of age 

discrimination.  And you said, and I quote: "We do not believe 

that that violates the Human Rights Code."  But your 

Department of Agriculture, Mr. Minister, has applied to the 

Human Rights Commission as of March 7 for an exemption, 

for special permission to violate the code. 

 

So on the one hand, you don't think that it violates the code, but 

on the other hand you've gone out of your way to get special 

consideration to break the code.  So which one is it, Mr. 

Minister? Because you can't have it both ways.  If you don't 

think the policy violates the Human Rights Code, why then are 

you asking for an exemption? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I thought I was fairly 

clear.  We support very strongly putting young farmers on the 

land.  We think it is very good public policy to help young . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There has been a complaint to the 

Human Rights Commission, which does not necessarily mean 

there's been a violation.  We are doing whatever we can to 

convince the Human Rights Commission to allow us to 

continue with our policy, which we think is good policy. 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

Where does the Liberal Party stand with respect to young 

farmers?  Are you saying that we should not help young 

farmers get started? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Cameco Board Remuneration 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 

Corporation.  Mr. Minister, in preparation for the annual 

shareholders' meeting for the Cameco Corporation being held 

tomorrow, the company has distributed a management proxy 

circular.  That document outlines the fact that one of your 

government's appointments to the board, Mr. Allan Blakeney, 

is receiving $15,000 a year retainer plus a thousand dollars for 

every meeting of the board he attends. 

 

The document also states that Mr. Blakeney is receiving special 

compensation in the amount of $36,000 a year for special 

corporate governance.  Mr. Minister, can you tell this 

Assembly what Mr. Blakeney does for an extra $36,000 a year 

and what precisely is special corporate governance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think as the 

member well knows, that Cameco is a private corporation, that 

the government has the opportunity to appoint some board 

members to this corporation, and we have chosen to nominate 

Mr. Blakeney, and he was accepted by the other shareholders 

as one of the board members of Cameco. 

 

What Mr. Blakeney gets paid is not a concern of this 

government; it is up to Cameco Corporation to decide what 

their directors get paid.  And we think that if the member's 

numbers are right, I would certainly consider those numbers to 

be valid and maybe even modest in light of what some other 

people get when they contract out to some people in my city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, we yesterday or 

the day before found out who the little dipper is, now we're 

finding out who the big dipper is. 

 

Mr. Blakeney is receiving one of the richest tax-funded 

pensions in this province, Mr. Minister.  You have also 

appointed him to the board of the Saskatchewan Insurance 

Corporation and now he is appointed to the Cameco board with 

an additional, with an additional $36,000 added to his regular 

salary as a board member.  The province owns 40 per cent of 

Cameco; the federal government, 9 per cent.  What we're doing 

today is asking you to protect the taxpayers from these gross 

injustices to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, is the euphemism for a lobbyist; does Mr. 

Blakeney lobby your government in this position or in any 

other position? 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I see that the 

Tories are up to their usual tricks of trying to do some character 

assassination on some very well-known and highly respected 

people in this province.  And I just don't think that that's going 

to fly very well with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to simply reiterate again, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 

Blakeney was a nominee of our government; was accepted by 

the other shareholders of Cameco to be a board member.  He is 

doing an exceptionally good job.  He is keeping us well 

informed as to what's happening at Cameco, which is what our 

board members are expected to do.  And we believe that he is a 

credible, valuable board member to Cameco. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, we are simply 

wanting to know this: what does special corporate governance 

mean in relation to a $36,000 extra stipend for Mr. Blakeney? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I indicated earlier 

that this is a private company and that question should be 

directed to the Cameco management because they'd be able to 

answer that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Would the member from 

Humboldt please come to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to enact certain 

consequential provisions resulting from the repeal of that 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

make a few remarks about The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Repeal Act.  At the end of my 

comments I'll be moving second reading of this legislation. 

 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Act 

was passed in 1989.  After privatization of PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

remained liable for over $70 million in guarantees issued to 

PCS in the early 1980s. 

 

Upon the change of administration in 1991, we undertook to 

remove the taxpayers' exposure to this contingent liability.  In 

1993 PCS removed almost 40 million of this lease guarantees, 

leaving taxpayers still liable for about $32 million in 

guarantees. 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

This legislation is very simple.  Section 2 repeals The Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Act including 

restrictions on share ownership.  Section 3 provides a clear 

definition of what constitutes PCS's head office. It stipulates 

that this head office with these functions and jobs will remain 

in Saskatchewan, a clear definition of what a head office of 

PCS is to consist of and what functions are to be performed 

there.  By specifying that these functions must remain in 

Saskatchewan, we created specific and concrete protection for 

Saskatchewan jobs. 

 

Second, PCS has agreed to remove the remaining $32 million 

in debt that is guaranteed by the Saskatchewan taxpayers.  This 

contingent liability will be removed from our books, and this is 

good news for the people of Saskatchewan and will also be 

looked upon favourably by the credit rating agencies of Canada 

and the United States. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Repeal Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to just make a few 

comments regarding Bill No. 59 and the minister's statement.  

I'd like to commend the government for the ongoing efforts 

they have continued due to the Bill of 1989 and continuing the 

efforts to open up the Potash Corporation.  We would like to 

support this Bill and offer to the government our wholehearted 

support for their moves in this direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the House is well aware it was our government 

that began the privatization of PCS and the minister alluded to 

that.  It was and is our firm contention that the government had 

no more place owning a primary industry in this province than 

it would have running the farms and ranches of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we felt that a private potash corporation would be 

more efficient and productive enterprise, would employ more 

people, and on the whole would be a stronger and more viable 

economic force than any Crown corporation could hope to be.  

We are happy to see that the government has come onside in 

realizing the benefits of privatization to the economy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time that the privatization was introduced 

we felt that we had to listen to the concerns of a few people 

opposed to the initiative.  So in spite of our own inclinations, 

we introduced the share trading restrictions to give these people 

some level of comfort with what was going on. 

 

Happily times have changed now and PCS can begin to operate 

fully as a productive and responsible corporate citizen.  

Between the benefits that PCS will gain from this legislation 

and the benefit the provincial budget will accrue from the 

write-downs, this legislation represents the best deal possible 

for 

PCS, the government, and the people of Saskatchewan as a 

whole. 

 

We would again like to congratulate the government on this 

move.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1415) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  At this time, I would ask the Minister of 

Finance to introduce the officials who have joined us here 

today and to make any remarks you may want to make before 

moving the resolutions. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like 

to introduce the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright, who 

is on my right.  Sitting behind me is Bill Jones, the associate 

deputy minister of Finance.  And sitting next to Bill Jones is 

Larry Spannier, the executive director of the Treasury Board 

branch. 

 

Before we begin I'd like to make a few comments about the 

process that we're engaging in today.  One of the most 

important principles in any democracy is the idea that only 

elected officials can decide how tax dollars are spent.  That's 

why we bring the budget before the legislature and require a 

debate on a line-by-line basis through estimates of the budget 

and how the money is being spent. 

 

This year the budget was brought in on a very timely basis.  It 

was introduced February 17 with the idea being that if the 

opposition so wished, it would be possible to pass the budget 

by year end, which was March 31, 1994.  Because the budget is 

still being debated in a detailed way through the estimates 

process, we require interim supply because there are agencies 

out there such as educational institutions, health care 

institutions, social organizations, which require money in the 

interim.  So the process is just to give to these organizations the 

money they require to tide them over until the budget is 

actually formally passed by the legislature. 

 

With that introduction, Mr. Chairman, I now: 

 

 Resolve that a sum not exceeding $716,845,000 be granted to 

Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 

1995. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

as I see the information that you've brought here is a 

one-twelfth interim supply again to be voted, as I see it, would 

you give me any indication, Madam Minister, where there is 

anything more than the total of two-twelfths being voted as of 

the end of May for interim supply.  Is there anything more than 

the two-twelfths allocated? 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, to 

the member opposite, it is all straight two-twelfths; there is no 

area in which there is in excess of two-twelfths. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, you made some 

observations that were somewhat interesting in that you had 

said that the budget was early enough this year to provide us an 

opportunity to pass it early enough.  I would say that under 

normal circumstances that is not usually the case. 

 

However, I want to point out to you that we have not had any 

opportunity, nor have we taken opportunity to ask you, not only 

about the expenditures, but the revenue.  The revenue is just as 

an important part of the opportunities in this Assembly to speak 

to you, to speak to the Minister of Finance as she collects 

revenue for the province of Saskatchewan, and we need to talk 

about that.  We need to talk a lot about that.  And so far, 

Madam Minister, we have not been able to do that. 

 

Nor have we taken the opportunity to do that in any of the other 

interim supply Bills.  And I want to just say to you that we are 

giving you the opportunity to have the interim supply done 

today with the caveat on it that we would have an opportunity 

to discuss revenues and the opportunity in revenues at your 

earliest possible convenience.  And that in my view would be 

later this week, early next week. 

 

And that opportunity is, Madam Minister, what we need to talk 

about.  We can talk significantly about the expenditures but the 

people in this province are interested in the revenue side, and 

the opportunities for us to speak out on their behalf in relation 

to those revenues is something that we want to talk about. 

 

And I'm not going to ask you any of those questions today if 

we have some commitment by you that we will, at the earliest 

Monday, begin to talk about the revenue side through the 

Department of Finance and the Committee of Finance.  And 

that, Madam Minister, is what we're interested in. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I have no problem with the basic point being raised.  I 

have some commitments in Saskatoon later on this week, but 

from our point of view, as soon as the House business allows 

the Department of Finance to be in here, we will of course 

answer all of your questions on revenue.  And if you want to 

submit some written questions before to speed up the process, 

that is fine as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's one other area that I think we want to 

have a lot of discussion about, and that is on the view that the 

Department of Finance has in relation to some of the offloading 

taking place by the federal government. 

 

And we want to have some projections that you would like to 

give to us and the people of the province about the Social 

Services side or the things that Mr. Axworthy is talking about 

-- all of those dynamics. 

We want to have some of that information given to this 

Assembly and to the taxpayers in this province as well so that 

we have a clear understanding about that. 

 

I just raise that now as an opportunity for you and the 

department to think about in order to relate that to us at the 

beginning of next week when you come forward with your 

Committee of Finance estimates and then we will talk about it 

then. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, again that's a point well made.  We will try to prepare 

ourself to come, when we come with our estimates, with 

information about things like Unemployment Insurance 

offloading and the cost of that to the province.  And so we will 

take notice of that. 

 

And as I said before, if you want to let me know beforehand in 

written form or other form what you would like, we can be sure 

that we have the information here when we do appear in 

estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There are a number of issues that have been 

raised by myself on other occasions, but I will point them out 

because we're in the context of discussing this in this format. 

 

I'm also going to raise questions about the . . . in the area of the 

federal government taking and reducing its exemptions in 

various areas.  I'll use as an example the hundred thousand 

dollar tax credit.  All of these tax credits, what the implication 

is for Saskatchewan, what the revenue return to the people of 

the . . . the Department of Finance is going to be in this context. 

 

And in those areas there is at least probably 10 or 11 areas 

where the federal government has said, we will reduce the 

volume of deductions that individuals will be able to take.  And 

we'll be asking you what revenue benefit the province of 

Saskatchewan will have in each of those cases.  And it deals 

with basically a letter written to the . . . written by Peat 

Marwick and it deals with the federal budget 1994. 

 

And I have outlined quite a number of those individual matters, 

and they deal with UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) and they deal with meals and entertainment, debt 

forgiveness, all of those issues.  And I'm going to be asking you 

questions on what the revenue impact in the Department of 

Finance is going to be in relation to those decisions made by 

the federal government. 

 

I'm also going to be asking you, Madam Minister, to 

substantiate the volume of dollars and provide for us the role 

that CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 

has in relation to the budget, the volume of dollars that are 

going to be generated by the increases in utility rates.  And I 

want to provide you with the opportunity to get them for us so 

that we can deal with that in a very precise kind of a way. 

 

And I want to just outline those for you briefly, Madam 

Minister, and I will allow the procedure to go on as it relates to 

the board of internal supply for the second month of the fiscal 

year. 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I: 

 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public service 

for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1995, the sum of 

$716,845,000 be granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1430) 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I move that the resolutions be read 

the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 60, An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1995, be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By leave 

of the Assembly and under Rule 51(2), I move that the Bill be 

now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to 

welcome your officials, Minister, and I'm glad to see you all 

back again.  And we have received a summary of a March 15 . . 

. answers to several of our questions and want to thank you for 

those.  We will be wanting to refer to that in some detail in a 

few minutes. 

 

But first of all, Minister, I want to ask you some questions with 

regards to the reclassification of dental health educators.  Now 

the recent PSC (Public Service Commission) reclassifications 

of dental health educators is a contentious issue with at least 

one group and that is the public health nurses.  Now we 

have been receiving letters and calls on this matter, Minister, so 

we thought it only appropriate that we delve into it just a little 

bit to see what's going on. 

 

Dental health educators classification no. 605210 were 

reclassified to health educators 2, classification no. 108082.  

The job description under which dental health educators now 

fall is not applicable from what I can see.  We have an attached 

letter that I've been reading.  And I think I'll just run over the 

job description for you so that you can get your mind set on 

where we're coming from. 

 

(1) the incumbent will possess a university degree or extensive 

experience in journalism, public relations, advertising, or 

related fields of communications; (2) incumbent will possess 

broad general knowledge of the problems related to diet, 

communicable disease control, immunization, cancer, 

tuberculosis, and sex education; (3) that they will stimulate, 

coordinate, plan, and organize all health education activities 

under the direction of the regional medical health officer; (4) 

that they may supervise the work of professional and clerical 

employees performing duties related to the public health 

education program. 

 

Now I can understand why public health nurses are concerned, 

Minister.  I don't see how the dental health educators fit into 

this job description.  I believe they attend SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

for a year or two, whereas public health nurses must attend 

university for four years.  And you can correct me if I'm wrong.  

And from what I can see, this job description gives them the 

power to supervise the nurses.  Is this true, Minister? 

 

I guess I should let you answer that before I ask more 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The first thing that I would like to say, 

Mr. Chair, to the member, is that these positions will not be 

supervising any nurses, so I can relieve the member's mind on 

that score. 

 

The class specification for health education 2 allows for 

education and experience other than the university degree to be 

considered.  These employees have been specifically trained to 

provide dental health education as a result of post-secondary 

education in dental therapy, inclusive of preventive education, 

and all have such experience.  So that that's the basis on which 

it was approached. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Will the dental health 

nurses be teaching our children about sex education, cancer, 

etc., as is stated in their job description?  No offence, but, Mr. 

Minister, they are dental educators and not health educators and 

perhaps the PSC went too far in this reclassification, would you 

think? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, these are dental health educators.  

The class itself is a health educator class, which includes many 

different kinds of educators, some of which I presume the 

member has correctly identified.  But these people are 

concerned with dental 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

education. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, I understand that the reclassification 

is retroactive as well.  I don't understand why that would be.  

Maybe you can explain to us why it would be retroactive.  And 

as well, how many people were affected by this reclassification, 

if you don't mind telling us that?  And what is the total cost of 

this reclassification, including the retroactive pay portion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The first thing I'd like to do, Mr. Chair, 

is explain the way in which these reclassifications work so far 

as adjustments are concerned.  The request comes to the Public 

Service Commission for a consideration of a . . . well it's a 

request for reclassification and the commission then considers 

it in accordance with their procedures. 

 

If there is a reclassification, it is retroactive to the first day of 

the month following the request.  And so if your request went 

in today and there was an adjustment on account of a 

reclassification, it would be effective on May 1. 

 

We don't know how many people were concerned.  The 

Department of Health would know that.  They employ these 

people; the commission doesn't.  So we don't know how many 

were affected.  We guess it's about a hundred but we don't 

know, nor do we know the cost; that would be included in the 

Department of Health appropriations. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So what you're telling me is that you have the 

power in your department to reclassify people to a position that 

is very much more lucrative and yet you don't have to pay the 

bill, so there is no accountability in the budgetary process 

whatever then; and the Minister of Health must somehow find 

the money in her budget to pay for your decision.  Is that what 

you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't think, Mr. Chair, that the member 

puts it fairly.  The fact is that the Public Service Commission 

has the responsibility within government to classify positions.  

And requests for reclassification are not as a result of the 

commission going out and searching for opportunities to do 

this work.  These arise as a result of requests that are made to 

the commission, and it is the commission's responsibility under 

statute to respond in those situations by reviewing the 

classification and determining whether any change should be 

made or whether the previous classification is appropriate. 

 

The commission, when these requests are received, needs 

certain information.  It needs a job description of the job being 

performed and a statement of the duties that are actually being 

performed by the people who are in the positions.  The 

commission, as part of its work, will interview the managers of 

the program involved to corroborate exactly what it is that the 

people do. 

 

Then the information has to be assessed in the context of the 

classification plan, and if people are doing work 

that entitles them to reclassification, then they are entitled to do 

that.  It's not a question, as far as the commission is concerned, 

of cost; the commission doesn't approach it from whether or not 

it will cost more money or how much more money.  That's a 

management problem for the department itself, or the 

Department of Health in this case, and it's a budgetary problem 

for that same department. 

 

But that's not the commission's business.  The commission 

merely tries to ensure that people are in the appropriate class 

considering the duties that they perform and that the integrity 

of the classification plan is maintained.  Those are the 

responsibilities of the commission and these responsibilities 

come into play each and every time there is a request for 

reclassification. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, this is rather puzzling.  Here 

you have a reclassification of people in the health field that is 

going to cost probably thousands of dollars.  Maybe I can go to 

tens of thousands; I might even be able to go to hundreds of 

thousands.  I don't know, you haven't given us any figures of 

any kind.  You don't have to pay for it.  The Minister of Health 

does.  You don't have to consult with her.  You obviously 

haven't because you don't know anything. 

 

What you've reclassified is people that the public health nurses 

say are getting the same pay now as what they get for four 

years of university training.  But you say that's okay because 

these people aren't going to be doing the public health nurses' 

work anyway, but you're going to pay them the same standard.  

The public shouldn't worry because these folks won't be doing 

anything more than what they were doing before, so there's no 

worry to the public except that they're having to pick up the 

bills.  And the taxpayer here looks to me like should be just as 

concerned as the public health nurses are. 

 

You've got, by your own admission, maybe a hundred people 

now who are only dental assistants.  They're not doing sex 

education and they're not doing any of the other jobs that the 

public health nurses do, but they're going to get paid the same 

as the public health nurses. 

 

Now that seems really strange to me. Why you would do that?  

In fact, I'd have to start to wonder if you couldn't have 

reinstated the entire school dental program for the kind of 

money that you're putting into this.  And if it's going to cost 

that kind of money, we should know about it. 

 

So I wonder if you would do a couple of things for me, 

Minister.  Undertake first of all to find out how much the cost 

is going to be; tell us how much the old dental program used to 

cost; and show us that what you're doing is fair and reasonable 

for the taxpayers as well as for the public health nurses, who of 

course are feeling offended because of their need to have a 

certain level of education to get a certain level of pay. 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

This doesn't look fair to me at all.  And we want to know where 

this money is going and why we haven't looked at the 

possibility of having this money spent in a more positive 

direction, like perhaps doing more than just handing out 

toothbrushes and teaching people that you stroke up and down 

instead of sideways. 

 

Now I guess another question I may as well throw in at this 

time, Minister, is why is the Public Service Commission the 

body that does this reclassification when it is the Department of 

Health that pays the bills?  Maybe you could consult with the 

ministers of Health there and see what's going on here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I don't know what the 

member had for breakfast this morning to make him so 

provocative in his line of questioning.  Presumably we can deal 

with these pressing matters of public interest without being 

personally offensive, as I found the member's remarks to be. 

 

But I will say this, and say it again, and this time I'll say it more 

slowly and more clearly so that the member will understand.  It 

is part of the mandate of the Public Service Commission of the 

province of Saskatchewan to consider questions of 

classification and reclassification.  That has been the case, Mr. 

Chair, and Mr. Member, since the Public Service Commission 

was formed in this province, which I think probably is 50, 60 

years ago. 

 

It is the Public Service Commission which is the only body in 

the government which has the mandate or the authority to 

classify and reclassify positions.  The question of classification 

is not for the Department of Health or the Department of 

Justice or any other department.  The question of classification 

is for the Public Service Commission.  I have explained to the 

member in very general terms how that process works.  It is not 

any part of the mandate and function of the Public Service 

Commission to deal with budgetary questions. 

 

The commission simply classifies and reclassifies according to 

standards which are applied here and have been applied for 

years and years and years,  including during the 1980s, the 

period to which the member has probably a particular 

emotional attachment.  Also which are the same criteria as are 

applied by public service commissions the length and breadth 

of this country. And that is the function of the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

Now we have a Department of Finance who is concerned about 

the preparation of a budget, and the Department of Health 

which employs people and pays salaries to them.  All we do is 

tell them where in the classification plans their employees fit.  

That's all.  That's all. 

 

Now if the member thinks we should have a wider mandate in 

the Public Service Commission, we would have to haul up that 

Act and consider it for amendment.  And maybe then I would 

have to answer 

some of the questions that the member put forward as to the 

cost of this matter to the Department of Health. 

 

I can't do that now.  I don't know that.  The member will have 

an opportunity to ask those questions of the Health ministers 

when they are in front of this legislature in the presentation of 

their estimates.  No doubt he already did that when they were 

here the other night. 

 

Now I can get that information for the member if he is too shy 

to stand up and ask the Health minister how many costs are 

involved here.  I'll do that if I have to to preserve the good 

relationship that we've always had. But I won't be criticized for 

coming in here not knowing something which is none of my 

business as the minister responsible for the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I can see we're going to get 

right off on the wrong foot to start with because it is your 

business.  You're a taxpayer if nothing else.  Now you're a 

minister of the Crown and it's your responsibility to know 

what's going on, especially when you make decisions that are 

going to cost hundred of thousands of dollars to the taxpayers 

of this province.  You have no business being a minister in this 

government without taking that responsibility square on the 

chin because it's yours, and nobody else's.  So don't pass it off 

that I'm asking foolish questions, because I expect you to do 

your job. 

 

Now I'm not asking these questions for myself.  I'm asking 

these questions for the public health nurses who have written to 

us and asked us these very, very direct questions.  They say that 

you haven't consulted with them. 

 

What consultation did you have with them before you made 

this decision to reclassify people that they say are getting 

money that they don't deserve?  What consultation did you 

have with the Department of Health about the budgetary 

process?  Did you have any?  Minister, we are in times of 

economic restraint.  Everybody in our society is forced to pay 

higher taxes and higher utility bills to fund your government's 

activities.  And each one of those people in our province is 

learning to live with less in order to finance the whims of your 

government. 

 

Now that seems to have one exception and that happens to be 

the civil service, where you can arbitrarily increase their wages 

to whatever numbers happens to suit you; and you don't feel 

that you are responsible to explain to us, you don't feel that you 

are responsible to give figures to us.  Who is responsible for 

this government?  Who is responsible to the taxpayers? 

 

You've made a decision that's going to cost hundreds of 

thousands of dollars to classify people to do a job that they 

don't have to do because they're going to be doing the same job 

they always did before; and instead of doing it right and putting 

it back into the schools to do some actual work with the teeth of 

these children, you've got them running around with a 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

toothbrush and their instructions are to teach the kids how to 

use a toothbrush and that's about the extent of their job.  And 

I'm saying to you that that's wrong unless we have some 

explanations of what's going on here. 

 

So on behalf of the public health nurses of this province, I put it 

to you, minister, what is going on here?  Is this a done deal or 

can you go back to the drawing board and correct this mess? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'll just try and calm the 

atmosphere here a bit.  It is clearly obvious to all of the 

members of this legislature and I'm sure to anyone who 

happens to be watching on TV how far out of line the member's 

questions have been in the outburst that we've just heard. 

 

We have before this legislature the estimates of the Public 

Service Commission and in connection with that the member 

has raised a perfectly legitimate question about the 

reclassification of a particular employment category in the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have explained to the member in some detail the mandate of 

the Public Service Commission as it relates to requests for 

reclassification.  I can go into further detail as to what is taken 

into account as those reclassification requests are being 

considered.  I want to tell the member very plainly though that 

these requests are judged on their own merit.  Now I hope that 

those words are clear enough -- each request is judged on its 

own merit. 

 

It is no part of the mandate of this Public Service Commission 

or any other to go around the public service to check out with 

all the other job classifications whether they would have any 

objection to a particular reclassification.  This is not some kind 

of a public relations or a political exercise. 

 

This is a highly technical, highly professional review of job 

duties to determine whether their existing classification is 

appropriate or not appropriate.  These requests come in all the 

time.  They're dealt with all the time.  Sometimes they affect a 

few employees.  Sometimes they affect many employees.  It 

depends upon how many people are employed in that particular 

occupation. 

 

So it is just not possible.  It's not part of the system and ought 

not to be that the commission should have to go around or 

should be expected to make any inquiries at all of other 

occupational groups to see whether they would have any 

problem with a particular job being reclassified. 

 

Nor, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Member, is it any part of the Public 

Service Commission's mandate to get into the budget question.  

This is not some kind of a balancing act that the commission 

goes through.  This is not some kind of government-wide 

exercise where the cabinet sits around and determines whether 

a job should be reclassified. 

This a highly technical, highly professional function that has 

been delivered by this Public Service Commission to this 

government since the commission was founded.  And it is 

exactly the same function as is performed by public service 

commissions in every other jurisdiction the length and breadth 

of this country.  And in each of these jurisdictions, the process 

of reclassification is done in exactly the same way.  And it is 

not any part of the commission's function to sort of phone up 

the deputy minister of Finance and say if we reclassify this job 

-- as we should on the merits -- will that throw your budget out 

of whack?  Because if it will, then we won't reclassify it. 

 

What kind of a Public Service Commission would that be?  We 

would all protest to that because the highly technical, highly 

professional function that is being performed ought not to be 

influenced or contaminated by these considerations that are 

outside the mandate of the Public Service Commission. 

 

Now if we as a government find that our costs have increased 

to the point where we can't afford to have this many dental 

health people, then we're going to have to make the appropriate 

adjustments.  And if indeed the public health nurses have got a 

case for reclassification, they know the processes and their 

union knows the processes by which this is done. 

 

And these requests for reclassification come in all the time.  

And the commission's responsibility, laid down by statute, is to 

deal with those requests.  And they have to deal with them 

within the four corners of the statute.  And it is simply not fair 

for the member to suggest that the commission should consult 

the Department of Finance and the Department of Health about 

whether they could afford a particular classification.  That 

would no longer be professional.  That would be some kind of a 

political exercise or a negotiating exercise or a balancing 

exercise, which is no part of the commission's function. 

 

We would have to change their legislation and change it rather 

dramatically before we could expect the commission to conduct 

that kind of an inquiry.  And, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Member, 

we're not going to do that.  We're not going to do it because we 

think it is important that there be an objective and professional 

system within this government for classifying positions. 

 

The classification of a position ought not to depend upon 

budgetary considerations or political considerations.  It ought to 

depend upon the duties that are being performed by that 

employee and how those duties fit into the overall classification 

plan. 

 

(1500) 

 

I don't know how more clearly I could explain that function, 

but I do invite the member to calm down here and cool the 

rhetoric and let's just try and exchange as much information as 

we can about some of these very important issues. 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, that line was nothing but pure 

bunk.  And you know it.  We've set out to try to find out what's 

going on here.  We ask you for facts and figures and you say, 

cut the rhetoric and let's get down to some exchanging of facts. 

 

Well, you're the minister; you're supposed to have the facts.  So 

start feeding us some information.  You're the one that's 

throwing around rhetoric about how you don't have a mandate 

to be responsible, how you don't have a mandate to consult 

with people.  And quite frankly I think there are going to be 

some people that are going to be offended by this. 

 

If you don't have a mandate to consult with the public health 

nurses, if you don't have a mandate to consult with the Minister 

of Health, if you don't have a mandate to consult with the 

Minister of Finance, then there's something desperately wrong 

here, and no matter for how many years it's been going on, it 

ought to come to an end. 

 

And quite frankly, sir, I'm of the understanding that this 

particular request for reclassification is nothing new; that it has 

happened many times before over the years and that these 

people were always turned down.  Only this administration has 

decided to increase this classification to cost extra hundreds of 

thousands of dollars in classifying.  And I'll remind you, 

classifying people who have an education to know how to deal 

with dental procedures in a very superficial manner of 

instruction, now being classified into the realms of pay scales 

where they are to know things about diet, communicable 

diseases, immunization, cancer, tuberculosis, sex education.  

They are to be able to stimulate and coordinate plans and 

organize all health education activities under the direction of 

the regional medical health officer.  I mean these are the 

classifications of the job description that you've just placed 

these people into. 

 

And you say nobody should worry; the taxpayers should be 

happy.  Well this taxpayer's not happy.  The public health 

nurses are not happy.  And I don't think that anybody else is 

going to be happy when you tell them that you don't have a 

mandate to consult with people before you do a reclassification. 

 

And quite frankly, I think you've made a mistake here, 

Minister.  And if I could have encouraged you in a nice way to 

change this, I'd have tried that, but I've done that other days and 

it doesn't work.  And quite frankly, the gloves are off and we're 

coming after you because you're not doing your job right. 

 

Now under the department budget, Mr. Minister, there's a nasty 

rumour going around this town about government departments.  

And the rumour is that if a department hasn't spent their total 

budget near or close to the end of their budgetary year, that the 

departments are to make sure that they spend the money 

quickly so that there's nothing left in the kitty. 

 

Is there any truth to this rumour, Minister?  Has the Public 

Service Commission ever come in under budget?  And what is 

the history of this department?  I'd 

like to know what the historical comparison is to the way 

you're administrating it and the way it was done in the past. 

 

And are these budgets consistently bang on, or are you off with 

surpluses or deficits?  We'd like to know that.  We'd like to 

know whether you're overbudgeting or underbudgeting.  And 

when in the fiscal year do most of your expenditures take 

place? 

 

Now that's quite a few questions, so I may have to repeat some 

of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, if the member is 

coming after me, then I welcome it and I think I'll be able to 

stand the test. 

 

I want to say that most of the commission's expenditures are 

salary, salary-related expenditures, and so the pattern is 

consistent across the year.  There is no burst of spending at the 

end of the year, which seemed to be what the member was 

concerned about, and I think that so far as the commission is 

concerned, the rumour that was bothering the member is false. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, let's talk about some individual 

problems.  I have a note here on a Ms. Darlene Eckstein.  I'll 

spell that for you:  E-c-k-s-t-e-i-n.  Now we picked this up in 

the documents that you have supplied us with here in the 

general departmental agency report and we thank you for that 

report.  Now we find some inconsistencies in this report that we 

would like you to explain and I'm sure you will be able to do 

that. 

 

Now this young lady, a junior secretary, does not appear on the 

new employees' list for either this year or last year.  Can you 

explain when she was hired and what her pay was last year as 

compared to this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Darlene Eckstein is a junior secretary in 

my office.  She began work on June 28, 1993 on a temporary 

basis to cover the job of another secretary who began maternity 

leave and she continued to work as a temporary at the rate of 

$2,141 per month to the end of 1993.  She was made permanent 

on a job-sharing basis as of January 1, 1994 and she continues 

to be employed as a junior secretary on a job-sharing basis at 

the base salary of $2,141. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, 

intermediate secretary Tanya Byrnes, I think it would be 

pronounced -- and I'll spell it so that you get the right name; it's 

B-y-r-n-e-s -- received a 12 per cent salary increase over last 

year.  Can you explain this large increase and if she took on 

any further duties in order to earn that increase? Can you give 

us any details on this particular individual and her 

employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, Tanya 

Byrnes commenced employment on October 1, 1992 in the C 

category at the rate of $2,141 per month.  She was temporarily 

reclassified to the D category in October 1992 to December 1, 

1993 on 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

account of performing higher duties, as I recall.  It was a 

temporary reclassification in recognition of that. 

 

She reverted to her home position and base salary of $2,141 per 

month on December 1, 1993 and was temporarily reclassified 

to the intermediate secretary range at the first step in the range 

on December 1, 1993.  And that was the time when the 12.3 per 

cent increase came into effect, which brought her salary to 

$2,785 per month. 

 

And I'm not clear how that occurred.  That was not any 

decision made by me.  It was at the time that the ranges were 

put into effect in Executive Council with respect to people 

employed in the ministers' offices.  And I believe that in the 

case of Tanya she had to go to that level in order to fit into the 

bottom of the first step in the range. 

 

In any event, she continues to be employed.  She's an 

intermediate secretary now as compared to her employment 

when she started out, and she is now permanently employed as 

an intermediate secretary at the first step in the range, the 

bottom of the range, at the rate of $2,785 per month. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, I 

appreciate your giving us this information. But when you say 

things like you don't really know what's going on in your 

department because you didn't really have anything to do with 

that, and somebody else did something about it and then carry 

on with the rest of, well she got a couple of thousand here and 

something there, if the general public's watching this, they are 

going to have the impression that you are far more incompetent 

than you are, and I give you credit for being very competent.  

And I know you can do better than that. 

 

So I think it would be better for everyone in this province if 

you would not approach the answers in that fashion.  Because 

even if I'm not bright enough to know what you're talking 

about, people out there watching television, they know what's 

going on here.  So I suggest that you be a little more forthright 

with your approach to the answers of these questions. 

 

Linda Dickson, ministerial assistant C, was hired last year as a 

permanent employee, yet this year she was laid off with the 

explanation, work assignment completed.  Now this seems like 

the kind of explanation one would use for terminating a 

temporary, not a permanent employee.  Was she in fact a 

temporary or on-contract employee, and if so why was she 

listed as temporary since her designation, ministerial assistant 

C, indicates that she was a secretary?  Can you tell us just what 

her work assignment was and in what way was it deemed to be 

complete? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm going to have to get back to the 

member on that.  Linda was in my office and left, and I can't 

recall as I stand here, what the circumstances were of her 

leaving.  So with the member's permission, Mr. Chair, I'll get 

back to him on that when I've consulted with my staff and I 

recall. 

We here in this House are not able to answer the particular 

question that the member put. 

 

Linda was certainly in my office as a junior secretary, as I 

recall, and did a fine job, but I just can't recall the 

circumstances under which she left.  I think as I stand here 

speaking that she went to another job, but I want to be precise 

about that so I'll get back to the member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, we will 

take you at your word that you will supply us with that 

information. 

 

Just in passing, how many people did you say work in your 

office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are six positions, but one of the 

positions is job-shared by two individuals, so that would be 

five full-time and two part-time people. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

I'm sure that's a really tough job to keep track of -- seven 

people in an office.  So not knowing where they went or what 

they did might be natural.  I don't know. 

 

I've worked with that many people and I never thought it was 

all that complicated to know who was there and who wasn't and 

why they were being hired or fired.  You know, even a farmer 

has a tendency to be able to keep track of those kind of things, 

and here you are, the Minister of Justice, and you don't know 

what's going on. 

 

But I guess that's your job and you've got to do it the best you 

can.  Maybe you could hire somebody to sort this out for you.  I 

could maybe give you some suggestions. 

 

Now anyway, we'll have to go on I guess, seeing as how you 

don't know what's happening. 

 

Details of all expenses paid to ministerial staff in the past year 

-- could you provide that for us, Minister? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The expenditures consisted of the 

salaries of five people.  I don't know whether the members 

want me to give those salaries in the House, but the total 

salaries were $91,834.48 paid to those five people.  Some of 

them were there for only part of the year, as the member will 

know from my previous answer. 

 

By the way, I should know what happened to Linda, but I just 

don't recall.  I have people in my staff who handle those sorts 

of things for me.  And I know that she wasn't fired.  But I'm not 

able to recall just the circumstances under which she left.  

Whether it was a question of leaving the workforce or going to 

another job, I just can't say.  And I apologize to the member for 

that. 

 

Also $605.51 of my business expenses was charged to the 

Public Service Commission.  And the grand total 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

then was $92,439.99. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thanks, Minister.  Maybe Linda Dickson 

will phone in and let us know what happened to her.  I hope she 

isn't lost. 

 

Could you please also give us then, Minister, the details of 

travel undertaken by your ministerial staff, including the total 

amounts, the cost per staff member, and the destinations and 

purposes of the trips? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I'm 

delighted to say that I have just been handed a note indicating 

that Linda Dickson left my office to take other employment, 

and actually went to a better job.  So the story has a happy 

ending.  And I remember that now that I get the note.  I even 

remember what the other job was. 

 

There was . . . I think the question was travel, travel expenses?  

And during the '93-94 fiscal year there was $813 worth of 

travel charged by my office to the department.  They were for a 

long-service recognition supper in Saskatoon that I attended to 

congratulate the long service employees and to hand out gifts to 

them on the completion of their term of service with the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That brings a couple of questions.  Now I 

think, Minister, that what you have given me is an $813 figure 

for travel.  And it sounds to me like that was for yourself as a 

minister, going to a meeting.  And I was also wondering if you 

could give us the cost of travel undertaken by your staff, if 

there would have been any of that kind of cost.  And if there 

was, we'd like to know some of the details about how much per 

member and their destinations and what the purposes of their 

trips might have been. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I had one of my staff with me on that 

occasion, so the charge covers both of our travel, air fare I 

think, that is involved here.  And there was just the one trip to 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You mentioned, Minister, that you go to these 

things to give out gifts for long-time service, I think was one of 

the terms you might have used.  If I'm wrong, would you 

correct me.  And who got the gifts and what they were for and 

what kind of gifts would they be and how much would they 

cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The long-service recognition suppers 

have been going on since about 1980, which would mean that 

they've been going on for the last 15 years.  They recognize 25 

years of service and 35 years of service.  The costs of the gift in 

recognition of those years of service are borne by the 

departments from which the employees come.  So I don't know 

what the total would be. 

 

But I can tell the member, having spoken at a number of these 

banquets and mingled with the employees who have given their 

careers over to working for the Government of Saskatchewan, 

that they are very solemn ceremonies and they are much 

appreciated by the employees involved.  They are emotional 

events, 

and I think it to the credit of the government, including the past 

government, that we recognize the occasion of people having 

so dedicated themselves to the Government of Saskatchewan 

and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, for clarifying that.  I'm 

sure that the taxpayers of the province would join with me in a 

very serious congratulations to those employees who have 

received those acknowledgements for their lifetimes of work.  

And even though the member from Saskatoon doesn't think it's 

important for people to know what's going on, it does explain 

to me why these expenditures didn't show up in the budget. 

 

It may actually be comforting to the taxpayers to know that 

somebody took a look to find out that these things weren't 

mentioned.  And now we know that they were paid by their 

departments, that's why we didn't find them.  So we're happy 

that you went and we hope that everyone enjoyed the evening. 

 

Now, Minister, you only hired one more person as an 

out-of-scope, temporary employee, yet you spent $45,000 or 39 

per cent more on this class of employees.  Can you explain 

this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm afraid, Mr. Chair, that the member's 

going to have give us some more detail so we can understand 

what he's talking about. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well from my notes here, as I went through 

this document here that I scratched out, indicated that we 

discovered here that there was one person who's classified as an 

out-of-scope, temporary employee listed in here, and it says 

you spent $45,000 or -- I don't know if my calculator is right or 

not -- but 39 per cent more on this class of employees.  Now 

that's just a class of employees where the price went up. 

 

Now I think what we did was compare that to last year's and it 

went up by $45,000 from last year for this type of employee in 

your department.  I guess that's about as good as I can explain 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm sorry to have to ask, would the 

member identify whether that was in the material that was 

recently supplied?  Or is it in the Public Accounts or the 

budget documents or . . . and is there a name attached or a 

position number or a page number or anything like that that we 

could help to . . . I'd like to answer the question, but I just don't 

have a . . . I'm not able to without some more information. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It was out of the information that we acquired 

from you but I don't have the page down, so what I'll do is I'll 

go back to my office, get into my notes and find exactly where 

I've pulled this information from, and then we'll deliver the 

answer to you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I'll undertake to give the member's 

question a full answer just as soon as I get some particulars 

from him. 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Certainly, we'll supply that right away. 

 

Now we also noted in going through this material, Minister, 

that you had some rather impressive cuts the previous year in 

your department.  But now you are spending even more on 

permanent out-of-scope employees than in 1992.  Now that's 

permanent out-of-scope employees I'm talking about. 

 

You hired one more such employee, yet your costs are up 

$240,000 or 8 per cent.  Can you explain this drastic change in 

the figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say first of all, Mr. Chair, and 

to the member, that there has been no economic adjustment for 

out-of-scope personnel during the term of this government up 

to this point.  They're all making the same money that they 

made previously.  I'm not aware of any reclassifications in the 

out-of-scope area, so that everybody's . . . the job rate is still the 

same. 

 

It is quite likely that the difference that the member noted in 

expenditure levels -- and he's talking about past years -- would 

be a matter of positions being vacant in one year and being 

filled in the other.  And if the position is vacant, of course the 

money's not spent; and when they're filled, the salary attaches 

and is paid.  And that's likely where the difference comes from. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, perhaps it is a typographical error or 

something like that, but I remember when we went through 

this, we noted that there had been one more person hired.  So 

that would account for some of the money.  And yet the figures 

seem to show that there was a $240,000 increase in the cost in 

that category.  That would seem to be an awful lot to be paying 

one employee. 

 

So unless I've done some mathematical error there or perhaps 

there's a printing error, the figures didn't jibe, so I wanted to ask 

about it.  And maybe it's my problem, maybe it's not yours, but 

certainly there is a problem in the numbers I've got here and I 

have to figure out what's going on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There of course is nobody in the Public 

Service Commission that earns anything like $240,000.  That's 

enough to pay more than three, perhaps four, employees.  So 

there is some explanation there and it is most likely that in one 

reporting period, in one fiscal year, there were vacant positions 

during that year which were not vacant in the following year, 

and that makes up the 8 per cent. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Well I think what we'll 

do here is ask you to commit to researching this a little more, 

and I will also do the same.  And perhaps I can, you know, find 

out what's going on; and if you can, you can do the same and 

we'll get it sorted out. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I'd be glad to do that.  The member 

get in touch with me and I'll get the answers back to him 

promptly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thanks, Minister.  I have a couple of more 

questions along that same line which I'm not going to bother 

asking you just now because we're going to run into the same 

problems, I'm quite sure.  So we will research this whole area, 

the both of us, and we'll let the general public know what's 

going on, I'm sure. 

 

On to the next section there under the heading of secondments, 

can you tell us who were involved in the various secondments 

both to and from the department, and the reasons for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, this is the 

information the member requested in general terms.  During the 

1993-94 year there were during the course of the year, four 

secondments from the Public Service Commission and there 

were two secondments to the Public Service Commission.  

These are past expenditures so we don't have the briefing 

material on what happened last year to that extent, but we'd be 

glad to provide that. 

 

I can provide some of it.  One employee was seconded to the 

Department of Social Service, a second to the Department of 

Justice. So those are two of the four secondments from.  And 

then secondments to, one employee was seconded to the 

commission from the Department of Education.  But the rest, 

I'll have to get the information together and send it across. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thanks, Minister, I will appreciate getting 

that information. Maybe we'll find out that Linda Dickson went 

to the Department of Justice or something. You never know 

what we might find.  But anyway, we'll await that. 

 

And computers seem to be an item in your department, of 

considerable cost and interest.  It seems like, Minister, your 

department continues to be a big spender in the area of 

computers and this year by my calculations, we figure there 

might be in the neighbourhood of something like $284,000 on 

new computer equipment and software.  Perhaps you could 

study through those figures and tell us if I'm getting close or 

where I'm wrong here.  Now it looks like this is on the heels of 

a half a million dollars in similar spending last year. 

 

Now if this is true and all this money went into computers, 

we'd have to ask on behalf of the taxpayers, when is this kind 

of spending going to stop?  Just how often do you really need 

to replace your computers in your office, and your software?  

This looks like a pretty hefty expenditure for anybody's office 

into the computer system, especially when a few minutes ago 

you mentioned that you have five permanent people and two 

that split a job.  So five people running $750,000 worth of 

computers sound pretty rich. 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 

question.  I don't think that we overspend on computers at all.  

You will know that the Public Service Commission maintains 

all of the personnel records of all of the departments and 

agencies of government so that the computer needs within the 

commission are quite large as a result. 

 

And it is a sensible way to do it because it is much more 

economical and efficient to do in that way than it would be to 

have similar computer equipment in each department to keep 

track of or to house all of the computerized information that has 

to be kept with respect to the employees of government. 

 

Another thing is that the expenditures include the ongoing 

repair and maintenance and the cartridges, and whatever else 

you use in maintaining the equipment, as well as the servicing 

of it.  So I think all told, although the numbers are large, they 

are understandable when put within that context.  We have 

deliberately tried not to get fancy at all with the equipment but 

keep it down to the basic minimum that we have to have in 

order to do the job. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  Maybe we'd better 

pursue these computers just a little bit more in view of your last 

statement about how you don't feel that you're overexpended or 

have too big of equipment or anything.  It seems like that . . . 

For example, we have here on one line item you specify that 

you purchased high-speed computers for programers, yet it 

appears that every single computer that you purchased is a 486 

DX-66. 

 

Now I'm no computer expert, Minister, be assured of that, so 

I've had to depend on talking to some people that at least think 

they know something about it, because I wouldn't know for 

sure if that was fast or slow.  But most of the people that we 

talked to consider these to be very high-speed computers. 

 

Now the question has to be asked, if you've got that kind of 

high-speed equipment, the folks I talked to said, well why 

would they not be able to for example use some 486 SX-25 

computers or something like that?  It seems like the people that 

I've talked to feel that you're overpowered in computers and 

that you've overexpended in the area for what you need.  One 

person made the comment that the entire Second World War 

was fought with less computer equipment than what one of 

these high-speed 486 DX-66's could perform.  Now I don't 

know if that's fair or not, but obviously these are pretty 

powerful, big equipment pieces that can do a lot of work and 

store a lot of material. 

 

So how do you explain the fact that people that know about 

computers feel that you're far, far over your heads in needs as 

well as costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member and I walk into 

interesting territory in this subject.  I recall reading that a 

computer in the '50s which would require a large room to house 

can now be carried around in the palm of your hand; the same 

kind of 

computing power.  And it's probably a long bow to compare it 

to the Second World War but certainly we are here in a field of 

very, very rapid change as anyone who has explored this area 

will know. 

 

The 486's are standard equipment now; even in home 

computers it becomes so.  The difference between a 486 and 

386 is a single chip that is a matter of a couple hundred dollars, 

something like that.  You know, it's not a big deal.  It is 

certainly better than the 286's or the 186; you know, much, 

much faster, much more powerful.  And most of the programs 

that . . . the sophisticated programs that . . . software programs 

require at least a 386 in order to run them, and in many cases 

require 486's.  And my staff are of the view that if we didn't 

have something like that, at least the 386 level, you couldn't 

keep up with the kinds of demands that are placed upon the 

Public Service Commission by the government-wide system 

that they run. 

 

So I don't think that's a major cause of concern.  I think that we 

are well within the bounds of prudent management in using the 

kind of equipment that we have. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I think some folks might share 

with me the view that you are an extravagant spendthrift in the 

area of computers because, as you said yourself, you can 

upgrade for a couple of hundred dollars.  But you don't seem to 

stop there, you seem to just throw them out and buy new ones, 

by the kind of money you're spending -- 200-and-some 

thousand dollars this year, half a million last year. 

 

Folks are going to start to wonder if you shouldn't have a chat 

with the Minister of Labour over there and maybe he could tell 

you about how, if you used a little bit smaller equipment, you 

could employ another 100 people for that $240,000 and at least 

give some of the people in the Commerce department at the 

university a job for the summer or something like that and at 

least, even if you're not doing any better job, at least you'd help 

some kids to get some money to go back to school for the next 

year. 

 

Now I know that the third party wants to get into this question 

period, and so I'm going to turn it over to her now. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

welcome to your officials this afternoon. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Minister, for sending us the information that 

we requested in our previous encounters in this House and we 

appreciate the volume of materials that your officials compiled.  

And while I will not be asking you further questions today 

regarding the contents of those materials, the information you 

provided will be most useful in asking questions of other 

departments. 

 

I also thank you for providing us with the answers to 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

the written questions that were submitted to you by the official 

opposition. 

 

I have just one more question with a couple of parts to ask you 

in your capacity as minister in charge of the Public Service 

Commission.  Number one, as part of this question is, what 

measures are you as minister and your department officials 

undertaking to ensure that politically-influenced appointments 

are not made to the professional civil service?  And number 

two, what measures are you taking to ensure that 

politically-influenced firings of professional civil servants are 

halted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I took 

some time before answering to try and give a comprehensive 

answer.  We've done a lot of things I think.  Our objective is to 

restore the integrity of the Public Service Commission's 

processes, which are set out in the Act, because we believe very 

strongly that hiring and firing should not be on a political basis 

so far as the Public Service Commission appointments are 

concerned. 

 

We have had some grave concerns about that in the past and 

we're determined that that will not be the case under our 

government.  We have ensured that all of the competitions are 

open competitions for the Public Service Commission 

appointments.  We advertise weekly in all the newspapers -- the 

member has seen the ad -- and we advertise internally as well. 

 

The hirings of all of the appointments of the commission are 

done by competition and they are, as I said, open competitions.  

And the panel operates in the way that the member knows 

about to select people.  They certify somewhere between one 

and three people in any competition. 

 

If it is an in-scope competition and there are existing public 

servants who are certified, then the most senior employee gets 

the job in practically all circumstances.  If there is no question 

of seniority involved, in other words there's not a person 

entitled to rely upon the seniority provisions, then the decision 

is made by the Public Service Commission as to who it is who 

is appointed.  No minister is involved in any of these processes. 

 

With respect to the out-of-scope positions, they operate the 

same way.  Only when you get into orders-in-council 

appointments is it a cabinet decision.  Even with respect to 

some of the order-in-council positions, to many of them there is 

an open advertisement and a competition run, and the 

commission assists in that process.  Although for 

order-in-council positions they are, at the end of the day, 

decisions of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, which is is the 

cabinet.  That's on the hiring side.  I think we're doing pretty 

well. 

 

On the firing side, the orders in council are one thing; I think 

the member will recognize that.  But so far as, if I may say the 

regular public service, the classified public service, there are 

two mechanisms.  First of all, there is the collective agreement 

and the grievance 

procedure within the collective agreement, which is an 

effective way of guarding against any kind of inappropriate 

firing, including firing without cause or firing for political 

reasons. 

 

So the in-scope people are protected by their collective 

agreements.  So far as the out-of-scope people are concerned, 

they have access to the appeal procedures within the Act, The 

Public Service Act, and those procedures are available to 

anyone who doesn't have access through a collective agreement 

to a grievance procedure.  So I think we're in pretty good shape.  

But our objective is -- I want to make it clear -- is to remove the 

politics from hiring and firing within the public service of the 

province. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for that answer, Mr. Minister.  

Just as an additional note to that, within the House and in the 

media and in general, we speak a lot of patronage these days.  

And I wondered if I might be able to get your definition of 

what a patronage appointment would be.  Or patronage in itself, 

what is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I don't hold myself out as a 

particular expert on the subject.  My own background includes 

a time in the public service of Canada and this province, and I 

have great respect for the role of the Public Service 

Commission.  And I understand, as you will, that patronage has 

its place, and we've all seen examples of that.  Even at the 

federal level there is patronage suggestions being made with 

respect to the appointment of the Lieutenant Governor.  And 

anybody with a political background is vulnerable to that kind 

of a charge. 

 

Yet I think it plain that we ought not to exclude from the public 

life of this country people who happen to have taken the time 

and exerted the effort to participate in public affairs and 

participate in the public issues of the day through political 

parties. 

 

I think that clearly the question of political patronage is open to 

abuse.  And we will all recall incidents of that in the history of 

this province, and I don't need to go into any detail there.  But I 

do make the point that you can't just exclude people from 

participation in public affairs simply because they have taken 

the time and made the sacrifice -- and we know what kind of 

sacrifices these are -- to participate in the political process. 

 

Where would our democracy be without a political process?  

Public issues are here; they're all around us.  They need debate; 

they need resolution.  And many of those issues must be dealt 

with by governments and that requires the political process to 

work and to work properly. 

 

I would really be sad if we were to exclude from the public life 

of this country people who have had some background in 

political life.  Certainly I think that patronage ought never to 

result in unqualified people being appointed to public positions.  

It can't be used as some sort of trough. 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

And yet at the same time, there are obvious cases where 

patronage ought not to be raised.  For example, the former 

premier, Mr. Blakeney.  That question arose during question 

period today -- his appointment by the government as naming 

to the board of directors of Cameco; one of Canada's leading 

citizens appointed to a board of a corporation which is very 

important in Saskatchewan; entirely appropriate that he should 

serve on that board, entirely appropriate, qualified beyond 

question, and is an enormously important member of that 

board, according to officials of Cameco. 

 

Yet in this House, it is suggested there is something wrong with 

that appointment, that it is a case of political patronage and that 

for that reason it deserves criticism. 

 

And I don't accept that.  I think that Mr. Blakeney's 

participation in the public affairs of this province and this 

country has been enormous; it's been extremely important, 

most productive, and we're all the better for it.  And you know, 

there's no reason why he would just stop his participation in 

public affairs because he had that background.  Indeed he is 

qualified beyond any of us to do the kind of work that he's 

doing today. 

 

Now that's kind of a lot of answer for a short, simple question, 

but it is an important question.  We ourselves on this side of the 

House, have been subject to this kind of criticism from time to 

time when we appoint former members of this House or former 

candidates for public office to public boards.  We do that 

because we know that they have a great deal to contribute, and 

we're not prepared to rule them out, to rule them out from 

playing a role in the public affairs of this province simply 

because they made the sacrifices, the personal sacrifices, and 

took the interest that they did in becoming involved in the 

public policy issues of their day. 

 

So without exception, we are pleased and proud to have made 

those appointments.  Not one person has been appointed to a 

job for which they were not qualified or which they could not 

do and that, in my view, is at the end of the day the crucial test. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your extended 

comments on the issue of patronage and I thank you for your 

answers today. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 33 agreed to. 

 

(1600) 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes consideration of estimates for the 

Public Service Commission.  If the minister wishes to thank the 

officials for attending here with us today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes I do, Mr. Chair.  The people in the 

Public Service Commission of this province are 

doing an excellent job and no more so than in their preparation 

of me for these estimates.  They are a small staff doing a big 

job and we have required more and more of them as time goes 

on, and they have without fail delivered on all of the 

expectations that we have of them. 

 

So on behalf of the members of the legislature, Mr. Chair, I'd 

like to thank them for coming and assisting the committee in its 

work today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, and 

your guests this afternoon . . . officials, we thank you and look 

forward to a dialogue on Indian and Metis Affairs.  I'm not 

going to spend a lot of time, if any really, discussing the whole 

role of land jurisdiction and we went through a fair discussion I 

think on a couple of occasions already.  We've spent a fair bit 

of time on that. 

 

One question I'd like to start off with though, Mr. Minister, and 

I'm going back . . . I'm looking at the Public Accounts from, 

actually '92-93; and then in the Estimates for '94-95.  And I 

noticed in '92-93 there was a budget in '93 of $4.2 million and 

actual expenditures of 17.4 million in that year. 

 

Then I notice for this year, we have for Indian and Metis 

Affairs Secretariat the forecast is showing 13.3 or almost 13.4 

million; and the estimate for '94-95 is 23.4. 

 

I'm trying to figure out -- number one, why the actual 

expenditure in '93 is almost four times more than what was 

budgeted in '93 and yet in your Estimates this year that were 

just handed out, where the actual is 17.4, you're only saying 

13.394 million was spent?  And I'm just wondering if you could 

give us an explanation of the difference in the dollar figures 

there and dollar values. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, and to the member.  The 

difference in the overexpenditure that the member has pointed 

out was because that was the year in which the Treaty Land 

Entitlement Agreement required us to make our first payment.  

We did not disclose that figure in the budget because we were 

in negotiations at the time and we didn't want to present the 

budget figure and thereby disclose our intentions in the 

negotiation. 

 

As it turned out we probably could have but it seemed prudent 

at the time to hold the information back and not put it out in 

your written documents.  Now that resulted in the $17.3 million 

expenditure that year. 

 

Now as the member has observed, that amount is dropped.  

And the reason for the drop is that the grant programs, the 

economic development grant programs 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

that used to be in the secretariat have now been moved 

elsewhere.  So it doesn't show as an expenditure for SIMAS 

(Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat). 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I have a 

few questions based around the global questions that I've 

received from your office, and I appreciate the responses. 

 

In the global questions, I gather that there are no MAs 

(ministerial assistant) or other staff in your office currently 

being paid out of Indian and Metis Affairs.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, none are. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, there must be a person in your 

office that basically then has the responsibility of dealing with 

Indian and Metis Affairs, and I'm wondering who that 

individual is, what duties do they perform, and how are they in 

fact paid or receive their funding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's Marian Morrison, the intermediate 

ministerial assistant.  And she is paid out of the Public Service 

Commission budget.  She does the duties that you'd normally 

expect, the liaison between my office and the department, and 

the kind of normal duties that an assistant does.  She divides 

her time between SIMAS and the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I would take it then that most of, if 

not all of, your office staff are then being paid out of the Public 

Service Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Some are also paid out of the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, did any members of your staff incur 

any expenses while working on behalf of this department, and 

could you provide us with any details, like extra duties or work 

for the department of Indian and Metis Affairs that we wouldn't 

have laid out before us in the information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Chair.  No. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And would that also mean that none of your staff 

in your office did any travel on behalf of the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Can I just ask the member, is it '93-94 

we're talking about, or '94-95? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, '93-94.  Pardon me, Mr. Minister, I would 

think that when we're looking at the staff numbers, we'd be 

looking at '93-94 because '94-95 is the budget year we're 

presently in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't think there was any.  Certainly 

there was nothing out of province.  We're just searching 

because there may have been a staff member who accompanied 

me on one of my trips in the province but I don't think so. 

Okay, sorry.  We're educating me on the fly here.  In June of 

'93 Ms. Morrison accompanied me on a trip to Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert and return, in connection with my duties as the 

minister of this secretariat. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, could you just give us a breakdown 

of the costs?  And I guess the reason she went was 

accompanying you as your staff person on those trips.  What 

were the purposes of the meetings, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The cost was a share of the air cost and 

was $343.  As I recall, the purpose of the trip to Prince Albert 

was a meeting of the Prince Albert Tribal Council.  I try to 

meet with them at least once a year.  I met with them just last 

week as a matter of fact -- the week before last.  But this was 

the only time that my office staff accompanied me. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm going 

to give you about four fairly . . . probably short questions, but 

the answers may be a little longer than what the questions 

would imply. 

 

Number one, I would take it that your salary, or ministerial 

salary would probably come out of the Department of Justice.  

Does any come out of Indian and Metis Affairs or any 

reimbursement? 

 

And then in this past year of course there's been a fair bit of 

discussion taking place -- debate, meetings, I'm sure that were 

in fact quite . . . would acknowledge that there's been a fair bit 

of debate has taken place over the treaty land entitlements.  

You've probably been out of the province on numerous 

occasions, maybe dealing with your counterparts in other 

provinces.  So I'm wondering what other areas -- travel, where 

you've travelled, what kind of costs have been incurred, and the 

purpose . . . the destinations and purposes of any trips, even 

over and above the treaty land entitlements, but anything that 

would have dealt with Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- If the member has no objection, I can 

provide that in writing.  I have some information but I don't 

have the purpose of the trip.  I just have the fact that the trip 

was made. 

 

So far as my salary is concerned, I think that that is an 

Executive Council item.  If it's not, it's Department of Justice.  

It's certainly not the secretariat. 

 

So I will write to the member almost immediately and give the 

information that he's requested. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I noticed 

in some of the global questions that we had responses to, there 

were some variations that I'd like to bring to your attention and 

ask for your explanation. 

 

Regarding in-scope permanent employees, I notice that these 

went up from 1 to 1.3 employees, and yet the salaries of these 

employees, if I understand 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

correctly, have gone from 17,398 to 43,000, which was 

basically 140 per cent.  I'm wondering how we explain this type 

of a sizeable increase when we've only added .3 of an employee 

to that position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The position is . . . there were 15 

person-months of work done in that in-scope permanent 

position.  You'll notice the number is 1.3 -- 1.3 person-years.  

And the reason for the discrepancy between the two years was 

that it was only partially encumbered in the previous year that 

had the $17,000 figure that the member mentioned.  It was 

encumbered I think by more than one person, but the total paid 

in that respect was only 17,000.  There have been no salary 

increases or reclassifications involved.  It simply is a question 

of the amount of time that the position was encumbered. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I'm not sure if I totally followed it, Mr. Minister, 

but I was just looking over the report from May 10 of '93 where 

it talked about the personnel report, the summary that you had 

given us last year.  And I looked at the end of . . . March 31, 

1992.  You had one in-scope person at a salary of 25,872; and 

then for March 31, '93 that one person is then down to 17,398; 

and then of course this year we're up to 43,000. 

 

And you're telling me that all of those funds weren't disbursed 

in that calendar year and that's why we have the discrepancy?  

We've got . . . I'm not exactly sure why we would have had the 

decrease and then all of a sudden the major increase again.  I 

guess that's the question we're trying to find out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is we had different people in 

the job for different lengths of time.  And so in one of the years 

the job was vacant more -- for longer periods than in other 

years, if the member follows that.  You don't have to pay the 

salary if there's nobody doing the job.  And that's the reason 

why there is a varying amount for different years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So I guess one would have to ask, was that a 

contractual type of service then, if a person was hired on that 

basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, as well we look at and notice in the 

out-of-scope permanent employees, these increased from 13 to 

13.1, and again we see a discrepancy from 702 to $780,000 

expenditures for the 13 employees, an increase of 11 per cent.  

And I guess one could say, or could certainly latch onto the 

words that Barb Byers had indicated: I don't think there are any 

out-of-scope civil servants' kids going hungry tonight. 

 

And I'm wondering how we justify that type of an increase 

based on the fact that it's just .1 of an increase in the number of 

employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Again it was a question of different 

numbers of employees working in the out-of-scope permanent 

jobs.  There were vacancies 

in one year that were not there in the other year.  Nobody got a 

salary increase; nobody got a reclassification.  It was simply an 

underexpenditure in one year because the positions weren't 

filled for all of that year, whereas in the following year they 

were filled for longer periods, and so the numbers turn out to be 

different. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess the question begs . . . is one wonders how 

come we've got such a discrepancy where you've got positions 

that are filled for just a part of the year.  Why are employees 

leaving?  Because that's like I indicated earlier, one would 

think that they must be on a contractual basis if you've got an 

employee hired for five months and then . . . Are they just 

released or is it employees moving on to other occupations, and 

then at the time you don't really need someone in that position 

so then you don't hire until the position needs a permanent staff 

person? Is that what's been taking place, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  For example, well there are people 

moving in the public service all the time.  They get better jobs 

and they go to another job within the public service, or in the 

case of one person I can think of just offhand, they got a better 

job outside the public service, so they went.  That leaves the 

position vacant. 

 

You then go through the staffing process.  And we try in this 

department, as the member will know, to staff with aboriginal 

people.  It's very appropriate obviously, and sometimes that 

takes us longer than would normally be the case.  I know for 

example that in recruiting for the assistant deputy minister on 

the Metis Affairs side, we had a very long competition process 

and we had to run it more than once, as I recall, before we 

finally came up with a suitable candidate.  So for that reason 

positions can go vacant and you get the kind of numbers that 

the member has referred to. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, in the area of contract employees.  

Number one, what sorts of contracts are we talking about and 

what do these people do?  And then I also notice in the last two 

years we really haven't had a number down for the number of 

contract employees.  There just hasn't been a number there, but 

there's an expenditure of salary in the '93 fiscal year of $36,140 

and now this year we're up to $86,000 with 2.8 contracts 

employed. 

 

So I wonder if you could explain why the increase and if there 

were contracts or agreements?  There must have been 

somebody working at the time or at least some employees 

employed in the last fiscal year because there was a dollar 

figure expenditure for salary.  What's the difference or how do 

you explain those numbers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member.  I think 

the member is referring to the information we sent across and 

the contract employees under the heading, general departmental 

agency report, personnel report no. 4 -- is that . . . Okay, I'll 

deal with each of those cases. 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

In the case of Margaret Eagle, this was the person that I 

mentioned was hired as the assistant deputy minister of Metis 

Affairs.  She was appointed to that job on October 1, 1993 

permanently.  We had her on contract from July 1 to the end of 

September, as she took a look at the job and we took a look at 

her -- sort of a pre-employment period.  And that is, I think, all 

I need say about her. 

 

In the case of Kim Johnston, that was a contract for a period of 

three months at $100 a day.  She participated in an inventory 

process where we inventoried aboriginal people who would be 

eligible for employment. 

 

(1630) 

 

Wayne McKenzie worked for a period of one month at $250 a 

day before his permanent employment. 

 

Jennifer Shaw is employed casually at the rate of $20 an hour, 

and comes and goes according to our needs for her particular 

service. 

 

And Wes Stevenson worked for a period of one month before 

his permanent employment.  And Wes is one of those who has 

now gone on to a new opportunity -- a better job -- and is no 

longer with the department. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So that basically is explaining the difference that 

we see in contractual agreements on the first part of that report, 

or page of that report, where we see 2.8 employees at 86,000.  

Last year we had 36,000 expenditure but we really didn't have a 

list of employees. 

 

So what you're indicating to us then is the dollar figure just 

reflects the number of days a person may have been employed 

under that contract before either they left the department or 

received permanent employment. 

 

Mr. Minister, I also note that there is some $19,000 increase in 

travel by the department, somewhere around a 30 per cent 

increase.  And I'm wondering if you can explain the increase, 

what kind of travel, where to, and what was the travel for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Perhaps we can send that information to 

the member.  It's quite detailed and I won't take the time of the 

House now.  I'll send it over quickly. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, a couple more questions before I . . . 

then some of the other MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) would like to ask a few questions. 

 

One thing that my staff brought to my attention as they're 

looking over the global questions from all the other 

departments, they give this department an A plus for their 

computer spending.  I think it works out to something like $300 

per employee, whereas most of the other departments earn 

$2,000 per employee for computer expenditures.  So they just 

wanted to 

acknowledge that -- and have us bring it to your attention -- 

considering the fact that you're dealing with a budget that is 

including expenditures under native land entitlement, that I'm 

sure gets complicated at times when you look at the different 

reserves and the different entitlements and how all the dollar 

figures break out. 

 

And in line with that, or in view of that, Mr. Minister, in the 

Estimates, page 71, I notice that we have expenditures for 

treaty land entitlements.  And I am anticipating that this is an 

estimate.  Last year it indicates that expenditures were probably 

around 11 million; this year you're talking in the 

neighbourhood of almost $20.5 million.  Is that a reflection 

upon what you anticipate the number of settlements that you 

will be facing this year in the province regarding treaty land 

entitlement, or land entitlements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Under the framework agreement, our 

annual contribution over the 12-year period is $11 

million-and-change.  In '94-95, there is another feature of the 

treaty land entitlement that kicks in, and that is the other 19 per 

cent above 30 per cent.  And that 19 per cent is calculated on 

the basis of the savings to the province as a result of some of 

the northern communities achieving reserve status.  The very 

complex part of the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework 

Agreement. 

 

But just to somewhat repeat myself, it is contemplated in the 

agreement that there will be communities in the North which 

will convert from the municipal status they have now to 

become part of the reserve.  That, for example, happens in a 

number of communities in the Peter Ballantyne Band area. 

 

And that will result in savings to the province, which we have 

to factor in under the agreement, which we have to in effect pay 

to the federal government because they have to pick up the 

increased costs for the reserve -- their social welfare and 

education costs. 

 

And that amount is about 9.5 million. I've got the exact number 

here but . . . And that's the reason for the difference between 

those two figures. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One other question, Mr. Minister, before I defer to 

some of my other colleagues.  We've had a lot of discussion 

and debate in this Assembly regarding welfare recipients and 

the fact that the federal government have, I believe as the 

minister has indicated, offloaded some of their responsibility 

regarding natives in the province and the province picking up 

the extra tab. 

 

I'm wondering, is there any money in Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat that goes towards any of the welfare rolls or the 

welfare recipients in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No.  None. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I have one area of some concern to certain people 

within our province relating 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

to your portfolio.  And what twigged me on to it was a March 

17 Canadian Press story which was talking about the 

Saskatchewan provincial government wants, and I quote 

actually:  Wants to ease its parks system into one that 

emphasizes wilderness protection over recreation, unquote.  

And quite frankly I think that that is an admirable objective to 

have. 

 

Yet five days later we found out that your provincial 

government is negotiating to sell a fairly large tract of land to 

the Thunderchild Indian Band, and I refer to that section in the 

province that's known as the Bronson forest.  And we're having 

a little bit of difficulty, because how does a move like that, in 

your opinion, emphasize this wilderness protection that your 

government has been advocating?  I'd like your reaction to that, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, this is a 

matter of considerable sensitivity, because as we speak the 

Thunderchild Band and the people who have an interest in the 

Bronson forest for a number of reasons are in the process of 

trying to work this out. 

 

The background, the member will know, is that in 1980 the 

Thunderchild Band claimed the Bronson forest and the minister 

of the day committed the government to making the transfer, 

although it was never consummated.  But the claim has been 

made again and our general policy is that we make Crown land 

available.  There isn't enough Crown land to go around to 

satisfy all of the unsatisfied land claims, and it is our 

obligation, as the member will know, under legislation, under 

the Natural Resources Transfer Act, to make land available.  

And so we try to do it whenever we can. 

 

The policy is clear, and that is that third-party interests have to 

be taken into account, and we're trying to do that.  There are 

outfitters and trappers who are using parts of the Bronson forest 

and their interests have to be protected in this situation. 

 

There are a number of other people who use the Bronson forest 

for recreational purposes who don't fall within the definition 

legally of a third-party interest.  And it is in respect of them in 

particular that efforts are being made now to work out a clear 

understanding of how this might work.  The secretariat is 

involved as well as the Department of Energy, or at least 

Environment and Resource Management, to try to mediate 

between the various persons who are interested in this question.  

And that's why I characterize it as a matter of some sensitivity 

because we are trying hard, as is the band, as are the people 

involved, to try and resolve this matter in a way that everybody 

can live with.  And hopefully they'll be able to do that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, that is exactly the reason why 

I'm asking the questions.  I want to pursue it with you because 

of the sensitivity of the area and because there are a number of 

parties involved that have vested interests in what happens in 

that area. 

What assurance can you give me that those interests will be 

protected?  For example, the area that is being proposed as 

being on the selling block, what's going to happen to that area?  

What are the uses for that area going to be?  Is it going to 

become an oil drilling place because there's oil in the area?  

Will there be logging allowed in that area?  Because it has been 

a protected area up until this point. 

 

So what can you do or what can you tell me today that will 

ensure that the Bronson forest will remain as a protected area 

within this province? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, there are various ideas being 

discussed, including particularly a co-management arrangement 

with respect to the area.  The idea would involve the band and 

the provincial government, and the third parties who would be 

the users of the forest.  So that's one idea that is being discussed 

and there are some precedents for that around the province.  

And I think the discussions are being carried on within that 

context. 

 

I emphasize that the third-party interests that are there, the 

permits and the leases of course have to be respected, and that 

is a common feature to all of the land to which the entitlement 

process applies. 

 

As far as the specific questions about the development of the 

land's resources, oil and logging, this just has to be worked out 

in one way or another.  There are no regulations or laws that 

I'm aware of that apply, and that's very much the area where the 

people involved are going to have to work out a solution that 

they can all live with, whatever that is.  We are in there trying 

to help in the sense that we are trying to get the discussions 

going and continuing on a high level.  And the communications 

are as good as they can be, and we are confident that reasonable 

people discussing a problem can come to some mutually 

satisfactory solution. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, from your answer it's 

obvious that you have some knowledge of the area and that you 

have been well briefed on it . . . well briefed on it just now, 

okay.  I was going to give you an extra bit of a compliment 

there, but like usual it's the officials that keep us looking good. 

 

Mr. Minister, seriously, the local residents are getting back to 

us and they are saying that they are worried about the sensitive 

landscapes and the many lakes in this area and how they may 

be affected.  And you're telling me that there might be the 

ability of having a co-management team working on it.  And 

that will include all the third parties that you're talking about.  

But unfortunately, Mr. Minister, in a situation like that there are 

bound to be disagreements and there are bound to be disputes. 

 

And I guess it's that dispute-settling mechanism that I'm 

wondering about, how that will be handled and, ultimately, 

what use will be put to that land?  Because originally this 

Bronson forest was put under the 



April 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

umbrella of the parks system so that it would be protected.  

And that was reasonable and that's where it should be because 

then it would fall under the regulations of the park system.  So 

the protection was there. 

 

But if this land is now sold, then I just wonder exactly what 

concrete assurances we have that indeed that land will be 

continued to be treated in that protective state. 

 

The selling of this land goes against . . . and I'm going to do a 

little bit of quoting here.  It goes directly against the goal that 

your Resource minister has been talking about, of keeping 12 

per cent of our surface in its natural state.  And I'm going to 

quote.  He said that his government is committed, with other 

countries around the world, to help to establish that 12 or 13 

per cent of the earth's surface in its natural state, so that our 

biodiversity on which all life is based can be maintained.  That 

was a commitment that your colleague, the fellow from 

Rosetown, made a commitment to. 

 

And just the other day we had a debate in this House dealing 

with endangered spaces.  And I say endangered spaces, not 

species in this case.  And this is our government, the province's 

commitment to maintaining that. 

 

And I guess what I'd like you to react to is that the parks system 

has been going in southern Saskatchewan and buying up 

surrounding land, surrounding existing parks and then putting 

that on the endangered list, as it were, to increase our 

commitment to protected land. 

 

So on the one hand, Mr. Minister, I find it somewhat ironic that 

you're going out, buying up private land now, putting them into 

our parks system, and then going over here and selling some 

land that is already protected.  Would you comment on that, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I appreciate, Mr. Chair, the member's 

concern and I appreciate that there are worried people who are 

themselves very concerned. 

 

We are optimistic about this process resulting in an agreement 

that will be satisfactory to everyone.  The Thunderchild Band is 

interested in this area because it has traditional and cultural and 

spiritual significance, as far the band is concerned, and has had 

from time immemorial, since they first occupied that area. 

 

And the band has recognized that people in the area have used 

the area for recreational purposes for hunting and fishing and 

hiking and skiing, and the chief has said that he has no 

intention of restricting access or preventing these activities, has 

no intention of establishing a commercial fishery, has no 

intention of moving onto the land or establishing a physical 

presence there. 

 

So enough has been said that there are the elements of an 

agreement present.  And I think that if we can keep these 

people talking together and dealing directly 

with each other and trying in good faith to reach an agreement, 

we will be able to arrive at such an agreement.  That would be 

very desirable. 

 

The people who value the land for its recreational purposes and 

for its use, as has been the case while it's been a protected area, 

should be able to have their fears met.  And at the same time, 

the Thunderchild Band can become the owner of land that is as 

important to them as the Bronson forest is. 

 

We think we'll be able to facilitate an agreement between them.  

Now if it doesn't work, it doesn't work, and some hard 

judgements are going to have to be made down the line.  But at 

the moment we would like to encourage that process of 

discussion, try and mediate and facilitate wherever we can, 

with a view to having the people involved make a deal that they 

can all live with and be happy with and live together as 

neighbours.  They're all going to live in the same area for a 

very, very long period of time, and they should be able to 

resolve their own problems and set a basis for a long-term 

future relationship. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You were talking about all the commitments 

that the chief was making.  I take it for granted then that these 

will all be part and parcel of the final agreement that is signed 

with all of those commitments put down in writing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I would think so.  I would think for 

example that these undertakings . . . I'm quoting from a news 

release that the chief of the Thunderchild Band issued on 

March 30.  And all of the things that I've quoted come straight 

out of this press release.  So I know that they would be pleased 

to incorporate those into a co-management agreement, those 

assurances.  As I say . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Whose press releases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is the Thunderchild Band's press 

release.  And this should go a long way towards forming the 

basis for a co-management agreement for the area.  So we're 

really quite optimistic, you know. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, would you admit that what 

you're doing here is setting a precedent, number one; and 

secondly, that this potentially is putting at risk all other 

so-called Saskatchewan parks lands that are existing now for 

the benefit of all of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The Bronson forest is in a different 

category because, as I mentioned earlier, there had been an 

earlier claim placed against it and the province committed 

itself, and this puts it in a different category than other park 

land. 

 

I'm not the minister to speak to the question of parks, but I 

think this is a special case and that that would not be the case in 

relation to other parks.  That's a bit of a sweeping 

generalization and I'm not the one to make it and I may be 

contradicted tomorrow by somebody else, but Bronson is in a 

different category, I think. 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1994 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well talking about sweeping, I just want to 

make sure that nothing here is swept under the carpet of leaves 

in the Bronson forest area.  So I want to take a look at section 

407.  You must be quite familiar with section 407 of the land 

treaty settlement . . . agreement, pardon me. 

 

And that section of the land treaty agreement states: 

 

 Provincial parks, protected areas, recreation sites, historic 

sites, and park land reserves will only be sold in exceptional 

circumstances. 

 

So I will give you the opportunity to put it on the Table as to 

what those exceptional circumstances are that have prompted 

the potential sale of that land. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, the exceptional circumstances here 

I've already related to the member, and that is the case. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You mentioned 1980.  My information is that 

something occurred in 1981 and I'd like you to describe for me 

those exceptional circumstances and the commitment that was 

made at that time.  Who made the commitment?  Who was the 

minister that made the commitment at that particular time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It could have been 1981 or 1980.  It was 

minister Bowerman in the Blakeney government who agreed, 

who committed the land, and did so on behalf of the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The minister of parks says we have a 

commitment to historic sites and recreational parks and camp 

grounds and many other forms of park activity in 

Saskatchewan, including wilderness parks.  Now I'm just 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if you are prepared to sacrifice on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan their park system for a 

commitment made by your former friend and colleague, the 

NDP Minister Bowerman, back in 1981. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The Minister Bowerman, who was a 

candidate for the National Party in their most recent federal 

election, was at the time one of the ministers of the Crown in 

Saskatchewan, made the commitment on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  And I think in good faith to the 

first nation involved, we have no choice but to honour the 

commitment. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 


