




















































Hansard: February 07, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2785 

 February 7, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 92 -- An Act respecting a By-election in the 

Constituency of Regina North West 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move that Bill No. 92, An Act respecting a 

By-election in the Constituency of Regina North West be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 

ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 -- An Act respecting a By-election in the 

Constituency of Regina North West 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

92, An Act respecting a By-election in the Constituency of 

Regina North West be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

just say a few words of congratulations to the new member 

from Regina North West.  And on behalf of the Premier who is 

stranded because of weather in Saskatoon and will be here later 

in the day, and on behalf of the government members of the 

House, I want to extend that congratulations to the new 

member and wish her well in the work that she will be doing as 

the new representative for the Regina North West constituency. 

 

I want to add these words, and that is that to be elected to this 

legislature is a great honour as all of us who do occupy these 

chairs here know.  It is an honour that is extended to only a 

very few people in the scheme of things.  When you think of all 

the people who live in this province, only a very few are given 

the privilege and the honour of sitting in this legislature.  And 

so with that, Mr. Speaker, comes a very immense and big 

responsibility as we know here. 

 

This by-election which took place, took place during very 

difficult climatic conditions, but that was so because one of the 

first acts that the government did in the first session of this 

legislature was to pass a Bill that required that any vacancy in 

any constituency would have to be filled within 90 days of its 

vacancy.  And therefore not only the spirit but the intent of that 

legislation has been carried out.  And this legislature will be 

represented . . . or the constituency of Regina North West will 

be represented in this legislature during this session, as it 

should be.  And I think therefore, although it was a difficult 

time in which for many members in this House to be 

campaigning and many volunteers, it's something that had to be 

done in order that this constituency be represented. 

 

I want to wish the member of North West well in her 

work.  I look forward to her contribution, as we all do, to the 

proceedings of this legislature.  And I hope that during the 

debates here, although speaking personally, when my first day 

in the House came about, it felt a little intimidating, I'm sure 

that as the days and weeks go by and the member gets involved 

in the work that we do here, it will be less so and that she will 

make a very important contribution. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it's appropriate that we proceed with this 

Bill and seat the new member for Regina North West. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to join with the Deputy Premier and in fact echo 

many of the words that he's spoken in the Assembly this 

morning as we welcome a new member to our midst. 

 

It has always been one of the greatest privileges that I've had in 

my life to sit in this Assembly.  And I remember the feelings of 

coming into this Assembly, as the new member from Regina 

North West is doing, as a result of a by-election fought in the 

winter months.  And I think it certainly steels you for the task 

that will come in the days and the sessions ahead of you. 

Because if you can survive a winter by-election in 

Saskatchewan, I think the debate in the Legislative Assembly 

may pale in comparison.  And we must all congratulate Ms. 

Bergman for the efforts, the efforts of her volunteers, the 

efforts of her party, and indeed all that participated in the 

democratic process in what was very unpleasant conditions. 

 

As the Deputy Premier said, there's a high expectation in the 

public today that we in this Assembly are indeed looking to 

reform ourselves, that we're treating our business that we do 

here in a very serious manner.  And I think the expectations 

that were raised in the recent by-election will flow through into 

this Assembly and that there honestly will be a sense of 

cooperation and change occurring in this session and in others 

to come.  And we expect the new member from Regina North 

West to be an integral part of that because all of us have that 

responsibility in front of us. 

 

So I join with the Deputy Premier, as do all members of the 

official opposition, in welcoming the new member from Regina 

North West to this Assembly and we look forward to her 

participation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We are delighted 

of course to welcome our newest member of the Liberal 

caucus, Anita Bergman.  We have great confidence in her 

abilities and we want all of you to know that she'll be a very 

dedicated and sensitive MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly). 

 

I want to speak for just a few moments about the candidates in 

the North West by-election.  Mr. Speaker, these individuals 

showed tremendous 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

commitment to the challenge, and I was impressed with each of 

them throughout the campaign.  In spite of the cynicism so 

often talked about, the candidates in Regina North West 

demonstrated that politics is able to attract many people, three 

particular individuals, who have great enthusiasm, significant 

talent, and vigour.  The campaign was a gruelling test and the 

candidates and volunteers from all parties are to be 

congratulated for their courageous efforts. 

 

To Kathie Maher-Wolbaum and to Harvey Schmidt, may I say 

that they did a remarkable job of representing their convictions 

and they did their parties and their supporters proud. 

 

I wish our new MLA well.  And I know that she will work 

tirelessly on behalf of her constituents and the people of 

Saskatchewan.  We feel very honoured to be in this Assembly 

and we are committed to earning the respect of not only our 

political colleagues, the legislative staff, but the people 

throughout our province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, and the Bill read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, because of the 

non-controversial nature of this Bill, I would move that the 

committee stage of the Bill be waived. 

 

By leave of the Assembly, Committee of the Whole waived. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 -- An Act respecting a By-election in the 

Constituency of Regina North West 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 10:13 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 92 -- An Act respecting a By-election in the 

Constituency of Regina North West 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:14 a.m. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 

present to you Anita Bergman, the member for the constituency 

of Regina North West, who has taken the oath and signed the 

roll and now claims the right to take her seat. 

 

The Speaker: -- Let the member take her seat. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Grain Handlers' Dispute 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I realize what I am 

about to do is perhaps a little bit out of the ordinary, but at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, the situation that I'm raising is also out 

of the ordinary and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have in 

front of the people of Saskatchewan a dire set of circumstances 

mitigating against the farmers of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this point I would like to ask, by leave of the Assembly, 

permission to engage in a debate, Mr. Speaker, regarding the 

grain handlers' strike in the west coast that is affecting, to a 

great deal of detriment, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would propose is that we have a debate 

centring around this grain handlers' strike.  We will put a time 

limit on it and I suggest that we make a time limit of 45 

minutes and we limit the speeches of individuals who want to 

get up to five minutes each, max.  And that at the conclusion, 

Mr. Speaker, I would propose to make a motion that the 

transcripts of the debates be sent to Mr. Axworthy, be sent to 

the federal government, to express the sense of urgency that 

this Legislative Assembly . . . in a non-partisan, all-party 

commendation toward this minister be sent forward so that 

immediate action can be taken to settle the dispute. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly for this debate. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

thank members of the Assembly for agreeing to this unusual . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member proceeds, I assume that by 

agreement when he put on the conditions of the time limits, 

that that was also agreed to? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Mr. Speaker, my time starts now 

then. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it goes without saying that we recognize, 

that the people of Saskatchewan recognize, and that the federal 

government should recognize that half of the arable, 

cultivatable land in Canada is right here in Saskatchewan.  The 

Saskatchewan economy is based on agriculture.  As much as 

we have been over the years trying to 



February 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2787 

diversify, the essence boils down to agriculture.  And when 

something happens that is beyond the control of the farmers, 

beyond the controls of the producer, then we, Mr. Speaker, as 

legislators, federally and provincially, must take action to 

ensure that the interests of all of the people are protected.  And 

the way that the thing is developing right now, Mr. Speaker, 

with a mediator being appointed, his recommendations being 

rejected, there does not seem to be an imminent end to this 

dispute.  And in the meantime, it is costing the farmers of 

Saskatchewan millions of dollars a day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a news release from the Canadian 

Wheat Growers Association that by the way is also calling for 

back-to-work legislation.  And they are indicating that the 

Canadian Wheat Board Estimates that export sales worth $500 

million are being affected by this strike. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that less and less money is going 

to come into farmers' pockets as the ships are lying there half 

full; demurrage charges are now being put into place costing 

also many, many thousands of dollars a day. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the movement of grain from 

elevators is being affected.  We have a finite grain handling 

system in this country, Mr. Speaker.  The grain cars can only 

handle so much.  And if there's a back-up and orders are not 

able to be filled, Mr. Speaker, we will never recoup that.  That 

is a permanent loss because we cannot ship more that we are at 

the present.  The elevators are filling up.  The terminals are 

filling up, the grain cars are filling up.  And this is going to be 

permanent damage, Mr. Speaker, unless we can get those 

people working. 

 

And I would ask again, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this 

Assembly -- all of us -- in a united effort, combine in a 

cooperative spirit for the well-being of the people of 

Saskatchewan, indeed for the well-being of the people of 

Canada.  And thereby, Mr. Speaker, I would now urge all 

members to support a motion that would say, Mr. Speaker, we 

hereby move that the transcripts of the debate of this morning 

be sent to Mr. Axworthy, be sent to the federal government, 

where we will all urge expediency; we urge a very hurried 

approach to where this settlement can take place so that indeed 

Canada's reputation will not be soiled -- Canada's reputation as 

a reliable exporter of grains will not be soiled. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I formally would move then that this 

Assembly endorse the sending of all transcripts of this debate 

to the federal government so that it can act with the sense of 

urgency. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1030) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that you're 

pleased that there are other people that are a 

little bit rusty as to the logistics of the operation here, but to 

formally help this out I make the motion: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the federal government to 

immediately take steps to end the 

longshoremen's strike that is devastating the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the motion that we are debating and, Mr. 

Speaker, the seconder to that motion will be the member from 

Morse. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to rise today to take part in this debate.  I agree that we 

need to send the Saskatchewan perspective to Ottawa and to 

the participants in there.  This is of a particular interest to 

Saskatchewan and I think that we need to make our viewpoints 

known. 

 

As you well know, this lockout and subsequent stoppage in 

grain movement comes at a very bad time for Saskatchewan.  

The Premier has already sent letters to the Prime Minister and 

to the parties involved to urge a very quick and complete 

settlement of this so that we can get on with moving the grain 

which is so vital to our Saskatchewan producers. 

 

And I say this couldn't come at a worse time; we've had ten 

years of very, very tough times on the farm.  We've had very 

low commodity prices.  We've had crop disasters.  And in the 

past decade we've had thousands of farm families go through 

the ordeal of foreclosures and bankruptcies and very hard 

times, and this is one more step and one more problem which 

we just cannot afford at this time.  We must settle this. 

 

The crop this year was the fourth largest in history,  and that 

meant that there will be more difficulties in transporting it and 

getting it to market.  The crop this year, the harvest, was very 

late and that certainly added to the dilemma.  The Wheat Board 

and the grain companies could not begin marketing the crop 

because it wasn't in the bin, and the grade was very uncertain, 

so we had a selling season that started very late because of the 

harvest. 

 

It was further complicated by the fact that farmers have 

adapted this year.  We had record acreages of peas; we had 

record acreages of lentils; record acreages of canola, and so on.  

And that was a response that farmers made to world conditions 

and fortunately we had some good crops.  Not in all regions; in 

my region the crop was not great but in most parts of the 

province we had a reasonable crop and we have better prices, 

not super prices but better prices, particularly for some of those 

specialty crops, and the action of the farmers has paid off in 

that respect. 

 

But that also adds a burden to the transportation system.  We 

add more crops, means more switching of railcars, it means 

more tie-ups, it means more space at terminals and so on.  And 

the system was not geared up for the large amounts of specialty 

crops that we grew this year.  So that further added to the 

problem of 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

moving the grain.  The flooding in the U.S. (United States) 

Midwest meant that cars that are often available in the United 

States, that are moved into the Canadian system to meet peak 

periods, were not available.  So that again added to the problem 

and made it very difficult and is going to tax the system to get 

the commodity to market. 

 

This impacts directly on the farm families out there.  Many 

farm families this year have good crops of peas and canola.  

And the price is good and the grain sits in the bin, and when 

that grain is in the bin there's no money to pay the suppliers, 

there's no money to make the payments to the banks, and in 

some cases, there's no money to put food on the table for the 

kids.  That is not acceptable.  We do have to have this grain 

moving, and we certainly would urge that some settlement 

occur very, very quickly. 

 

It just is again detrimental to the farmers and that has a 

detrimental effect on our overall economy, and it's not 

acceptable to the province of Saskatchewan that this industry 

be hamstrung by actions that are beyond our control. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly urge that we do send 

a message to Ottawa that this is very important to 

Saskatchewan and to our farmers and that something needs to 

be done very, very quickly, because this will be very 

detrimental to the industry overall. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We know 

several facts of what has been transpiring over the last several 

days.  Two million metric tonnes of wheat and barley worth 

$500 million to the farmers of this country and to Canada are 

scheduled for export over the next two weeks.  And 26 vessels 

are now in port waiting to load grain; 35 or 40 more are 

expected in the next two weeks.  And by the end of the week, 

the export terminals will likely be full.  Country elevators in 

our province will likely be full after that. 

 

While ships wait to take on grain, they charge what is called a 

waiting fee of between 11 and $15,000 per ship per day; 26 

ships charge between 286,000 and $390,000 per day.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, means that both the Canadian Wheat Board and 

the producers of this province are going to be held responsible 

for those dollars. 

 

This particular strike, or what some people are talking about as 

a lockout, will cost producers money, and most importantly, 

irreparable damage to Canada's reputation as a reliable supplier 

of grain.  In the tough economic times we cannot have grain 

producers held to ransom.  And each day that this continues it 

costs shippers like the Wheat Board, and there's no doubt that 

it's going to cost our farmers. 

 

Whenever possible, we agree that we must allow the collective 

bargaining procedure to succeed.  But this 

has been tried and it's quite obvious that it is not successful.  

Not only does this indirectly impact on farmers, it's going to 

indirectly impact on our reputation as a whole, as a nation. 

 

I have personally called the Minister of Agriculture, Ralph 

Goodale, and other federal ministers at the federal level to 

express the concerns of Saskatchewan farmers, and we join 

with our colleagues in the House today to put pressure on the 

federal government to bring this to some closure. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to say a few 

words about this issue, and it's a very important one, I believe, 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  Not only the 

people in rural Saskatchewan are going to feel the impact of 

this, Mr. Speaker, but also the people in urban centres.  So 

many times we conclude that if rural producers have a problem 

that it has no impact on other parts of the province.  And I want 

to just say that for the first time in Saskatchewan's history, we 

have seen a change, just a glimmer of hope in the long end of 

serious problems for the rural people. 

 

And I want to point out to the people of Saskatchewan and to 

the federal government that we need to have an adjustment in 

allowing the people of the province of Saskatchewan to reap 

some of the benefits that they have worked so hard for over the 

years. 

 

There are two things I believe that this strike causes a problem 

with in rural Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan in total.  

Those two ways, Mr. Speaker, are a reduction in the grain sales 

in international markets.  We have in Saskatchewan the highest 

quality of grains grown in the world.  We have a system that 

sets it apart to register these grains and the quality of these 

grains as it's marketed internationally.  We have a reputation, 

Mr. Speaker, that is second to none across Canada.  We have a 

reputation second to none internationally. 

 

And as I've travelled through various parts of the Soviet Union, 

they've told me there's two reasons why farmers in Canada are 

recognized.  One is that most of them came from there and the 

majority of them are good agriculture producers.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is very significant in the discussion we have because 

we can grow the greatest quality of grain, Mr. Speaker, but if 

the market hasn't got confidence in the shipping and the 

handling and the delivery of that product then, Mr. Speaker, 

they will go elsewhere.  And that's the seriousness of this 

problem that we have here today. 

 

It impacts in two ways, Mr. Speaker: a reduction in sales and 

the cost of demurrage.  And as it's been pointed out, demurrage 

is a very significant issue in this matter.  As we speak, the 

province of Saskatchewan has suffered some very serious 

problems in the last two years not with drought, Mr. Speaker, 

but with frost and with delayed harvests.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, has caused some concern by the Canadian Wheat 

Board in its capacity to deliver on a full year the volumes of 

grains that they have on hand in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Alberta, and 



February 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

Manitoba.  And that raises some concerns.  And with this, Mr. 

Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board had arranged to haul this 

during the months of January, February, March with a peak 

coming just at this time. 

 

Now is it significant that the longshoremen would go on strike 

at this particular time?  And it is significant, Mr. Speaker, and I 

believe that we should send the federal government this 

message -- say, put the people back to work with the condition 

that the mediator continues to work in a way that would reflect 

an opportunity to develop a long-lasting relationship. 

 

What we need to have is something that goes on for more than 

one year, not just from year to year and year to year, so that 

every time the products either have to be moved or it has a 

raise in the price, that that then triggers a mechanism whereby 

the people there almost hold up the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan for ransom. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we raise this issue 

today.  It's a very significant one.  It's important to the people 

of this province that the millions and millions of dollars that are 

spent in the dispute, Mr. Speaker, are not only spent in the 

dispute, but they are also spent by the Canadian grain 

producers in dealing with the markets that they have to have.  

And we, Mr. Speaker, are totally at the will of those people 

who are loading those ships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have heard it over and over and over again 

through the years, that farmers in Saskatchewan would be 

willing to go there and work at half the rate that those 

longshoremen are working to provide the guarantee that the 

grain moves on a consistent basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a world where communication is as available 

as it is today, we have in the province of Saskatchewan just 

completed a disaster for ourselves when the people are not able 

to get the grains.  There are millions and millions of people 

who are waiting for the opportunity to have the grain delivered 

to their markets.  And we, Mr. Speaker, are going to support 

this motion to be delivered to the federal government, that they 

work to resolve the issue, but that they put the people back to 

work.  And in that way, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support this 

motion as we debate it here and send it to the federal minister, 

Mr. Axworthy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

I had little difficulty, indeed a considerable sympathy for the 

comments made by the member from Rosthern.  However 

having seen the motion which he actually wrote, I've got some 

problem with what was written.  It was different than what was 

said, and I want to address myself to that aspect of this.  I leave 

to the Minister of Agriculture and others a comment upon the 

situation in Saskatchewan.  But what was written is different 

than what was said. 

It has been my experience in these labour disputes, it is never 

useful to take sides.  Neither side is ever perfect and neither 

side is ever totally at fault.  And the problem I have with the 

wording is that it reads: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the federal government to 

immediately take steps to end the longshoremen's strike . . . 

 

It is not in fact a strike, but a lockout.  And I don't think the 

member from Rosthern intended . . . I was perhaps particularly 

conscious of the difference, but there is quite a difference. 

 

It's worth remembering that this began, this whole dispute 

began with . . . a federal mediator was appointed in July of '93.  

It might be worthwhile to go through the chronology quickly. 

 

July of '93, a federal mediator was appointed.  July 19 of '94, 

the mediator reported, without success.  On January 27 there 

was a strike at the port of Chemainus.  On the next day, 

through a series of events, that resulted in a lockout throughout 

the entire B.C. (British Columbia) port system.  I would add as 

well that the longshoremen's union offered to move grain and 

agricultural products. 

 

Now I say this not to take sides; it's never useful to take sides.  

It is worthwhile remembering this is not a strike but a lockout 

and the parties are very sensitive about this.  So I want to draw 

to the attention of the Assembly that difference and just point 

out that it is commonly assumed, Mr. Speaker, that every time 

there's a work stoppage the unions are at fault and they've gone 

on strike, and they've gone on strike for more money. 

 

That in fact is . . . and indeed those comments, one might have 

read those comments, one might have read that into the 

comments of the member from Morse.  In fact that's not the 

case.  There's a strike at a relatively small and far less 

important port that resulted in a lockout. 

 

So I'm concerned about the wording of this motion because it 

appears to take sides and that isn't going to get the walk-out 

settled and that isn't going to get the grain moving.  In fact this 

motion may . . . the language in which the motion is written 

may do as much harm as good and I'm disappointed in the 

wording which was chosen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

speak on this issue because it's very important to all of 

Saskatchewan, and it's very important to Souris-Cannington.  

While the minister may not be prepared to take sides on this 

issue, I am.  I am prepared to take the side of the western 

Canadian farmer who is being hurt by this dispute, lockout, 

strike, whatever they want to call it, but it's the farmers that are 

being hurt. 

 

But it's also some of the other industries in this province.  The 

potash producers that ship through that port are also being 

affected, and if the strike . . . if the 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

dispute goes on longer, their employment will be affected 

because sales offshore will also be affected. 

 

I phoned around last week in my local constituency to find out 

what effect this dispute, as the Minister of Labour would like to 

call it, is having.  The elevators in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, are already filling up because of lack of movement.  

They're very worried that they're not going to be getting any 

cars because the cars are already sitting out at the west coast -- 

full. 

 

This is going to have a chain effect, Mr. Speaker, right cross 

this province, right across western Canada, because once the 

elevators become full, once the cars become full, it's going to 

take a significant period of time for that grain to start moving 

again.  And it's just . . . The dispute in Vancouver is not going 

to be over on day A and grain is going to start moving again.  

It's going to be a lag time in there that it's going to affect us all. 

 

Those sales are going to be lost.  Now, no. 1 and no. 2 spring 

wheats are selling quite well, but, Mr. Speaker, those grades 3 

and lower are moving very slowly.  In fact the Wheat Board 

suggested there's only going to be about 50 per cent of that 

grain sold.  So if we miss any of those sales, Mr. Speaker, it's 

going to have a very detrimental effect on the economy of all 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

It seems to be, Mr. Speaker, that whenever grain prices start to 

move, as they have with no. 1 and no. 2 spring wheat and with 

durum, someone in the system always tries to grab a larger 

share.  And when it all gets said and done, the farmer gets very 

little benefit for that price increase, but somebody else in the 

system takes it. 

 

And I think this is part of what is happening in this situation.  

Someone else in the system has seen some grain prices 

increase, some movement there; so they feel this is the proper 

time for which to get an increase for themselves. 

 

The minister would suggest that perhaps labour is not at fault 

here.  According to the media, Mr. Speaker, labour is asking 

for a $3-an-hour increase.  Well farmers would like to receive 

that.  Farmers would like to receive the benefit of the sales that 

are currently being lost, Mr. Speaker, to receive the higher 

prices that are being offered for those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I would hope the federal 

government would take a look at as this dispute drags on, is the 

movement of grain south through other ports.  I think that is 

very important, that we look at alternatives to the grain 

movement system, that we move either down the Mississippi or 

through the ports in Washington where it's not a very large jog 

to move our cars south across the border.  And I think that 

would be a worthwhile effort, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at 

that. 

 

One of the things that we need to do, Mr. Speaker, and one of 

the things that the federal government needs to take a serious 

look at, is naming the port of Vancouver 

as an essential service, that any labour disputes at that port be 

handled by binding arbitration.  Then the farmers, the potash 

producers, the coal industry, and whoever else ships through 

the port of Vancouver, is not going to be held up for ransom by 

either the labour unions or the companies at that port.  I think 

that would be a large step forward, Mr. Speaker, if the federal 

government would implement such an idea and make the port 

of Vancouver an essential service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government must look at this issue 

immediately and must resolve it immediately, before any 

permanent and truly serious harm happens to the farmers of 

western Canada.  I support this motion fully, Mr. Speaker.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased also to enter the debate on this emergency measure.  I 

think it's important to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that a number of 

people throughout the grains industry in western Canada are 

calling for back-to-work legislation.  I understand the Minister 

of Agriculture in Alberta, Western Canadian Wheat Growers, 

the official opposition, the Government of Saskatchewan, are 

calling for back-to-work legislation.  The Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool has been noticeably absent, Mr. Speaker.  And it would be 

interesting if someone from their organization would be willing 

to comment on the labour disruption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are already seeing things, the prices of grain -- 

canola particularly -- being affected by the labour disruption 

out on the west coast.  Canola prices have gone down fairly 

significantly over the past week.  Grain analysts, as reported by 

Agriline last week, suggested that it was a direct result of the 

labour problems. 

 

And it's quite simple, Mr. Speaker.  Countries, importing 

countries like Japan, are questioning the Canadian farmers' 

ability to supply product.  And it's a direct result of the labour 

disruption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my belief we need back-to-work legislation 

now.  In fact I thought back-to-work legislation should have 

been sooner than now.  Collective bargaining rights are 

important, Mr. Speaker, and we recognize that.  However, I 

believe the point has been reached where the grain handlers 

and longshoremen should be declared an essential service, 

removing the right to strike, because it is simply too important 

of an issue to our economy.  The movement of commodities 

like grain, potash, lumber, are the lifeblood of many large 

numbers of Canadian families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past the Canadian Wheat Board has used 

the port of Seattle as an alternative port.  And I believe that that 

port again should be used as an alternative port to continue the 

movement of Canadian grain.  Other ports should be examined 

as well.  Perhaps we should be looking at the use of the 

Mississippi River system to continue the movement of 

Canadian grain. 

 

Huge demurrage charges are being rung up against 



February 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

the Canadian farmer as we speak, Mr. Speaker -- something 

that I find is absolutely reprehensible that the Canadian farmer 

is bearing the responsibility and the cost for something they 

have no direct part in whatsoever.  The grain companies and 

the labour unions are directly responsible, and yet it is the 

Canadian grain farmer that is paying the bill once again, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I think that is reprehensible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding that these people on the 

west coast earn over $21 per hour for the work that they do -- 

something in the neighbourhood of $50,000 per year.  Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers I represent believe this is an excellent 

wage for the work they do.  I think many Saskatchewan farm 

families would be happy to have that kind of income coming in 

today to their farm family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it's high time, as I said, that the 

industry be declared an essential service.  It's far too important 

of a port and far too important of an issue to stop the movement 

of Canadian grain.  I urge the federal government to act as soon 

as possible, Mr. Speaker, and I will be supporting this motion 

wholeheartedly.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to present an amendment to this motion: 

 

 Delete everything after the word "Assembly" and 

substituting therefor: 

 

 urge the federal government to settle the west coast dispute 

which is negatively affecting the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think . . . And that will be seconded by the 

member for Regina Lake Centre.  So I will be moving that 

motion . . . that amendment, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my 

comments.  And if I do run over the five-minute time, I would 

assume that I will still have time to make my motion or else 

have some suitable warning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious we see the opposition members 

coming from very similar positions that they have taken in the 

past on issues, and that is beat on somebody.  Don't negotiate 

anything, just beat on somebody for the purpose of making 

somebody else happy.  Well I think those days are over, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would ask all the opposition members to try to 

start cooperating for the sake of Saskatchewan farmers and the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, everyone has a role to play in this 

dispute.  Because the economy is very important, the jobs of 

every individual -- not only in Saskatchewan, on the west 

coast, and in between on the rails  

_- are very, very important to that economy of Saskatchewan 

and Canada.  And that's what we have to keep in mind, those 

jobs.  And if everyone plays their role, Mr. Speaker, those jobs 

can be maintained 

and we can get along in this country -- actually get along -- 

instead of just mouthing cooperation. 

 

The federal government has a role, Mr. Speaker.  We have 

called for a negotiated settlement to the strike from this 

province, and the federal government is an employer in this 

case.  So it has a role to play, a dual role -- responsibility for 

the economy of Canada to make sure the grain moves, to make 

sure there's a negotiated settlement for the workers on the west 

coast, and has a responsibility as an employer of those workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should have maybe put a 

little more enthusiasm into his speech and let the people really 

know he meant it, instead of just mouthing it, as I said, and 

show a little cooperation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the employers have a responsibility and a role to 

play.  We have some member-owned employers at the west 

coast.  They have a responsibility to their people who own 

those companies, the farmers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the workers have a responsibility.  There was an 

action mediated initially.  Then there was a reaction to the 

action.  And subsequently we have a stalemate.  We had a 

strike; we had a lockout, or a threatened lockout.  I'm not 

scared to say the words because if we don't start saying the 

words, then we're not going to be able to settle this thing. 

 

(1100) 

 

So the workers have a responsibility.  They also have a 

responsibility to their families, and that's part of their 

responsibility and that's what they're showing.  They also have 

a responsibility to their co-workers in Saskatchewan who rely 

on their jobs in the grains industry and other industries that spin 

off, and the rail workers who have their jobs rely on this 

industry.  So we all have interlocking responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also say that the media has a role to play 

here.  On the weekend, and in many of the reports that I have 

read, Mr. Speaker, I have only heard the words or seen the 

word "strike."  And in very few cases was the word "lockout" 

mentioned.  I don't think that's a balanced approach by the 

media.  I think their role in here is to ensure that everybody is 

informed of everything that's going on.  And unless I've been 

reading only selected materials -- which I haven't chose to do, 

Mr. Speaker -- I have seen many more words . . . the word 

"strike" many more times than I've seen the word "lockout" or 

proposed lockout. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we all have roles to play in this situation.  The 

important thing, as I said when I began, is that it's the economy 

of Canada -- in particular to us, Saskatchewan -- and the jobs 

from here from the time the grain is grown to the time it's 

transported until the time it's loaded on the ships to the time it 

feeds the hungry people of the world, we all have 

responsibilities.  And by beating on each other, we're not going 

to solve or meet those responsibilities. 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will move that we: 

 

 Delete everything after the word "Assembly" and substitute 

the following therefor: 

 

 urge the federal government to settle the west coast dispute 

which is negatively affecting the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Regina Lake Centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to second this 

thoughtful amendment and speak in support of it.  There is a 

problem on the west coast, and as an urban member I've sought 

to understand this issue that affects producers in rural 

Saskatchewan.  It's not always easy for urban members to 

understand all the issues, having not grown up in this 

environment, but I have sought to understand this issue. 

 

In seeking information I did come across some additional facts 

that are not always presented in the articles that I've read on the 

subject.  There seem to be two factors affecting this situation 

that have not been widely reported.  The west coast 

longshoremen have indicated their willingness to move the 

grain as they have in the past three strikes, the last being in 

1986.  And I understand there's also some problem with the rail 

lines.  The railways were two weeks behind on deliveries to the 

west coast when the lockout began, so the port would have 

been running below capacity and would have been unable to 

meet its commitments even prior to this situation.  And the 

longshoremen are in fact locked out. 

 

All that aside, I'd like to comment on the need to respect the 

process that's going on.  Both sides are at the table.  And as we 

are doing, we all need to urge them to do everything they can 

to illustrate this process can work without the interference of 

the federal House. 

 

I want to reiterate our Premier's call for an urgent mediated 

settlement.  The mediator was appointed quickly and needs a 

little bit of room to do his job.  And I think we also have to be 

careful in the dispute not to emphasize the divisions between 

the employer, the longshoremen, and the farmers.  All parties 

need to pull together.  Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment 

and I join in the call for urgency in reaching an agreement.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

re-entering the debate to discuss the amendment at this point, 

Mr. Speaker, and I'll keep my short remarks to the amendment. 

Mr. Speaker, it is this side's opinion that this issue is much, 

much too important for semantics and to get bogged down in 

terminology.  And, Mr. Speaker, whether it is a strike, whether 

it is a lockout, whether it is a dispute, quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers of this province don't care.  The people of 

this province don't care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, what we want is for this 

Assembly, in a clear unequivocal voice transmit to the federal 

government our concerns.  And we believe the motion . . . and 

in fact we believe that all the members who have spoken in this 

debate have also voiced that concern.  And so, Mr. Speaker, if 

that is what makes or breaks this motion, then, Mr. Speaker, 

members on this side are going to agree to the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

wish to speak on this issue . . . other speakers have spoken 

about in terms of placing blame.  I think it's important here that 

we get a settlement.  I think we are seeing the problems that 

exist right now and the financial dilemma that will exist if this 

dispute continues . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Voice of reason. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Yes, voice of reason. 

 

The one thing that concerns me about this issue is that it's been 

used as an opportunity for those people attacking the Canadian 

Wheat Board.  Some people are saying now in terms of this 

issue that it is now time for to allow grain to move south, to 

allow the Canadian Wheat Board . . . to remove its authority to 

move grain.  And we've seen this issue take place before. 

 

As the member from Morse has outlined, the ability of the 

Canadian Wheat Board to sell this product produced by grain 

producers in western Canada and do an excellent job of doing 

that, with a final payment that was issued last year of $500 

million to producers, increases in interim prices to producers, 

and a strong track record of moving grain for western Canadian 

producers.  These things have to be enhanced. 

 

But I am saddened to hear, when I hear other organizations 

attack it, as an opportunity to move grain south.  They are 

taking an issue and adding their argument to it in a false way.  

It is a falsehood -- trying to mix up the durum issue with this is 

an opportunity to do that. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the durum issue that exists 

right now for western Canadian producers, in terms of the price 

problem that exists, is created by the export enhancement 

program by the United States.  Clearly this is something that 

we have to deal with and solve in order to have fair trade out 

there in the world economy.  And it is the export enhancement 

program that is creating the shortfalls in terms of durum in the 



February 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

United States.  They are creating their own shortages, creating 

the price to rise. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board is trying to take advantage of that.  

But its critics are saying it's not acting quick enough.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is important that we get a settlement.  

It is important to allow the Canadian Wheat Board to do the job 

that it needs to do. 

 

With the Canadian Wheat Board, as I was saying, its ability to 

market the product . . . We've seen last year its ability to move 

feed grains, which is a poor commodity, and it continued to 

move that product forward.  I think we also have to look at too 

that we don't see sales restricted in terms of canola production, 

in sales out there right now in terms of the increased returns for 

canola producers in western Canada. 

 

Also the Vancouver port is becoming very important in terms 

of containerization, especially crops to be marketed.  It is 

important that these crops continue to move. 

 

I think that this is also an opportunity.  This dispute highlights 

the need for the federal government to act to develop a 

mechanism by which we don't see the disputes take place 

again.  And I think all members of the House would agree with 

such a move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- We need some way by which Saskatchewan 

farmers are not held to ransom by an issue that takes place 

many miles away.  It also shows the difficulty of Saskatchewan 

producers being land-locked. 

 

The Speaker: -- The total time for the debate has elapsed, as 

agreed to by members earlier today. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:11 a.m. until 11:12 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Thompson Serby 

Wiens Whitmore 

Tchorzewski Roy 

Lingenfelter Cline 

Shillington Scott 

Anguish Crofford 

Koskie Wormsbecker 

Teichrob Stanger 

Johnson Kluz 

Goulet Knezacek 

Atkinson Harper 

Kowalsky Keeping 

Carson Jess 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Langford 

 

Upshall Swenson 

Hagel Neudorf 

Bradley Martens 

Koenker Boyd 

Lorje Toth 

Pringle Britton 

Lautermilch D'Autremont 

Renaud Goohsen 

Murray Haverstock 

Hamilton McPherson 

Trew Bergman 

-- 54 

 

Nays 

-- Nil 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to move a 

motion of transmittal, seconded by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

 That Mr. Speaker transmit to: (1) the Prime Minister of 

Canada, the Rt. Hon. Jean Chrétien; (2) the Hon. Ralph 

Goodale, Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food; and (3) the 

Hon. Lloyd Axworthy, Minister of Human Resources 

Development, the transcripts of this debate. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

PROROGATION 

 

At 11:15 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 

 

Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at this 

Legislative Assembly.  In so doing, I wish to thank you for the 

work you have done. 

 

This session marked a renewal of hope for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  While some jurisdictions chose to aimlessly 

slash budgets, you chose to tackle adversity with innovation, 

initiative, and compassion. 

 

You have sharpened the focus of government in order to better 

assist the recovery of the Saskatchewan economy through job 

creation and fiscal stability.  The Department of Economic 

Development Act, 1993 will increase government's ability to 

rejuvenate the economy, through job creation and increased 

trade capability.  The Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Act enhances the ability of Saskatchewan 

workers and corporations, working together, to raise equity 

capital which will create, protect or maintain jobs and allow 

corporations to diversify and increase investment into 

Saskatchewan businesses.  Further, you have encouraged 

growth in 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

small business with the passage of The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

You have endeavoured to improve the circumstances of 

farmers and the farm economy.  You have approved The Farm 

Financial Stability Act which helps reduce the risk to loan 

guarantees granted to feeder/breeder associations and increase 

efficiencies for government, lenders and associations.  The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act broadens the investigative 

powers of the Farm Ownership Board and strengthens 

enforcement provisions.  As part of government reorganization, 

amendments to The Crop Insurance Act bring the corporation 

into the Department of Agriculture, consolidating and 

streamlining administration. 

 

In approving The Health Districts Act you have moved to the 

second phase of the provision of health care envisioned thirty 

years ago, when the Woodrow Lloyd government launched 

North America's first public, prepaid Medicare program.  This 

Act will integrate health services and increase community 

involvement through the creation of health districts and district 

health care boards.  Providing more local control over the 

delivery of health services is a significant step in the promotion 

of wellness for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The continued focus of open and accountable government 

remains a high government priority.  Changes to The Financial 

Administration Act implement the recommendation of the 

Financial Management Review Commission by adopting the 

principles of accrual accounting.  The Crown Corporations Act, 

1993 sets forth a clear, more accountable structure for the 

operation and reporting of Crown corporations. 

 

You have provided for the increased confidence in the electoral 

practises of Saskatchewan.  The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993 allowed for public input and the impartial creation of 

more representative electoral districts.  The Local Government 

Election Amendment Act 1993 (Wards) and The Urban 

Municipality Amendment Act (Wards) will restore the ward 

system in Saskatchewan for urban municipalities, strengthening 

equal representation and accountability.  In addition, The Local 

Government Elections Amendment Act, 1993 (No. 2), updated 

and enhanced democratic rights within municipal elections in 

response to requests from the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. 

 

You have endeavoured to earn the faith and trust of 

Saskatchewan people by embracing high ethical standards.  

You have adopted The Members' Conflict of Interest Act and 

approved a code of ethical conduct in order to lend credibility 

to the conduct of elected officials of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

You have approved legislation that ensures safer workplaces 

and a better system of benefits and rehabilitation for injured 

workers.  The Occupational Health and Safety Act helps 

workers and employers to reduce workplace hazards and 

prevent injuries.  It also provides a framework for dealing with 

sexual and 

other forms of harassment.  The Workers' Compensation Act 

has been amended to curtail the practice of deeming and to 

ensure that injured workers receive fair compensation and 

treatment. 

 

You have adopted amendments to The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code, further extending freedom from discrimination. 

 

Although the times have required financial restraint and careful 

attention to an overburdened treasury, you have none the less 

sought to show that government has a compassionate face and 

has not ignored the difficulties of the less fortunate.  The 

Limitation of Actions Amendment Act and The Victims of 

Crime Amendment Act empower victims of abuse to make 

progress towards recovery.  The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1993 will eliminate the potential of further 

financial hardship for disabled adults.  As well, these 

amendments eliminate a perceived discrimination against 

children of parents who have never been married. 

 

You have adopted The Treaty Land Entitlement 

Implementation Act in order to accommodate the provisions of 

the historic agreement signed in 1992 by Saskatchewan, 25 

Indian Bands and Canada. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further 

requirements of the public service and I assure you that this 

sum of money will be used economically, prudently and in the 

public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I congratulate you for the manner in 

which you have devoted your energies to the activities of the 

session and wish you the full blessing of providence.  God save 

the Queen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later today, the 7th day of February, 1994, at 2 

p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 11:22 a.m. 

 


