






















































Hansard: March 03, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 605 
 March 3, 1994 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 
The Chair: -- I will ask the minister to introduce her officials 
to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my right I 
have Bill Reader who is a deputy minister.  To his right is Ron 
Davis who is assistant deputy minister of municipal services.  
To my right and behind me is Ron Styles, associate deputy 
minister of housing.  Immediately behind me is Larry 
Chaykowski, executive director of administrative services; and 
to my left is Ken Alecxe, associate deputy minister of 
recreation and culture. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, 
Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
I'm going to start tonight, Madam Minister, with something that 
is a little bit different.  As you know, during question period 
we've been asking questions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens and are going to continue that process in estimates.  So 
I will ask these questions of you individually and allow you to 
answer each one with the best of your ability because we'll be 
sending the verbatim to the individuals involved. 
 
The first one I will pose to you, Madam Minister, deals with 
someone that you may know.  This individual is from St. 
Brieux, Saskatchewan.  His name is Mr. Steve Sabo.  He says: 
Mr. Premier, I would like to know why on 210 acres of 
grain-producing land which I live on, I pay land taxes of almost 
$1,000 yearly.  This land is all rented and I do not farm.  We 
raise a garden and sell the extra vegetables to people 30 miles 
away in Melfort, Saskatchewan.  I deliver this to them using 
my own truck.  SGI says that I need to have a private licence on 
my truck.  That increases the cost by $210 yearly.  There are 
regulations around market gardens that mean you must have 
2.5 hectares of land -- that's 5 acres.  I have no machinery, no 
heated storage, and there is no market close by for all this 
produce.  A used piece of machinery is over $9,000.  I am over 
70 years of age and don't want to start farming again.  Why do I 
pay so much in land tax on such a small base, given where I am 
in life? 
 
That's from Mr. Steve Sabo, at St. Brieux, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you for that question.  The 
assessment of all property across Saskatchewan is based on a 
formula developed by SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) and the local taxes are set by the mill 
rate of the local rural municipality.  So it is beyond the 
jurisdiction of the provincial government to decide or intervene 
in 

whether or not local property taxes are too high or inadequately 
applied. 
 
Again it's up to SAMA to decide the assessment base and it's 
up to the local government -- the local rural municipality -- to 
apply their mill rate.  And on that basis, the gentleman receives 
his tax notice. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- The next one, Madam Minister, is from a 
gentleman by the name of Brian Foley, from Quill Lake, 
Saskatchewan.  And he writes: Mr. Premier, I want to know 
why as a farmer, a wealth producer, why my fuel is taxed at 
200 per cent higher than it is in the United States.  Our land 
taxes and transportation costs are unreal.  Also, why 9 per cent 
PST on all our oil, batteries, tires, iron, building and shop 
supplies, utilities, etc.  I'm taxed poor.  Why is this, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, both in regard to this 
question and the one before it, they mention a number of other 
taxes that I won't deal with.  I will deal specifically with the 
reference to property tax. 
 
And again, I think the quote was: my land taxes are unreal.  We 
have, as far as we can see through doing some comparisons 
both with the American states south of us and to our 
neighbours, our land taxes vary somewhat but they're roughly 
equivalent to what other jurisdictions are also charging as far as 
property tax.  So again, it's the same issue that the local 
assessment base will be determined through SAMA and the 
mill rate will be applied to that, and from that you get your 
property tax.  And for a lot of people, they find that the 
pressure is mounting because . . . somewhat to their own 
economic circumstance.  Whether it's unfair or not, I guess it 
depends on where you sit. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next 
question I believe is also your responsibility.  It may not be the 
topic of conversation tonight, but perhaps I'll read it into the 
record and you can respond. 
 
This one is from a Mr. Eldon Miller of 605 Idylwyld Crescent 
in Saskatoon.  Mr. Miller's concern: Mr. Premier, I want to 
know why your department -- speaking about, I believe this 
would be culture and rec -- appears to have an unequal policy 
of funding of arts and park facilities between Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Miller's understanding is that Regina's Wascana Centre 
receives 382,000 in provincial funding while Wascana's . . . 
Meewasin Valley Authority only receives 740.  It's also his 
understanding that Regina's Centre of the Arts receives 
$500,000 and the MacKenzie Art Gallery receives 400,000 
while Saskatoon's Centennial Auditorium and Mendel Art 
Gallery both receive nothing from the provincial government, 
and he wonders if the minister could confirm and explain this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you for that question.  I know it's 
been an issue that has been talked about 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

quite a lot lately. 
 
What has been done over the past, and we try to continue now, 
is to look at global funding as it relates to all the facilities in 
Saskatoon and Regina and try to fairly distribute money 
according to an overall distribution of quite a few organizations 
and facilities. 
 
When you compare, however, the Mendel specifically with the 
MacKenzie there are discrepancies, and because of that the 
people in Saskatoon feel that they have been unfairly dealt 
with.  In 1993-94 the Mendel gallery received 175,000 from the 
Arts Board and 150,000 from the Saskatchewan Lotteries.  But 
when you add into that mix, to Wanuskewin in Saskatoon 
$250,000 and from the lotteries 142,000, the Western 
Development Museum in Saskatoon received $1.1 million, and 
three theatre productions, Nightcap Productions, $66,000 from 
the Arts Board; Persephone Theatre, $145,000 from the Arts 
Board; and Twenty-Fifth Street Theatre, 103,000; and then to 
the Saskatoon symphony orchestra, $154,000, the total arts and 
cultural funding to the city of Saskatoon for last year was 
$2.285 million. 
 
Comparing that with the MacKenzie Art Gallery which last 
year received 130,000 from the Arts Board; 400,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government; the Centre of the Arts which is a 
provincial government facility received 523,000; the Globe 
Theatre received 240,000 from the Arts Board; and Regina 
symphony orchestra received 154,000 from the Arts Board; and 
the science centre received 150,000 from the Saskatchewan 
government.  So the total there was 1.597 million.  So when 
you add all of those together actually Saskatoon does come out, 
in a global sense, ahead of the funding allocated to Regina. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you, Madam Minister.  
I'm sure the individuals will be interested in your answers, and 
they may wish to follow up.  I think one thing that is becoming 
evident to me as I read these responses that are coming in from 
the public is the theme that is pretty consistent, and that is the 
question of taxes and the issue of downloading in particular.  
Tonight we're discussing municipal government. 
 
Municipal government has been the basis and the foundation of 
democratic government in our province, in our country.  It is 
restricted in that it cannot deficit budget.  And that has been its 
history here, and I think it's one reason that it has been fairly 
successful in being a very low-cost deliverer of services to the 
people that elect it. 
 
What we are seeing, Madam Minister, particularly in the last 
two years, are increasing tax loads in the offsetting of program 
monies that these people simply cannot duck.  They have 
nowhere else to go than back to the property tax base.  And as 
you're well aware, that issue of what should be paid for by 
property tax has become increasingly vocal in our province. 
 
And I just look at the line-up, Madam Minister, for what 
reductions we're talking about over the coming 

year.  When you look at the funding reductions to municipal 
revenue sharing, SAMA and school division operating grants, 
the total is 25.478 million, over 25 -- nearly $25.5 
million -- that we're talking about here that has to end up some 
place else.  When you break that down, you've got your urban 
revenue sharing, five million two; rural revenue sharing, two 
million five; SAMA funding, three million five; K-12 operating 
grants, fourteen two.  This entire area, Madam Minister, is 
going to have to be picked up. 
 
And then on top of that there is the health issues that you're 
well aware of, that were raised at SUMA and will be raised 
again at SARM I'm sure in the coming weeks, all issues 
surrounding the property tax base.  Madam Minister, I'm 
wondering, given that you will not make a commitment, for 
instance on the hospital revenue-sharing Act, to follow the 
advice of municipal government and given that you won't make 
any projections for them beyond two years, what do you see in 
the future?  Do you see further downloading coming?  And 
how do you expect them -- given the parameters that they work 
under -- how do you expect them to make up the difference 
with a property tax base, quite frankly, Madam Minister, that is 
declining?  Declining in value in so many of both our small 
urban and rural communities. 
 
What do you say to them, Madam Minister, faced with that 
situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I want to thank you for the question, 
and you have raised some very interesting points. 
 
I want to start by saying we are not unsympathetic to the 
provincial governments and their challenge to accommodate 
some of the changes that have been taking place over the last 
number of years.  You are right when you say that by statute 
they cannot deficit budget.  And you're right also when you say 
that's probably been to a large degree part of their success 
because they have learned to manage their budgets and their 
expenditures very well. 
 
(1915) 
 
And if the world were a little different I guess, in this year and 
last year, we would like to provide more money to municipal 
governments because we know that they are extremely 
important, and they provide not only a lot of valuable services 
but they are the backbone and the core of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it's not that we are reducing our transfers and our support to 
municipal governments simply because we choose to, but it's a 
matter of necessity.  And I don't want to go into all of that, that 
we do have a debt load, we are paying $843 million this year 
for interest payments, and if that wasn't there we could do a lot 
of things. 
 
But the world is as we have it today and we can't do much 
about that.  So I want to go back to say that over the last 
number of years, as both SUMA and SARM saw deficit 
budgets becoming part of the landscape of 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

provincial governments, they passed several resolutions 
demanding that provincial governments get their fiscal house in 
order and start to balance their budget. 
 
So I would like to say first, for the record and because I know 
it's true, municipal governments support provincial 
governments who have balanced budgets as well.  And the 
process that we have been going through in the last two years 
has been one in which we think is a very fair process; 
everybody has been asked to take part of the hit, if you will, or 
part of the decrease in funding.  And it has been a difficult 
situation for some municipal governments, not all but for some, 
because there has been of course a change in the economic 
climate in some small rural centres, and they have found that 
their assessment base, particularly as it pertains to commercial 
or business assessment, has been declining. 
 
But that . . . I would differ with you when you say property tax 
base is declining.  In agricultural Saskatchewan, the property 
tax remains constant.  There may be arrears, but still the tax 
base is there; it hasn't disappeared.  Where there is population 
shifts or where there are businesses that have been closing, then 
you will see of course some change in some urban assessments. 
 
But it has been difficult, and I want to now go into some 
statistical analysis that we can provide that perhaps will put this 
into a little bit of a different light. 
 
First of all, we have gone through some records for the last 
number of years, from 1989 to 1992, and we have found that 
within the RMs (rural municipality), their funded reserves have 
been going up in value, where their debt load has been going 
down.  And in 1992, the funded reserves for RMs is forty-two 
million, three hundred and a bit million dollars while their debt 
load has been declining, and it rests now at $3.2 million, so 
their debt to reserves is actually a pretty good indication of a 
good fiscal situation. 
 
Similarly the villages across Saskatchewan have for their size, I 
think, a fairly substantial amount of revenue in their bank 
accounts.  They have $29.677 million in their bank accounts 
with a debt load of $2.6 million.  And again the debt load has 
been going down while their funded reserves have been going 
up. 
 
And within the towns of Saskatchewan we have $59.899 
million worth of funded reserves, and their debt load again has 
been going down.  It rests now at $19 million.  So when we 
look at the overall financial health of municipalities, it's not 
bad.  I mean I think people would look at it and say they have a 
AAA credit rating compared to Saskatchewan which has a 
BBB credit rating. 
 
I can give you some other analysis that we have, just to put this 
in perspective.  This year, if you say the 10.3 per cent decrease 
in revenue-sharing pool is equivalent to 1.4 per cent decrease in 
the general municipal operating revenue . . . so relative to their 
whole operational budget, the decrease that we have 

implemented this year represents 1.4 per cent. 
 
So having said all that, and I know we'll be getting into it later, 
I guess what I want to say is municipal governments are having 
a tough time.  They have to make tough decisions.  They have 
to reduce their expenditures like everybody else.  They can't be 
immune to what's happening across Saskatchewan.  They're 
working very well.  They're maintaining their mill rates, and 
they support a balanced budget, and they're in the process with 
us.  And we're trying, with whatever means we can, to support 
them.  And in the coming years we've already told them that we 
are not going to be reducing our transfers any further.  So what 
they can look forward to from now on is a stabilization of the 
transfers from the provincial government to municipal 
governments, and hopefully as the economic climate improves, 
so will their situation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman.  Well thank you, Madam 
Minister, for that information.  It will certainly engender some 
questions a little bit later. 
 
I forgot to mention to you at the beginning that last year we 
worked off of a sheet which was supplied to all ministers.  I 
think it helped speed the process up.  We have no expectation 
that those need to be returned during the course of the session 
but I would ask you that -- and I believe I sent them around 
today by inter-office mail; that they are the same sheets as last 
year basically -- that we do receive them at some point in the 
future. 
 
Madam Minister, I listened very carefully to your reasons why 
things have to be cut so drastically on the municipal side and 
yet I go through the budget projections, the revenue 
projections, which your Minister of Finance gave a few weeks 
ago, total revenues are projected to increase by $152 million.  
That's revenues from general taxation increased by over 22; 
federal transfers by 116 million; transfers from Crown 
corporations, a projected increase by over 55 million including 
50 million from gaming operations. 
 
Obviously your government is receiving revenue over and 
beyond what it did last year, and I would say fairly significant 
revenues.  At the same time you are continuing to download on 
other agencies.  That tells me that there must be money being 
spent in fairly large amounts for other things.  And one of the 
questions that I'm receiving as the critic for this area this year 
is: why, with expenditures going up by over $150 million . . . 
or revenues rather going up that high, why some of this drastic 
downloading is occurring?  Because the numbers aren't all in 
yet, even. 
 
The school board stuff is sitting there waiting to happen.  Most 
school boards are informing local councils that the hit is 
probably going to be more than what they thought.  And as you 
and I both know, that's for a number of reasons, but some of 
those are going to go into the double-digit range, Madam 
Minister. 
 
So could you explain why, with revenues going up that much, 
you're still expecting to do this download. 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

If all of the other things that you said you're doing are in place 
and you have so much control of how government operates, 
how we can have that much increase and yet still have to 
download it? 
 
If you were at an even line, I could understand your argument, 
and it would be valid, maybe.  But with getting more money, 
something's not jibing here and you need to explain that to 
local councils. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well it's not that complicated to explain.  
When you're starting in a hole and you're trying to work your 
way out of it, you don't have excess revenue.  What you have is 
you have revenue going first of all to pay $843 million of 
interest payments. 
 
And if we didn't have that, well that $843 million represents, as 
far as I can recall, more than what we take in in total E&H 
(education and health) tax and what we take in in corporate 
income tax as well.  Combine those two together and you still 
don't pay the interest payment. 
 
But, other than that, if you start in the hole and you're trying to 
work yourself up to a level playing-field, and so the only two 
ways you can do it is by reducing expenditures and increasing 
revenues at the same time.  And still after all we've done, we're 
still in the hole by $189 million this year.  We're trying to come 
back to a position where we have equal revenues to equal 
expenditures.  And because we started so far in the hole and we 
had to work our way out of it, it will be at least two more years 
before we have an equilibrium established. 
 
So when people say, when you're having all this revenue 
coming in, why can't you stop hitting on us, we have revenue 
coming in but it has to simply go to try to bring down the 
deficit and to pay off that interest payment which hasn't even 
touched the debt, which is about $15 billion. 
 
So I'm sure the member opposite realizes, having sat on the 
Treasury Board, that there is no magical way of equalizing your 
budget except through expenditure cuts and revenue increases.  
And when you start that, that doesn't mean when your revenue 
increases that all of a sudden you stop, because you go 
backwards and you go in the hole.  And that's what happened 
for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would suggest that 
most governments in Canada went in the hole in the 1980s, of 
all stripes, and they went in to varying depths.  All of them are 
trying to crawl out of the hole now, of all stripes, and that 
process is taking many different forms as we see it across 
Canada, and I think people are judging. 
 
But as I said to you earlier, I think it's always a question of 
priorities.  There's always priorities in government and I think 
people today are probably very disappointed with the big party 
that Crop Insurance is going to throw for the folks.  You know, 
there's 80,000 bucks that was probably still in the account at the 
end 

of the budget year and somebody in their wisdom decided it 
would be better spent on a party than doing what it maybe 
should do.  And there's always priority, Madam Minister, and 
you and I can probably stand here and argue back and forth 
about whose priorities have been messed up in the last while 
and we'll each score some points, but at the end of the day that 
isn't going to solve the problem that local governments face. 
 
What I'm wondering is: of the numbers you quoted of the 
funded reserves and the debt, how much of those funded 
reserves would still be contingent upon government, senior 
government, coming through with . . . I know that when my 
RM builds a road, it's over so many years.  There's always 
monies held back until the road is completed -- they maybe do 
10 miles one year and 10 miles another year, and that type of 
thing.  How much of those funded reserves would be 
contingent upon senior levels of government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- A couple of comments.  We talk about 
priorities and you're right.  We have tried to be as fair as we 
can across all of the agencies and all of the third parties as well 
as all the levels of government.  So we have approached this 
from, I think, a fairly good attitude of being fair and equal. 
 
And there are other models.  And you're right, Alberta has 
chosen a model where they are speeding things up.  It's not 
because they have a BBB credit rating, it's because they want to 
have a balanced budget and they've taken far more drastic 
actions than we have.  And Alberta represents one model and 
we can tell you, if you like, what is happening with Alberta and 
their transfers to municipal governments. 
 
We have other models.  We have the model that's going on in 
New Brunswick where they've reduced this year and next year 
by $8 million in transfers to municipal governments.  So this is 
not an uncommon theme that runs across all levels of 
government, whether it's provincial or even the federal 
government, a need to reduce expenditures and transfers and 
establish priorities -- trying to protect those segments of our 
population and those agencies that need our help, at the same 
time trying to preserve a fairly good quality of life and level of 
service. 
 
Now when you talk about contingency reserves, the numbers I 
gave you was cash in the bank.  It had nothing to do with 
transfers from the federal government.  This was money that 
they had in the bank, cash in the bank -- nothing to do with 
transfers from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That is 
important to know.  A lot of RM councillors and people on 
town councils, in my constituency anyway, take a great deal of 
pride in passing on larger accounts to the people that follow 
them up, and it's generally because people do without certain 
things.  That's how they do that.  But that is something that has 
always been in rural Saskatchewan and I suppose it comes from 
people growing up in the 1930s.  And a lot of the people that 
have sat on councils in the last few years 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

are of that generation, and that's sort of their attitude, and I do 
think they appreciate government attempts to economize. 
 
But the inconsistencies I guess, Madam Minister, are what 
really make them angry, and I take you to the area of health 
care which in this province has always held a very special 
place.  I think we would consider in this province the concept 
of universal health care stronger than anywhere else in Canada 
probably, because of what has transpired here. 
 
(1930) 
 
That's why they find your approach to the hospital 
revenue-sharing Act to be very inconsistent.  What they are 
seeing is the lessening of service all over rural Saskatchewan 
primarily.  And in many cases you have facilities that were 
funded at the local level -- and that depended on whether it was 
an acute care facility or whether it was an old-age home or 
whatever -- where these people would go out, for instance, to a 
local government board, they would go out and raise, through a 
commitment of the property tax base, funds not only to build 
the facility, but because in many cases it was a union hospital 
district, to ensure that it's ongoing operating costs and the 
provision of equipment would be there. 
 
Madam Minister, some of those facilities today, as we know, 
are no longer serving the same purpose as when those folks 
went out and either borrowed through a debenture system or 
whatever they happened to prefer as a tool to build that facility. 
They are still responsible for the building even though it today 
doesn't provide acute care services, and they still have this 2 
mill levy on their back. 
 
Even though the union hospital district no longer exists they are 
thrown into a much wider pool of health care funding which 
they in many cases feel alienated from, and yet the provincial 
government says no, we will not give you any idea what's 
going to happen in this regard.  We're going to keep health care 
funding on the property tax base at least until 1996 and at that 
point we'll begin to reconsider. 
 
Well what people are saying to me, Madam Minister, is that 
1996 is probably going to be an election year and that your 
government's drive for a balanced budget will probably 
coincide with that, and that that might be an awful nice election 
promise at that time to remove it, and they don't find your 
reaction to what has been proposed to you by SUMA for 
instance to be altogether that reasonable.  And the two, one, 
and zero option I think is considered by many to be very fair 
because they recognize that you wish to plan and you don't 
want to do anything precipitous, but they don't understand why 
this is sort of a non-discussable topic until 1996 even though 
the premiss in this province has always been basically that the 
property tax should not fund health care, that that should be 
something that you and I pay through other taxes: personal 
income tax or E&H. 
 
The property tax base in this province is under too 

much pressure today with low commodity prices and a very 
stagnant economy to handle yet another property-based tax 
which you refuse to talk about until 1996. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well thank you for those comments and 
that question.  They're very interesting. 
 
I'm not going to stand here and debate the health care reform 
because I think you can do that when the Minister of Health 
comes in with her estimates.  And you have mentioned school 
education taxes and I'm not going to mention that either. 
 
But specifically to your reference about the 2 mill levy on the 
property tax.  I'm just going to . . . I know you know the history 
and I'm just going to put it on the record because I think it's 
important. 
 
Since we've had property taxation in Saskatchewan since the 
beginning of our province, revenues from property tax have 
gone to at least three major service areas, one being municipal 
services, the other two being education and health services.  So 
historically property taxes have funded at least those three 
services and they do as well in other provinces of Canada.  So 
there's never been, I think, any definitive resolution or 
statement saying that property taxes are exclusively for 
municipal purposes.  That's simply historically not true, and it's 
not true either from a jurisdictional point of view across 
Canada. 
 
With your reference to the change to the hospital revenue tax, 
when we eliminated the union hospitals and, through that the 
union hospital requisition and replaced it with the hospital 
revenue tax, there was a benefit to municipalities of $4.6 
million.  In other words, a difference between the first 
requisition and the 2 mill hospital revenue tax benefited them 
$4.6 million.  And I think people like to forget that but 75 per 
cent of the municipalities across Saskatchewan saw that as a 
benefit, so we're not downloading; in fact we're going in the 
opposite direction. 
 
I can recall when I was mayor and in municipal government, 
there were increases from the union hospital requisition going 
up all the time, and we have reversed that and we're going in 
the other direction.  And you say, well why can't we give an 
indication about what's going to happen in 1996.  And I think 
we have to stabilize the health care reform and make sure the 
district boards are operating before we start making any further 
moves.  And we'll do this through discussion with the 
municipalities and the people in the district boards and the 
Department of Health and we have made a commitment to do 
that. 
 
So we haven't said anything one way or the other.  We're 
working towards that goal and we realize there is pressure on 
the property tax and we would like to remove it as well.  But I 
think we cannot, in doing so, unnecessarily put in jeopardy the 
health care reform, and we have to at least give ourselves two 
years to stabilize that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may not 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

think that health and education have anything to do with what 
we're talking about here tonight, but I can tell you that the 
people that you're charged with representing are going to be the 
ones that have to collect the taxes.  They're the people that on 
my farm will say, member from Thunder Creek, I need more.  I 
need more for the Thunder Creek School Division.  I need 
more for the Thunder Creek Health District.  And I want it out 
of your farm.  I want it out of your hide.  That's what those 
municipal councillors are going to have to do. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, they see this as the thin edge of the 
wedge.  Because over the last two years they have felt quite 
disappointed in the way that they've been treated.  And they're 
also not stupid, Madam Minister, because they see the newly 
formed health districts as not quite being as efficient and 
progressive as what your Madam Minister of Health always 
tells us in here. 
 
Matter of fact when they see them starting to backslide and say, 
maybe I don't want to get myself elected until 1997, people in 
municipal government start to quake at the knees.  Because if 
you're going to leave these people unelected for a fairly long 
period of time dealing with the size of budgets and the size of 
challenges in front of them, and when they know that the 
provincial minister says, that's it, that's the cap, and they have 
launched off on something else, there's only one place that 
they're going to get it from. 
 
Because they don't have the power of provincial income tax.  
They don't have the power of provincial PST (provincial sales 
tax).  They've only got one power, Madam Minister, run a 
balanced budget and take it out of the taxpayer, take it out of 
the property base's hide. 
 
There isn't a health district in this province, Madam Minister, 
that I suggest to you, is not over its projected budget today 
from what they thought it was going to be.  And there was 
some recognition; the Minister of Health just threw another 10 
million bucks in the pot in order to get the lawsuit off.  She 
recognized what was going on out there and has thrown more 
money in. 
 
Now that $20 million projected saving from last year is pretty 
well eaten, I would guess by now.  And that's why people in 
municipal government realistically are antsy at your reluctance 
to say two, one, and zero, or at least some plan.  Just no, just 
hang on till '96 and we'll chat about it. 
 
Because if things don't go right, there's only one place it's going 
to come from.  Unless you can assure me tonight that there's 
another place, that your Minister of Health will have more 
money in the kitty, or somebody else will have more money, 
this thing is going to have to come from only one place.  And 
quite frankly, Madam Minister, until my farm does a whole lot 
better than it's doing right now there's not a whole lot more to 
give.  And there isn't a whole lot more in the business 
community to give. 

Our tax-free day doesn't start till July 8 in this province, you 
know.  We work longer than anyone else in Canada to get to a 
day where I actually keep the money that I earn.  My property 
tax cannot stand any more.  Why this reluctance to not work 
with them and set a deadline?  Set a sunset date on this thing 
and say yes, provincial health care is a provincial 
responsibility; it has no business in our day and age being 
involved with the property tax base, given the fact that that tax 
base is under so much pressure.  Why not do that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I don't want to stand here and debate 
the reforms and the budget of the Department of Health, and I 
think you'll have lots of opportunity to do that later. 
 
There are a couple of comments though that I think need to be 
once again stressed.  We are removing health care off property 
tax.  When your government was in there was $4.6 million 
more on property tax than there is today.  So we are moving 
towards a direction that municipal governments want.  Maybe 
not as fast, but it is impossible when you are dealing with the 
debt load and the kind of demands that we have, to move as 
quickly as everybody would like us to move. 
 
So I guess I would say again, we are doing what we think is the 
best possible under the scenario that we have been left.  And 
we are trying to work ourselves in a position that benefits all 
people of Saskatchewan, including those people who have 
property taxes.  So once again, we are moving in the direction 
that they want to go.  We are talking with them; we have made 
a commitment to continue the talk.  We have to watch what the 
health care reform process does and we want to stabilize the 
delivery of services for those districts, and we will monitor the 
situation. 
 
You made an interesting comment about the attitude of 
municipal governments towards election of district boards.  
And again, I think it should be put on the record that from the 
beginning of time until last year, health district boards were 
appointed, except they were appointed by municipal 
governments.  And now the problem with municipal 
governments is that they're not doing the appointing.  It 
happens to be the provincial government.  So I think it should 
be recognized that that seems to be a very hollow argument, 
that they support elections.  They didn't support elections -- and 
I can tell, you I was there -- they did not support elections of 
any health care boards as long as they were doing the 
appointing.  So I think those comments have to be placed in 
context with what you're saying. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, those people, by and 
large, at least in my Union Hospital Board, came from 
councils; they were elected councillors, councilwomen, by and 
large.  And I just know in my own community, the board costs 
of the Union Hospital in Moose Jaw last year were under 
$10,000 -- 9,600 I believe. 
 
The projected board costs since we went to the new 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

structure are projected, given the way that they're going, to be 
over $300,000.  Now I'll take my folks from the municipal 
councils who could run that institution -- that's all costs in, by 
the way, that was travel, meals, whatever -- at less than 
$10,000, compared to what is being projected there. 
 
And that once again, Madam Minister, I find your comment a 
little strange that you would say that about the folks that you 
are charged with representing.  The reason that they have these 
reserves and the reason they were able to do so efficient a job 
on Union Hospital Boards is because of their attitude, not 
because they were being authoritarian in the way that they did 
those things. 
 
Another area, Madam Minister, I wish to explore before we get 
down to detail is the question of SAMA, and the increases that 
are projected for SAMA funding because provincial 
government is once more downloading its responsibilities. 
 
To have percentages of over 200 -- I believe 250 is what they're 
projecting this year -- I find a little bit strange if you are being 
as cooperative as you claim, in your relationships.  Even in 
difficult times, when one goes 100 per cent, that's an awful 
leap.  Why you would attempt to go that far, Madam Minister, 
given once again the existing pressures out there and the fact 
that these people will have to make the difference up from only 
one place, and once again that's property tax, why such a large 
jump in one year? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well you're right, the issue of SAMA is 
very complex and there's a lot of history here that is interesting 
and it's an evolutionary state that we're in right now. 
 
Why the large percentage increase?  I guess when you're 
looking at percentage increases you have to understand where 
you are starting.  If you're starting at $10 and you go to 20, 
that's a 100 per cent increase.  So I think it's important that you 
use numbers that have some real meaning and not simply look 
at percentage increases because often times, I think, it doesn't 
tell the whole story. 
 
It is right now, I think, to say the least, an issue of great 
importance for municipalities and the delivery of assessment 
services has been something that we have been in discussion 
with them for at least two years.  The very first meeting that I 
had in December 1991 was with the SAMA board, together 
with SUMA, SARM and SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association). At that point in time, I warned them that there 
were going to be some fairly dramatic changes and we should 
work toward a resolution of the issue. 
 
And since that time I probably had dozens of meetings with all 
of the associations talking about how to resolve the problem, 
which really is: who should be paying for assessment services, 
and trying to establish a rationale or some principles upon 
which we can proceed. 

So when you say it's been a dramatic or drastic cut, it didn't 
come unannounced.  They were aware that it was coming for 
two years.  We announced early last spring that there was going 
to be a decrease and we had to work towards a resolution of the 
problem. 
 
I think, though, as you look across Canada, there are some 
interesting comparisons that we can make.  Alberta right at this 
point in time is moving towards full cost recovery on 
assessment delivered services.  In other words, they will be 
recovering from municipalities the total cost of assessment 
services that are provided on a provincial level.  Manitoba has 
always recovered 75 per cent of the cost of assessment services 
from the municipalities. And B.C. has recovered 100 per cent 
of assessment services by a levy of the property tax. 
 
Up until last year, Saskatchewan government paid 81 per cent 
of the total cost of SAMA.  And this year, we're paying 44 per 
cent of the total cost of SAMA.  Now yes, that has been a 
decrease.  There's no argument about that.  But I think it's based 
on a certain set of rationale and a certain set of principles that 
are defendable.  And we can proceed to talk about that if you 
like. 
 
I will point out to you, though, Mr. Member, that in the last 
year of your government you provided to SAMA $7 million 
and in the first two budgets that we presented, we increased 
SAMA funding up to $7.5 million.  So the first two years of 
our government, we actually increased the allocation over what 
you had provided them.  And it's only been due to the fiscal 
pressures of trying to get our deficit under control that we had 
to take the action. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, not only does the 
problem of the tremendous percentage change bother these 
people, but the fact that you chose to raid the revenue-sharing 
pool to come up with your portion this year is even more 
offensive. 
 
And it would have been one thing, I guess, if you had said 
because of the existing reserves we want you to pay a greater 
percentage, but I mean that really is a backhanded way to do 
things, I think, to go into that pool to come up with your 
numbers this year. 
 
And I mean SUMA clearly said to you, Madam Minister, that 
they were prepared to take a trade-off.  They were prepared to 
take a trade-off, and that was them assuming those SAMA 
costs providing that you got rid of the hospital revenue tax.  I 
mean they very clearly laid that out to you.  And I don't know 
why that type of a trade-off isn't acceptable to you.  I mean 
there's two points there that, quite frankly, people in municipal 
government find very offensive, and why those two things you 
would do and why you wouldn't even talk about that trade-off 
they find quite mystifying. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Interesting enough, there was a 
trade-off -- $4.6 million for three and a half.  We provided 
them with $4.6 million by virtue of us taking off the union 
hospital requisition.  They got a benefit 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

there of 4.6 last year.  This year there was a trade-off, and they 
are assuming $3.5 million on the field services portion of 
SAMA.  So there was a trade-off.  We've already provided 
them the benefit on the health care side, and this year we're 
asking them to pick up more of the cost on the assessment side.  
So the principle that you just talked about has already been put 
in place, and I'm glad you recognize it. 
 
On the issue of . . . I think you said something like raiding the 
revenue-sharing pool.  Again I think you have to go back to 
look at some data around SAMA and understand how we went 
about it so that it makes some sense to you. 
 
Saskatoon and Regina and Prince Albert and Moose Jaw have 
never made a contribution to SAMA as an agency.  Part of the 
reason for that was that they have their own field service staff, 
so in that regard they felt . . . and I gather your government 
when you set up SAMA felt that there was no reason or no 
obligation on them to make a contribution to SAMA although 
the rest of the municipalities did make a contribution to SAMA. 
 
When we looked at the changes that we were going to initiate, 
we divided the function of SAMA into two categories: one 
being the central services which is research and policy 
development and confirmation of assessment and data base 
management and so on.  We divided that and separated it from 
the field services, who are the people who work out in the field 
doing data collection and applying the manuals and developing 
the assessment rolls for the municipalities.  So we divided 
those two functions, and then we looked at the cost of them, 
and then we tried to attribute a fair and equitable formula to 
each side. 
 
So what we did was saying that Saskatoon, Regina and Prince 
Albert and Moose Jaw should make a contribution to SAMA.  
They should make a contribution to the central agency because 
that's where the manuals are developed, and that's the nerve 
centre and the data collection centre and the research and 
policy development centre of SAMA, and it's a very, very 
important central function. 
 
So what we did in order to be fair to everybody was to transfer 
$2 million from the revenue-sharing pool; 1.1 million coming 
from the urban revenue-sharing pool; 700,000 of which comes 
from the four largest cities; and 800,000 transferred from the 
rural revenue-sharing pool.  So that was the rationale behind 
the transfer of funds from the revenue-sharing pools to SAMA.  
It funds a central core agency which is a very important central 
core, functions to maintain the integrity of the database and the 
research and policy development of SAMA. 
 
The field services again are the issue of the requisitions at this 
point in time, and that's where you see the increase that the 
municipalities are talking about, and those are the services of 
the field staff who work on behalf of municipalities -- like they 
do in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert -- collecting the data 
and developing their assessment rolls. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I suppose, Madam Minister, if things 
were static, those arguments might make some sense.  But you 
and I both know that they're not.  I mean Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation estimates that over half of Saskatchewan 
communities have got quality or security-of-supply problems 
with water.  A lot of the water in Saskatchewan is substandard 
and getting worse, not better.  I've been in community after 
community where their discussions centre around trying to turn 
the urban jurisdiction over to the rural RM because they quite 
frankly can't handle the road, sidewalk and sewer 
infrastructures any more. 
 
So the argument you make would be fine in a world, I guess, 
like it was in this province in the 1970s and the early 1980s 
when those things all were going up, not going down.  But 
what we have is, quite frankly, deterioration, and we'll discuss 
some of that with the federal program which you folks also 
dipped into in a big way when urban government particularly 
was expecting more. 
 
I mean and it's not restricted to the small communities.  
Saskatoon and Regina are talking about . . . I think Regina 
presently is talking about closing five of their community 
swimming pools.  There are lots of hard choices being made 
across Saskatchewan because things aren't staying equal. 
 
I mean we were asking your colleague, the Minister of 
Environment, the other night about what kind of numbers did 
he attach to his area alone when you look at underground 
storage tanks, landfills, burning regulations -- all sorts of things 
that impact on municipal government. 
 
The rules and regulations have changed.  They've added 
significant costs, Madam Minister, that once again have to be 
picked up by the business sector and the property tax base.  It's 
not going up.  I know in your fondest dreams that's what you 
want to happen; you want it to go up but it's going the other 
way.  And it's not probably going to change itself in the near 
future, Madam Minister, not with the high tax policy that your 
government seems to believe is the way out of our problems. 
 
So when you have all of these jurisdictions with all of these 
pressures on them, I find it unrealistic that you would have the 
approach that you have had with SAMA because that very tax 
base which you say they've got which should be supporting 
assessment and revision of assessment, that very tax base is 
under a tremendous amount of pressure. 
 
My own community of Moose Jaw, I know people right now 
that cannot get a bank loan even though they have replaced the 
tankage in a piece of property and have all of the most modern 
monitoring devices available to them, and they still cannot get 
bank loans.  That taxpayer, Madam Minister, that person who is 
going to be reassessed by SAMA, probably isn't going to have 
the ability to even pay his property tax under those conditions. 
 
That's going on all over the place.  The minister told us 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

that they've identified 7 or 8,000 tanks in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Each one of those pieces of property potentially 
is in difficulty, one way or the other.  And that's the reality out 
there; I'm not making that up, Madam Minister.  Go to any 
town.  You know it.  Many of the good corner lots in those 
jurisdictions are in difficulty.  They are going to be reassessed. 
 
The big question will be: is it going to be on the home-owner?  
Is it going to be on the business community?  Everything I've 
seen says that it should come off of the business community 
and go onto the home-owner.  Politically that's very difficulty 
to do in any community because there's more home-owners 
than there are business people. 
 
Madam Minister, the costs that you're downloading, I think are 
unreasonable because of what reality is in so many 
communities.  They are no longer growing; they're shrinking.  
And that's why I think that you need to rethink this strategy.  If 
there are inequities, if there are communities that haven't been 
paying their fair share, maybe there needs to be a re-talking of 
this situation.  But a lot of places find this absolutely 
unreasonable given what they're staring at with reassessment 
and how to pay for their share of it.  They find it simply 
unreasonable given all of the things that are changing on them.  
And it isn't going up, Madam Minister, it's going down.  And I 
think that deserves some kind of a response to maybe all but 
maybe a dozen communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Interesting comments and there's all sorts 
of debatable points coming from them.  I'm going to restrict my 
remarks to not the issues on the environmental side but to a 
couple of comments you made. 
 
One, on the cost of providing water services, and we recognize 
that's an increasing and a very critical cost.  We are studying 
that and it's a concern to us for sure.  I will say though that for 
many, many years most municipalities in Saskatchewan didn't 
treat water as a commodity.  They felt that it was free and so 
they never really respected the idea of either water conservation 
or developing good water strategy. 
 
And what we have now is many municipalities who are very 
reluctant to look at charging reasonable water rates, or sewer 
rates, in order to provide good quality service.  And this is 
something that's not unique to Saskatchewan.  It's something 
that's going probably all across North America, is a need to 
recognize a true value of water.  And we haven't done it in 
Saskatchewan and it's one of those adjustments -- perhaps an 
attitudinal adjustment -- but certainly a financial adjustment 
that's coming. 
 
I guess what we're talking about is the ability to pay for water 
through some user fee or some cost-recovery process.  I think 
it's not only on the backs of property taxpayers, it's on the 
backs of whoever uses water in our society.  And it should be 
appropriately applied so that there is fairness in it.  It's not just 
property owners who use water, it's everybody who is a 
resident of some community in Saskatchewan. 

(2000) 
 
And we're working with communities to try to develop a good 
water strategy and try to help them analyse both their needs and 
their costs, and to develop a long-term water quality and supply 
strategy. 
 
So you do talk about them making hard choices and it's right 
and they're difficult decisions.  And we've gone through that 
here. 
 
I can tell you, as much as I would like to, I cannot isolate 
municipalities from tough decisions.  It's a fact of living in 
Canada today whether you're living in Toronto or Halifax or 
Melfort or Choiceland, the same thing applies.  Every 
government budget is under stress.  Everybody has to try to 
reduce their expenditures, make those tough decisions.  And 
again, as much as I would like to say that we're going to put 
municipal governments in a cocoon and shelter them, it is 
impossible to do. 
 
They do have other avenues to raise money.  Their property tax 
is not their only avenue of raising funds.  There are other ways 
that they can raise funds and many of them are doing it and it's 
on a user-fee or cost-recovery basis.  And we have examples all 
over Canada on that and we can look to our neighbour to the 
west and they can certainly show us some ways for municipal 
governments to find appropriate methods for funding some of 
their services. 
 
But you made one statement there that I would like to correct.  
Don't confuse reassessment with assessment because I think 
that will get us into all sorts of unknown territory.  The 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency is a core 
agency that manages the assessment functions of 
Saskatchewan.  When you're talking about changes or shifts in 
taxes or changes in assessment values, that has not happened 
yet and I think it would be wrong and misleading to bring that 
into the discussion at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm 
surprised that you wanted to talk about water projects tonight 
given the history of your home community and some of the 
things your government has done.  If that's the criteria, I 
suspect most people in the province will say, no thank you, 
we'll look after our own water because, I mean, your Melfort 
pipeline, it's an absolute disaster. 
 
And that's another example of what people are saying to you, 
Madam Minister, is that you talk about delivering potable water 
to Saskatchewan communities and then you come along with 
this nonsensical tendering policy of cherry-picking your way 
through a pipeline with union-only preferences, you know. 
 
My colleague, Mr. Martens, was in your community yesterday.  
And he says you go out of town and there's a big pile of mud 
where all the leaks are from this piece of pipeline that you 
interfered with, quite 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

frankly.  You didn't go to the lowest tender and now we've got 
a mess on our hands. 
 
We've got business people all over your community that are out 
money.  And that isn't the type of project, Madam Minister, that 
will make people feel good about getting involved with you 
doing water projects in their town.  That's a very poor example.  
And as long as you're going to tie this union-only tendering 
policy to government projects, and you cherry-pick them at 
will -- for whatever reason; we're not quite sure but we have 
suspicions -- then, Madam Minister, nobody is going to want to 
play that game with you.  It's simply unreasonable. 
 
And I've received lots of letters in the last two or three weeks, 
as I'm sure your staff have, from both rural municipal councils 
and urban municipal councils, complaining about your 
tendering process specifically, and requesting that it be 
clarified, and that you allow low bid -- low bid -- to work in 
any projects that they're involved in. 
 
So, Madam Minister, can you give the assurance, maybe 
tonight, that any future water projects done in Saskatchewan in 
conjunction with towns and villages and rural RMs will not be 
cherry-picked with this policy?  That it will be a low 
_bid policy.  And that the provincial government will no longer 
become involved in that sort of thing.  Could you give that 
assurance tonight? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Interesting comments again.  I will say 
that I was mayor when the city of Melfort decided that they 
would go into the pipeline with the Water Corporation, and we 
developed an agreement on which the water rates of Melfort 
would increase over the three years.  And that agreement is in 
place, and whatever problems the pipeline is having will not 
result in any change in the cost of water to Melfort residents.  
And whatever problem the pipeline is having is not a result of 
the tendering process anyway.  But I'm not going to get into 
that debate because we're supposed to be here to discuss our 
estimates and that will be probably something that you will 
want ask the minister responsible for Water Corporation. 
 
In regards to assuring municipalities on the process we'll go 
through, we sit down with the municipalities -- the Water 
Corporation and municipalities that have a project -- and we 
talk through whatever the tendering process is.  And they will 
be comfortable when we go to tender any project that they are 
involved with, that it is done in a fair and reasonable manner. 
 
And that is our approach to it -- that it's done through dialogue 
and discussion.  And the point that the tenders are advertised, 
the municipalities will be aware of all the cost, and that they are 
fair and reasonable and they'll be comfortable with that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, if they were comfortable 
they wouldn't write all those letters.  I mean they've been 
coming in in fairly large volumes.  They don't like it.  They 
don't like the process at all. 

They want a very clear policy defined. 
 
It's okay for you to say, well that's somebody else's 
responsibility, we're here to discuss my estimates.  But, Madam 
Minister, you're involved in it, you represent these people.  
That's the oath you swore, is to represent these people at the 
cabinet table.  That's your section, they're your responsibility, 
and just because they interact with someone else you can't shirk 
that responsibility.  They very clearly in municipal government 
want to understand what the policy is, vis-a-vis tendering. 
 
And as we get into infrastructure and other things there are 
implications of involvement with the provincial government, 
and if they don't clearly understand at least where their minister 
comes from, the person that represents them at the cabinet 
table, then I think they have a problem. 
 
So as the Minister responsible for Municipal Government who 
I know has received dozens of representations from municipal 
government on this issue, I would like you to put your position 
on the table. 
 
And it's a very simple question: in projects at least involving 
municipal government, is low bid the policy or is it not?  That's 
what they would like to know, Madam Minister, whether it's 
union or non-union is inconsequential to them.  They want to 
know that you will be accepting low bid, all things being equal, 
and they all understand how those provisions work in 
tendering, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I'm glad you said that because I 
know municipal governments offer tenders all the time and it's 
not just the low bid that is always successful.  There's all sorts 
of other criteria that enter into it so I am not going to stand up 
here and say that the provincial government is going to always 
accept the low bid because I think that would be inappropriate 
and municipal governments themselves do not do that. 
 
I will say once again, on projects that are jointly sponsored or 
where there is a partnership between municipal governments 
and someone like the Water Corporation, we go through a lot 
of discussion and when we decide in the end that we will go to 
tender they are aware of all of the specifications that go into 
that tender call and they will have agreed to it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, there's been a recent 
example.  I believe my colleague who represents the Moosomin 
riding, there was just a court case, Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal, involving a firm from Moose Jaw and another one 
from Esterhazy on a water pipeline contract.  And the town was 
fined a very substantial amount of money for not taking a low 
bid.  And they went to the Esterhazy firm because it was a firm 
that was closer and they thought they'd get better service.  They 
were fined -- I believe it was over $30,000 -- because they 
didn't take low bid. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, that I think is fairly significant, 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

that if the judicial system, in dealing with municipal 
government, is that harsh with them, why you think that you're 
beyond that?  And as I understand the Melfort situation, that 
tendering process was all done and through, and then stopped, 
and then re-tendered. 
 
And people on city council there, I think, have expressed some 
concern to you about that process, Madam Minister.  I mean 
they clearly thought they understood the tendering process, but 
then it was stopped after it was done, and redone again with 
very little explanation of what you were up to.  And that isn't 
fair, Madam Minister.  And I don't think you are any different 
than what has recently occurred in the courts of Saskatchewan 
on this issue. 
 
I mean clearly the taxpayers in those communities are saying to 
their representatives: we want low bid, all things being equal.  I 
don't know why you won't assure communities tonight, people 
you represent, why you won't emphatically say that the policy 
of the Department of Municipal Government is this or that, not 
this sort of nebulous, wishy-washy, well it might be, it might 
not be, got-to-see-who's-involved type of attitude, because they 
don't appreciate that, Madam Minister.  This province can't 
afford that kind of tomfoolery. 
 
So once again why don't you . . . And if it's some other kind of 
preference, just say it -- this is the preference -- because the 
minister responsible for SaskTel's having a tough time.  He 
says one day that it's Regina and Saskatoon only and it's over a 
certain amount, and then all of a sudden a million-dollar 
contract shows up in Moose Jaw and he has to come back and 
apologize to the legislature because he didn't get it straight the 
first time. 
 
What I'm asking you, as far as your department goes, is what is 
the policy?  People out there expect it.  Could you try it again, 
please, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well first of all, the Department of 
Municipal Government doesn't set the policy for the 
Government of Saskatchewan.  So I think it would be unfair of 
you to ask me -- in the absence of I think a lot of discussion 
with a lot of the other Crowns and a lot of the other 
departments -- to stand here and say the Department of 
Municipal Government is going to have this policy. 
 
The government has said they do have a policy.  One is that we 
prefer local people to be hired.  That was the case in Melfort.  
We stated a very definite preference that 50 per cent of the 
people who worked on that pipeline had to come from the 
Melfort area.  And so one policy is for local people to find 
employment. 
 
We have also said very clearly that we want our policies, or our 
tenders, to reflect both equal opportunity for people in unions 
and people who are not in unions.  And our minister 
responsible for SaskTel has said that and many other ministers 
have said that.  We would like to see a policy that provides 
opportunity for both union and non-union people to find work 
in Saskatchewan.  And I don't see why you 

find that offensive.  I think it's a reasonable approach and it's 
fair.  And it certainly benefits most people who are both in the 
skilled trades and the labourers in Saskatchewan to have such a 
policy. 
 
In regard to the incident at Moosomin, again I would say that 
when a tender call goes out -- from my knowledge from being a 
mayor and being somewhat involved before -- you have to 
advertise specifically in that tender call what your parameters 
are.  And unless you say upfront that not necessarily the lowest 
bidder will be approved, then I guess you leave yourself open. 
 
But most municipal governments know very clearly how they 
should advertise and the specs are very clear in their own 
contracts.  We do not impose any government policy on any 
municipal government, and when they are advertising for their 
own contracts they can advertise them in any way they want.  
And that includes whatever will be taking place under the 
municipal infrastructure program.  These are their projects.  
The money is transferred to them.  And through the process 
that they've always had in place, they will be responsible for 
the tender call and the approval of the projects. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, it is important.  I don't think 
there's a community or an RM in this province that, if you went 
out there and sat down with them and asked that question, you 
wouldn't get the same response.  They believe that in this day 
and age, given the amount of hurt that they are going through in 
particular, that they would not want low-bid tendering. 
 
And I do find it offensive, Madam Minister, because your 
political party, in 1991 . . . and I remember it very clearly, my 
third election campaign -- listened to you go around this 
province condemning the tendering practices of the previous 
government. And maybe they weren't up to snuff. 
 
But I'll tell you what.  The political price was paid because 
your Premier, your member from Riversdale, clearly said that it 
has to change.  We've got to go to low-bid tendering.  The 
province has to change the way the tendering is done and there 
were a lot of commitments made. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, maybe there is no truth in advertising at 
all.  Maybe as far as you and your political party go those are 
something that you trot out every four years and you don't live 
up to it.  But the fact is the member from Riversdale said it 
even in the leaders' debate, I believe, that there has to be 
low-bid tendering, open and honest.  That's the only way that 
we're going to rectify the situation, put the confidence back in 
the business community.  You're going to get people confident 
again that they can bid on government projects or 
government-related projects and there isn't going to be trouble. 
 
And now we have the situation cropping up all over 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

the province, one that you are directly involved with.  And I 
would guess if you asked the question today in the city of 
Melfort in the council that you used to sit on: what do you 
think the policy should be? My guess, the answer is low-bid 
tendering, all things being equal. 
 
And they don't care, Madam Minister, if it's union or 
non-union.  They just want to know that the bottom line means 
something, not that you can run a tender and then say:  oops, 
don't like this; going to stop it; going to rewrite it; going to help 
my friends out a little; and then have the mess that you've got 
up there in your home community.  I mean if that thing's 
pressure tested by next August it'll be a wonder.  It really will 
be. 
 
So, Madam Minister, it does matter.  And you did promise that.  
You promised it very, very carefully, I would say, in the '91 
election campaign.  And that's why I think at some point you as 
the minister responsible for these people are going to have to 
interject on their behalf and say that this is wrong-headed and 
we're going to have to do things differently. 
 
Madam Minister, of the municipal infrastructure program that 
has been significantly changed since its first announcement, 
your provincial government has committed some of the money 
that municipalities thought was going to go to them to capital 
projects.  Madam Minister, can you identify those projects, and 
are they wholly in the provincial realm, or are some of those 
joint municipal-provincial projects on the capital side?  And I 
believe you have moved -- is it? -- $28 million of the federal 
funding to provincial projects?  Can you give us an indication 
of how much of that will be solely provincial and how much 
will be joint provincial-municipal? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To your first question, we are still 
working with the federal government.  As you know there's a 
partnership here, and there's a process where we will go 
through with our partners, and there are discussions going on 
on the criteria for eligible projects.  And at the appropriate 
moment the minister responsible for the intergovernmental 
affairs will announce the projects as they are listed for what we 
would call provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Specifically on the municipal side, which you see in our 
municipal budget a total expenditure for this year of $21 
million, I can tell you how that is broken down.  I can't tell you 
at this point in time what projects will be funded through that 
because to a large extent the criteria for those projects will be 
determined by municipal governments themselves. 
 
And as far as the rural municipal governments, I would expect 
that all of it, 99 per cent of it at least, will be applied to the grid 
road system.  So we are still working with the federal 
government to finalize some details around the project 
allocation and designation. 
 
In regard to the municipal side, municipalities will be receiving 
$28 million for their own projects which are labour intensive 
and improve the municipal 

infrastructure.  Of that $28 million, $10 million comes from the 
provincial government and is applied to their share of the costs, 
and $18 million comes from the federal government.  The rural 
municipalities receive $10 million, and there is a $4 million 
intermunicipal allocation.  That provides us with a total of $42 
million, half of which will be spent this year, which is $21 
million, and that's what's shown in our estimates. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, could you explain to me 
once again that you have . . . you said $21 million blocked out 
for municipal government under this.  You're contributing 10 
million to urban projects, as I understand it.  There's 4 million 
for intermunicipal projects, and 3 million for northern water 
and sewer projects.  Now those are all part of the $21 million 
that you said you identified in budget.  Could you explain it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The projects that will be for northern 
municipalities will come out of the provincial side which are 
not part of the $21 million that I talked about.  The reason for 
that is northern municipalities have not the capacity to 
cost-share those projects, and so in that regard the provincial 
government will be the major partner with the federal 
government in that infrastructure project which is northern 
water and sewer.  So that $3 million is not part of what you see 
in our budget in Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, when your Minister of 
Finance, amongst others, went to Ottawa and renegotiated this 
agreement differently than what most people . . . and I can only 
take the word of the folks that I listen to at SUMA who 
explained this program to their delegates, an explanation which 
I noticed you took great exception to in a written form a few 
days later.  But as they explained this particular change that 
have occurred sometime in December, I believe, someone must 
have had an inclination of what they needed to go for when 
they wanted the program changed to commit it to certain 
projects. 
 
Now that number that was arrived at here, where you got your 
extra share, has to be aimed at something, Madam Minister, 
and I'm very curious as to what it was because, you know, why 
wasn't it 29 million or 26 million?  But somebody had a pretty 
good idea, I would think, on the capital side what they were 
aiming at.  And I would just like to have an indication -- as 
would most people in municipal government -- exactly what 
those projects might be where you needed the extra money that 
should have gone to municipal government, but you needed 
more instead.   What some of those things might be? 
 
The number was arrived at and it wasn't arrived at foolishly.  I 
know the deputy minister of Finance quite well.  He's a very 
good civil servant and I'm sure he had his priorities and his 
needs well lined up when those negotiations took place.  And a 
lot of people would like to have some indication of the type of 
thing that probably is either ongoing, or has been built, or is in 
the building process, that that money is going to be dedicated 
to.  There must be some explanation that a 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

minister has to the amount that was cherry-picked out of that 
program. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well again this program is under the 
jurisdiction of the Provincial Secretary, but I will provide you 
with what information I know.  I think first of all you have an 
over-active imagination about some scheme that's been cooked 
up here.  It was not like that at all. 
 
When we first heard of the Liberal government's 
platform -- which was to create jobs through some 
infrastructure program -- we said at the very beginning, and we 
said after the election, that we were not contributing new 
money to whatever program was announced because we had no 
new money.  This program was not part of our balanced budget 
plan and therefore there was no way that we could come up on 
short notice with new money to put in to match any program no 
matter how good, or how worthy, if that was a way we had to 
approach it. 
 
First of all again I want to say that it took a fair amount of 
trying, and thinking, and rearranging to come up with $10 
million that we did come up with, because from the very 
beginning we said we could not match any funds, we had no 
money.  And it was through a process of looking very carefully 
through a number of budgets that we finally said, well we can 
come up with what we think is fair, which is $10 million. 
 
I want to go back to their original FCM (Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities) program because this is where the 
problem starts.  FCM and municipalities across Saskatchewan 
believe that this was a program -- and I am well aware of what 
the basis of this program was, what the model was -- which 
was: a third, a third, a third.  But this is not the FCM program, 
this is a platform promise of the Liberal government that they 
delivered, and it has taken many changes along the way. 
 
And from the very beginning it was apparent to anyone who 
listened to the Prime Minister or who was campaigning for the 
Liberal government that there was going to be something 
different than what the FCM model was, which is to say that 
there were other projects that could be included other than 
strictly municipal government projects. 
 
So it is far beyond municipal in nature; it is community-based 
projects.  Like you I'm sure have heard that Quebec has decided 
to build a convention centre.  Every jurisdiction across Canada 
has approached this program in a different way, and 
Saskatchewan is not unique in what we are doing. 
 
So there are two things.  The program that came down from the 
Liberal government is not the FCM program.  It is not limited 
to strictly municipal infrastructure.  It's broadly based, includes 
many other type of projects besides water and sewer and streets 
and roads.  And second, we have contributed more than we 
thought we could by virtue of making some changes internally 
and trying to come up with $10 million over the course of two 
years, which was a very difficult process 

for us to go through.  But we did the best we can, and we did it 
in order to support and enhance delivery of those services at the 
municipal level. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you can't have it both 
ways, and as much as you and I both would probably like to 
kick the federal Liberal government, the fact is that you got 116 
million extra in transfers.  Just the changes in the federal 
budget the other day are going to pad your wallet significantly.  
We don't know on that issue of senior citizens what the total 
impact is, but you had 30 million budgeted that you probably 
are going to shave all to heck.  We've had changes to capital 
gain that's going to put some more money in your pocket, and 
there's been further changes that were identified yesterday on 
write-offs that banks and credit unions and others have done for 
small business and farmers that you'll probably benefit again 
from. 
 
I mean on one hand you plead poverty and that, you know, you 
and the federal government work this out.  But when you start 
getting windfall revenue, does the program change?  No.  
Because I'm sure you've got other places that you're going to 
put that. 
 
So you can't have it both ways, Madam Minister.  When you 
get extra funds from the federal government, as you have done 
three times now -- three times since budget day, three 
identifiable items -- that there is extra revenue because the 
provincial government gets a portion.  That's the way it works 
here -- gets a portion of federal tax payable. 
 
You have not changed your attitude at all on the infrastructure 
program.  And I think rightly so.  Those people expected and 
believed your commitment to job creation, your commitments 
that you made to renewing particularly urban infrastructure in 
this province. 
 
(2030) 
 
And unfortunately I have a very good memory, Madam 
Minister, and I remember the '91 campaign almost like it was 
yesterday and all of the promises that were made about what 
you were going to do in urban Saskatchewan, you know.  No 
more food banks, and welfare rolls would drop and there would 
be all of these jobs around and the tax base would be so vibrant 
with all of these changes, you know, and we were just simply 
going to do away with a little waste and management and it 
would all change around. 
 
Madam Minister, you have directly benefited three times 
tax-wise from the federal government decisions of last week.  
Don't you think it would be appropriate maybe to sit down with 
the folks from municipal government and perhaps see if there 
aren't better ways now that we could provide some of those 
jobs in employment and education.  Get those 78,000-plus 
people off of the welfare rolls, rebuild some of those 12,000 
jobs that were lost since your government took office, fix some 
of the water and sewer and roads in some of our cities rather 
than sort of using this blunt-edged approach of "me first". 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

Now do you admit, Madam Minister, don't admit that you've 
benefited from the federal budget?  If not, why wouldn't it be a 
good place to perhaps fulfil some of your promises to 
municipal government by making some changes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I really don't want to get into any 
acrimonious debate here . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I wasn't acrimonious. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I know.  Well you made some interesting 
comments that you have a very good memory starting in 1991.  
And it's really too bad that your memory doesn't go back 
further than 1991.  I mean if it did then you would understand 
the dilemma that we face.  You sort of have this wall that starts 
at 1991 forward and you wipe out everything that went on for 
nine years before that.  And I wish we could.  It would be 
wonderful if we could come in and say, whatever happened in 
the '80s doesn't matter; we'll wipe the slate clean and we'll go 
on from here.  So I wish your memory was a little longer than 
starting in 1991.  You wouldn't have the problem that you have. 
 
I know you don't like to be reminded of this and I really am 
trying to be very gentle and kind about it, but if we decided 
that, oh, there might be windfall revenues and we've got to go 
out and spend them right now, then we'd be in the same 
position that you were in for nine years -- spending the money 
before you got it.  We haven't seen any windfall revenues from 
the provincial government, from the federal budget, from the 
federal budget -- we don't think they're there. 
 
We see, in fact we anticipate, some very tough measures that 
we're going to have to cope with, some being the changes in the 
UI, the Unemployment Insurance program, and a lot of other 
ones.  So there is no windfall for anyone in Saskatchewan from 
the federal government and there's nothing that we can share 
and it would be very, very foolish and I understand your 
psychology because you did it for nine years.  You run out and 
say, we think we're going to have money here so let's go out 
and spend it.  Well we don't do that.  We're very careful and we 
want to make sure that we have met our targets. 
 
I know you're getting excited and you don't like to be reminded 
that there was life before 1991 and I don't blame you.  If I were 
sitting over there, I would get annoyed every time somebody 
brought up that there was something happening in 
Saskatchewan between 1991 and 1982.  It's really unfortunate, 
but again, there is no windfall revenue from the federal 
government that we can share with anyone and we don't have 
any money at this time that shows us that this budget gave us 
any benefit whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, the simple fact is that you 
have received more revenue and you fail to admit it.  And I 
guess most people out there who read the newspaper, watch the 
news, find that as a very strange approach for a cabinet minister 
to not admit that there's been a changing picture and that you 
have 

benefited from it. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, you are expecting the property tax base 
in this province to pick up a tremendous load.  You are also 
expecting that property tax base to create most of the 
employment and the jobs in this province; I heard your 
Minister of Economic Development say that.  So you have a 
direct tie-in with what the Minister of Economic Development 
says because you're the person in charge of that tax base and 
the well-being of that tax base will determine a lot of things in 
this province. 
 
Madam Minister, how in the world can you honestly say to 
municipal government we can unilaterally change this program 
to our benefit for our capital projects when we in turn have had 
our revenue picture totally changed from when we did this. 
 
We've probably got -- I don't know -- 30, 40, $50 million, and I 
remind you that kind of money was nothing to your party in 
1986 when I had to campaign against 7-7-7.  God knows what 
that would have cost.  I mean 7 per cent mortgages for seven 
years on 70,000 bucks.  I mean that's what we were up 
against -- unbelievable stuff. 
 
So I mean, I don't think you want to get back into that.  We 
could have quite a historical lesson in election promises.  But 
anyway what we're talking about is 1994, 1994, a program of 
$57 million with significant changes made from the provincial 
government to municipal government. 
 
Now I just simply ask you the question: don't you think that 
municipal government and working with them would be a very 
efficient way of creating jobs and employment, and fixing 
some of the problems that we've got as to compare to probably 
some other areas that you could spend money in?  Would you 
agree with me, at least on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well there's a number of ways I can 
approach that.  Again you talk about the provincial government 
all of a sudden receiving some bag of money, and it's in your 
dreams.  You know you have to get into the real world here.  
And you go back and say, well you campaigned on something.  
Well the fact of the matter is you were the government, and we 
have $843 million interest payment that we have to make 
because you were the government.  And I can't ignore that even 
though you want to go back and talk about your politics, about 
campaign promises; I don't think they're relevant at all. 
 
What is relevant is that we have a deficit and that we have a 
debt, and we're trying to work through that.  And what is 
relevant and is the truth -- there is no windfall bag of money 
coming from the federal government, and we have provided 
you with information about that, time and time again, and you 
simply refuse to acknowledge it. 
 
You ask me to agree with you that municipal governments are 
tremendously important to the economy and to the economy 
and to the life of the 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

province of Saskatchewan, and they are, and we've said it time 
and again.  And we are working with them and we will 
continue to work with them. 
 
But I want to say again that water and sewer and streets and 
sidewalks are not the only thing that makes municipal 
government alive.  Communities have a lot of other community 
infrastructure that is equally important to water and sewer and 
streets and roads.  And its a holistic approach to this 
infrastructure program that we've taken in order to expand 
services and the quality of services throughout a municipality, 
and not limit it to just some very narrow topic and exclude 
other things that are equal and very important as well. 
 
So you want me to acknowledge that municipal governments 
are efficient.  They provide tremendous economy for the 
province of Saskatchewan.  I agree with you on all of those 
things but I disagree with you that there is money from the 
federal government that we haven't calculated on.  It is not true 
and it's not there and I won't spend it until I see it. 
 
Second of all, we believe that the infrastructure program can be 
many things and in order to make sure that the province, all 
communities of Saskatchewan, will receive the best benefits, 
we're making it as broadly-based as possible. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, I believe one or two more 
questions and then one of my colleagues is going to ask you a 
few questions.  There has also been a reduction, I believe, in 
the level of monies dedicated to fire protection this year.  
Would you explain to me what that percentage is and how 
much that is?  Because this also is of significant concern to 
communities out there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In our budget, there was a reduction in 
the part of the government, our department, that deals with 
public safety.  Now public safety has a number of different 
divisions within it: fire safety, building standards, emergency 
measures, and inspection services are all part of this division 
that has seen a reduction in allocation this year. 
 
Now first of all I want to make it clear, because some people 
sometimes don't always understand the relationship of these 
services to municipal governments, municipal governments are 
responsible for such things as protective services including fire 
services and building standards.  What our department does is 
provide advisory services or organizational services or support 
services to the communities, but we are not responsible either 
for fire services or for building standards.  They have their own 
municipal organizations that deal with that. 
 
What we have done this year as we have reduced the size of 
government, and this has been one part of it, is we have made 
an effort to integrate parts of our public safety divisions to 
provide less duplication and more efficient service.  So we have 
reduced the number of people that we have working in some 
divisions.  We have reduced by one our fire inspectors, and we 
have 

reduced by one someone working in our building standards 
division.  But in doing so we have also tried to integrate those 
two so that there is no vacancy or there is no lack of service or 
lack of coverage, but what we have done is try to make better 
use of the personnel we have to cover a broader spectrum of the 
services. 
 
So again I want to make it clear that we haven't vacated this 
field.  Our responsibility is advisory and supervisory roles and 
not direct delivery of any service, and in an attempt to 
streamline government and make it more efficient, we have 
integrated and amalgamated some of these divisions within our 
department. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you for the explanation, Madam 
Minister, but I also asked for the percentage drop in 
commitment and the total numbers.  From last year to this year 
I understand there is a drop in commitment of over 5 per cent.  
I think it's higher than that and I just wondered what those 
global numbers were. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The drop in dollars specifically is 7.5 per 
cent, but again it's because we have brought together various 
divisions of the public safety service so that it's more efficient, 
but yes, we have reduced our costs there.  And I think the 
public has been asking us as government to find a more 
effective and efficient way of delivering all of our services and 
this is part of that approach. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 
just wanted to go back to the low bid tendering for a moment 
and ask you a few questions about that. 
 
Does your department have a distinct policy with respect to 
tendering, and could you tell us what it is please? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't tender specifically from our 
department.  Our department is very much an advisory and 
supportive service agency, and we don't tell municipalities 
when they decide to tender how they should tender.  But 
internally, we do not tender because we do not have capital 
projects.  We have minor advertising contracts and minor 
communication contracts, but they are contracted to the central 
agency and again it's done on a government-wide policy.  So 
internally we do not control any tendering policy, and 
externally we do not tell municipal governments how they 
should tender either. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- You may not, but on the other hand, Madam 
Minister, you and your government definitely has a tendering 
policy or lack thereof.  And I'm wondering whether your 
department subscribes to the tendering policy as set out by the 
provincial government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I guess I overlooked one major division 
of our department which is housing.  And we 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

have a partnership, CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation), and through very long-standing commitments 
between Sask Housing and CMHC, our policy in Sask Housing 
is low tender. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Low tender whether it's non-union or union? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- CMHC is our partner with Sask Housing, 
and it has always been a very simple low tender. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- So then it's your opinion that that should extend 
to other departments as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, what I have said is that CMHC is the 
75 per cent partner in delivery of social housing, and in 
construction of social housing.  And through a long standing 
under . . . you know agreement that we have with the federal 
government, one component of that is that we are very simple 
and very direct -- low tender. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- So it's good enough for your department, but it's 
not good enough for the rest of the government departments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm sorry.  I don't know if I caught your 
question.  I was going to refer you to the RM's tendering and 
where we cost-share with rural municipalities on construction.  
Again it's on low tender. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Well I'm pleased to see at least one department of 
this government has that policy, Madam Minister, and I'm 
wondering whether you have any influence in cabinet as to 
whether that should be the policy broad-based throughout the 
government. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- On that issue I have said -- and I repeat 
again -- we have an issue where we want to have all contracts 
fair and open to both non-union and union personnel, and we 
have not specifically said that there was any union preference 
at all.  We have said that we want all workers in Saskatchewan 
to be able to compete on all projects, and we have not excluded 
anyone. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- You've not excluded them is true, Madam 
Minister, but what you have done is set out a number of 
contracts throughout Saskatchewan that have a union only 
tendering preference right into the tender call.  It has that in it, 
and I'm wondering why in your department it's good enough to 
have a tendering policy that is low bid and not in other 
departments -- fairly simple question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Again I can give you a very easy answer.  
We have a partner in Sask Housing who represents the federal 
government, and through agreement, we have always applied a 
low tender policy.  When we provide money to municipal 
governments and they do the tendering, they exercise their 
prerogative, and they exercise the prerogative of low tender.  
So when we have partners, we are quite 

agreeable to sitting down with them and discussing the issue, 
and this is the information that I gave you.  Municipal 
Government, through partnerships, will provide money to 
municipal governments for whatever contracts they want, based 
on low tender.  And through CMHC and Sask Housing, the 
tenders have always been accepted as low bidder. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, so that's when you have a 
partner, you have to have a policy of low tender.  I want to talk 
about when you don't have a partner.  What do you do when 
you don't have a partner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- But our department doesn't tender on 
contracts by itself.  We are not a department that has a lot of 
capital construction.  When we are advertising for any 
advertising contracts or publishing contracts, it's done through 
the central agency of government and it's done under the policy 
set by that central agency.  So as a department we don't have 
any tenders that are not done through partnerships.  So as a 
department we have no specific policy that applies only to 
those projects that we fund. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- So are you saying that you're forced to, by these 
other partners, only allow tendering that is to the lowest bidder? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I don't think it's forced at all.  I think that 
through agreement, we have established certain principles and 
we're willing to discuss those with them, and we've always 
done it this way.  I don't see any issue here that is debatable.  I 
guess I fail to see the point of your questioning. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Well the point is really quite simple, Madam 
Minister; on one hand your department believes and agrees to 
tender on a policy that is of the lowest tender.  And yet the 
government as a whole, which you're a member of cabinet, 
doesn't seem to subscribe to that same policy, Madam Minister.  
And I'm wondering how you jibe your department with the rest 
of the departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Again I will say, as I have about three 
times, the government policy has been to tender and make sure 
that contracts are open and the specifications are clearly laid 
out in those contacts.  And as far as who can find employment 
in those contracts, we have said they're open both to union and 
non-union contractors.  We have not specified one way or the 
other, but we do like to see a mix of union and non-union 
people working on contracts. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Open, yes I'll grant you that, Madam Minister, it's 
open to anyone to tender.  But in the tender calls it specifically 
says that there is a union preference to those tendering calls.  
And what I'd like you to address is the cost situation.  Is there 
or is there not a policy that your government has undertaken 
that doesn't seem to take into account the cost side of it? 
 
You look at it and you'll say it's union or non-union, it's open to 
anyone. And that's fine, I have no problem with that 
whatsoever.  The official opposition has said 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

time and time again, we have absolutely no problem with that 
whatsoever.  But if there's a cost associated with that, then we 
have a problem with it, and I'm wondering whether you have a 
problem with it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I have tried to answer this 
question relative to the Department of Municipal Government 
and the partners we have, and questions pertaining to union or 
non-union contracting as a government as a whole should be 
directed to the Minister of Labour and I would ask that this line 
of questioning be saved until the Minister of Labour is here. 
 
When we're talking about the Department of Municipal 
Government I've been very clear with our partners how we 
have approached this subject and I will repeat it again, but I'm 
not going to get into the issue of trying to debate or provide 
information that is in another department and under another 
minister. 
 
If you want to discuss this subject then I would ask that you 
wait until the Minister of Labour is here and discuss it with 
him.  I'm quite willing to talk about contracts under the 
Department of Municipal Government and I've given you the 
information relative to that and I will not want to answer any 
further questions pertaining to the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I'm 
afraid we're going to have to deal with it.  You don't seem to 
want to talk about it but I would like to talk about it and I think 
the people of Saskatchewan would like to hear your views and 
your government's views on this, Madam Minister.  When it 
costs more, there's a problem.  The taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
believe there's a problem. 
 
Is there or is there not no distinct policy and is there or is there 
not any place within your purview, within your ministry, where 
there is contracts that have a union only preference and you do 
not have partners?  Is there any at all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Contracts under the Municipal 
Government are those contracts that I've discussed that we have 
in a partnership with either the rural construction of rural roads 
or with CMHC on housing, and I've already told you the policy 
and I will not discuss government policy that is under the 
jurisdiction of the Minister of Labour. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- So, Madam Minister, you're saying that there isn't 
a single thing that's under your purview where there is an 
opportunity for there to be a contract that you don't have a 
partner that forces you to be the lowest cost bidder, to accept 
the lowest cost bidder? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It took quite a 
while for you to get to that but that's the point that we were 
trying to make.  I wonder if you, Madam Minister, would 
provide us with a list of all of the revenue sharing for all of the 
communities that you 

deal with. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At this point in time we haven't made the 
allocations to the urban governments because we're still 
discussing with SUMA the details of the formula, so we can't 
give you at this point in time the breakdown and the allocation 
municipal government by municipal government.  The same 
applies to rural municipalities.  We have done some 
preliminary work but we can't give you at this point in time 
specifically the allocation that they will be receiving in their 
revenue-sharing grants. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, that 
I think disturbs me a little bit, that you're asking us as a 
legislature here to grant you a certain sum of money and yet 
you can't tell us where it's going to be spent specifically, 
community by community within your department.  Is that the 
case? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I would say that I think the people 
that should know first would be the municipalities who are 
receiving it, and I understand that we're here to talk about the 
pools and the allocation and the formula from the pools, but we 
haven't finished talking with the SARM and with SUMA about 
the change in the formula, so I can't at this point in time give 
you a breakdown on how that looks specifically, municipality 
to municipality.  We're still working on it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- So you want us to give you essentially a blank 
cheque to decide what it's going to be after the fact.  We'll grant 
you a certain amount of money and then you'll say to the good 
folks in Kindersley, for example, your revenue sharing is going 
to be cut back, I don't know, 50 per cent, 10 per cent, 100 per 
cent.  And somehow or another, I suspect the good folks of 
Kindersley are going to be quite concerned if I come back to 
them and say I have no idea what revenue-sharing grant is 
available to you folks, but we gave her a global budget and 
she's going to do with it whatever she sees fit. 
 
Madam Minister, I can't help but wonder about that process a 
little bit and I wonder if you could shed a little light on it.  
What can we tell the people in these communities?  What 
would you suggest? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well, a couple things.  I would suggest 
that we're here to try to provide you with as much information 
that we have at this point in time. 
 
Right now we're in discussions with SUMA and SARM about 
the formula.  As soon as that formula has been defined and 
we're able to apply it to the pool, we'll provide this House with 
the breakdown on the allocation for every municipality.  We're 
not trying to hide anything, but you're asking a question before 
we have developed the answer.  And I think it is important that 
the municipalities be given a chance to know the allocation 
before we divulge it in the House.  And we're more than happy 
to provide you with the information as soon as we have 
finished our discussions with the municipalities and they are 
made aware of those allocations. 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

(2100) 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Well what would you suggest we do this evening 
then, when we want to talk about this?  Do you think we should 
move on and adjourn, or . . . Like I'm not all that thrilled about 
the idea of granting certain sums of money to you without 
knowing where the money is going to be spent.  And I don't 
think the people in the communities that I represent, or other 
communities in Saskatchewan, would would want us to grant 
you a global budget without knowing specifically what the 
revenue sharing is for those various communities. 
 
So I guess I seek your guidance, Madam Minister.  What would 
you like us to do this evening?  Do you want us to continue on 
with something else, or shall we talk about this for the rest of 
the evening?  What do you think? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I'm not sure what kind of guidance 
to give you.  You probably wouldn't take it anyway. 
 
But we have a pool in the budget, we have a formula.  There 
are certain factors in the formula that change from year to year, 
and we are still working through those factors and we can't give 
you, at this point in time, the specific numbers. 
 
Now there's lots, I guess, of other issues.  You may be satisfied 
with them and I'm pleased about that. 
 
I don't know what you want to do with the rest of this evening, 
but I will provide to you and to this House, as soon as we have 
finished the formula and the allocations and provided that 
information to the municipalities, I will give it to you, and that 
will take probably another couple weeks.  So at that point in 
time you will have the information. 
 
Right now I think we're voting on the estimates on the pool that 
you see under the book that you have in front of you.  That is 
my understanding of how this process goes.  You are provided 
with the estimates for 1994 and '95.  You have before you the 
revenue-sharing pools. 
 
I think there is a formula that has been in place for a number of 
years.  When we have all the information in about the formula 
and the variations from the formula that happen from year to 
year, we will be able to sit down and provide the specific 
allocations.  I can't do any more than that at this point in time.  
And as I said, I understand the subvote is on the pool; it's not 
on the specific allocations. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Yes I understand that, Madam Minister.  You're 
asking us to grant you a certain sum of money for the 
operations of your department, and yet you won't give us 
specifics about those expenditures.  And you're saying to me 
that, well maybe it will be available in a couple of weeks, but 
grant us the money, the overall budget, and we'll decide after 
that. 

I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, does it have anything to 
do with the concern that municipalities are expressing with 
SAMA, or what are the factors that are holding this up?  What 
are the reasons that you haven't been able to come to us this 
evening and say, here's the formula; here's all of the 
information.  Do it.  You know, here's what our plans are; 
here's specific plans. 
 
You're asking us quite a lot, I think, Madam Minister, as 
members of the legislature to grant you a certain sum of money 
without knowing the details of that money, which was available 
incidentally last year when we asked.  I recall standing and 
asking -- you gave it to us, no problem, everything was fine and 
dandy, we went through it. 
 
And now you're asking us, well that worked pretty good last 
year, but somehow or another it isn't good enough for this year.  
I don't know, Madam Minister.  I wonder if there's any 
explanation further to this that you could provide the people of 
Saskatchewan with this evening to make them feel comfortable 
about the fact that you came here relatively unprepared. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well you know, I can tell you that last 
year you voted to allocate $101,027 under this subvote to 
municipalities.  This year, it's a hundred and sixteen thousand, 
two hundred and ninety-seven thousand dollars..  So last year 
you voted that subvote.  This year that's a number for this: 
subvote MG03. 
 
Now you want specific formula allocations.  We are working 
with SUMA and SARM to develop them, and you know, you 
want us to hurry the process along.  The year end doesn't occur 
yet.  The year end is March 31.  We are ahead of where we 
were last year, and we will provide the information as quickly 
as possible.  And I don't apologize for that.  In fact I think your 
remarks are quite offensive. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, it offends us that you 
would come here this evening and not be able to tell us what 
the communities in our constituencies are going to get with 
respect to revenue sharing.  That offends us, Madam Minister, 
and I think it would offend most mayors and town councils 
around the province when you're asking us to grant you a 
certain sum of money and you don't have the information. 
 
So supposing, just supposing -- it isn't going to happen, Madam 
Minister -- but just supposing we granted you the full budget 
here this evening, went through it, granted you the full budget.  
We find out a couple of weeks from now that a community in 
my constituency or the member from Wilkie or the member 
from Morse is going to get zero.  What recourse would we have 
at that point to come back to you and say that isn't good 
enough, on behalf of that community, Madam Minister? 
 
We would have none, no recourse whatsoever, because it 
would already have been decided, we would have already 
granted you the money and away you go on your merry way.  
Madam Minister, that isn't good enough.  You're going to have 
to come up with 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

some kind of a very, very good explanation I think, for the 
people of Saskatchewan as to why the reasons that this is being 
held up before we're going to grant you anything. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all, a minute ago I was talking 
about some numbers in the budget and I want to correct that 
because I think I said 101,000.  I meant $101 million last year 
and $116 million, just so it goes in the record and it's clear.  We 
haven't cut back. 
 
Again there is a formula.  The formula that we use both for the 
urban and the rural has many factors in it.  We sit down with 
the two associations and go through it.  And we are working as 
quickly as possible.  We're ahead of where we were last year 
and I can assure you there is no community in Saskatchewan 
that gets zero. 
 
There is a base grant and there's a per capita grant and there's 
conditional grants on the rural side.  And we are working with 
them as quickly as we can.  But I will say to you that the 
allocation should be made known to those municipalities before 
we make it known to you.  We deal with the mayors and the 
reeves and the councils across this province and our obligation 
is to provide them with the information as quickly as we can. 
 
And we are doing that and it takes the cooperation of the 
municipal organizations to allow us to come up with those final 
figures.  So we're not holding anything up.  We are working 
with them.  We're coming down to the final allocation and 
maybe it's . . . the fact is that you don't have anything else to 
discuss tonight and maybe it's not us that are unprepared. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I assure you we have lots to 
discuss with you this evening and probably into subsequent 
days, Madam Minister. 
 
I wondered if you could tell us and categorically . . . this 
evening tell us whether the problems that you're having with 
SAMA, and getting the municipalities to accept what you're 
planning on doing to SAMA, has any bearing on the reason 
why you don't have the information this evening. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Absolutely no bearing whatsoever.  There 
are two distinct, different issues.  And I will tell you that we 
have been in discussion with both SUMA and SARM, and 
SUMA has passed a resolution in support of the direction that 
we're taking with SAMA.  And they are two distinct issues.  
One does not reflect on the other and it has no bearing 
whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you could then tell 
us . . . give us the formula that you're using and all of the 
factors associated with it.  You said there's a number of factors 
associated with the formula.  I wonder if you could just explain 
to the people of Saskatchewan this evening all of those kinds of 
things that go into your deliberations when you're making up 
your mind. 
 
Is there things like one community seems to have a  

better infrastructure and therefore they don't need that kind of 
money?  Or is there political considerations?  Your member in 
Rosetown's got a bit of a problem politically, maybe you can 
help fix it up a little?  Or how exactly does that work?  I 
wonder if you could explain that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Okay, we will give you some basic 
factors in how the urban revenue-sharing pool is allocated.  I 
want to, for the record, let you know though that we can't 
allocate any money until you vote in approval of this. 
 
Now there is a basic grant under urban municipalities that goes 
like this:  population of zero to 149 receives 2,700; population 
150 to 290 receives an amount of 3,300; population 300 to 499 
receives a basic grant of 3,700; a population of 500 to 3,999 
receives a basic grant of 3,500; and population of 4,000 and 
over receives a basic grant of $3,100. 
 
On top of that there's a per capita grant that is provided after we 
have the numbers that are provided through the Saskatchewan 
health insurance registration program so that we can come 
down to find a very close approximation of the number of 
people living in each community.  So that is one problem we're 
having, is trying to develop the census on which we provide the 
per capita grant. 
 
There also is a foundation grant that is an equalization grant 
that assists communities with relatively smaller assessment 
bases to those that have average or larger assessment bases.  
And there has been, in years past, a safety net that has also been 
a factor in the urban revenue-sharing grant formula.  At this 
point in time we haven't got all of those numbers in, and that's 
part of the reason that we can't give you today the allocations. 
 
Under the rural revenue-sharing formula there are two grants.  
One is the unconditional grants, and the other is the 
conditional.  Under the unconditional grant formula there is an 
equalization grant and one to organized hamlets. 
 
The distribution formula is a basic grant, and it applies to the 
estimated cost of providing services such as roads compared to 
municipalities with the financial capacity to provide such 
services.  There is a conditional grant which is specifically 
targeted to construction and maintenance for the designated 
road network.  I guess in a general way that is the way the grant 
structure is formulated, and it's on that basis that we are 
working to allocate specific amounts to each municipality. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 
wonder if you could tell us what the cost implications to the 
municipalities in Saskatchewan will be with respect to the 
SAMA changes that you're giving consideration to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- All right.  Now there are a couple of 
numbers I can give you here.  The increase that the 
municipalities will have to pick up over last year on 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

the SAMA requisition . . . on the field requisition, because you 
have to separate field requisition from the core services.  The 
increase on the field requisition this year is $1.5 million, which 
breaks down to .6 of a mill on a provincial scale.  An average 
increase of .6 mills is the increase that is relative to that change, 
or that $1.5 million that they will be responsible for.  That's the 
increase. 
 
A provincial increase on the requisition this year of $1.5 
million, equivalent to .6 mills. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Can you give us a breakdown of that municipality 
by municipality? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can't give you that breakdown 
municipality by municipality because the formula is determined 
by SAMA.  They have a formula that they use to send out their 
requisitions and we are not privy to it. 
 
They develop it internally and SAMA is not a part of 
government.  It's an agency that exists independent at an 
arm's-length of government, and they develop their formula 
and through that they send out their requisitions to 
municipalities.  So we have no influence over that.  All I can 
tell you is the global figures. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So costs 
essentially to the municipalities as a result of the changes that 
you're proposing to SAMA are going up, revenue sharing is 
going down, and in fact we don't even know what the revenue 
sharing is going to be.  Is it safe to say that then, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Again I'll give you some figures overall.  
There was the 8 per cent reduction in the urban revenue-sharing 
pool amounts to $5.1 million.  The 8 per cent reduction in the 
rural revenue-sharing pool amounts to $3.7 million.  Our 
reduction to SAMA funding, which is the 1.5 that I just talked 
about, is added in.  So the total reduction from provincial 
Consolidated Fund on the transfers to services from municipal 
governments is $10.3 million.  But what we do is subtract from 
that the benefit that they got by the change from the union 
hospital requisition to the 2 mill hospital revenue tax.  So from 
that 10.3 deficit we now subtract 4.6; so the overall change in 
transfers in services, including SAMA and including the 
revenue-sharing pools, is $5.7 million which equates to about 
1.8 mills. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- And can you tell us what 1.8 mills average to the 
average taxpayer of Saskatchewan means? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well 5.7 million is, translated to an 
average taxpayer, would be between 10 and $15 on their 
property tax. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, just one last question, and then 
I'm going to defer to one of my colleagues.  I wonder if you can 
give us some kind of assurance or 

some kind of commitment this evening as to when you will be 
bringing forward the revenue-sharing grants to the 
municipalities in the province.  And I think until you can give 
us that assurance, Madam Minister, I see no reason why we 
would want to give you essentially a blank cheque. 
 
I wonder if you could give us a time frame, a definite time 
frame as to when this will take place, so we can go back to the 
communities who are calling us about their revenue sharing and 
wondering what that's going to be.  I wonder if you could be 
definitive and tell the people out there in Saskatchewan this 
evening when they will know what their revenue sharing is 
going to be.  And then at that point, I'm sure there will be a 
great deal of discussion generated as to why it's fair for one 
community and not fair for another community or whatever. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Again when you vote on the subvote, that 
allows us to allocate the numbers, specifically from one 
municipality to another.  We will have those numbers available 
to the municipalities before the end of the fiscal year.  We will 
however provide those numbers to the municipal government 
councils before we provide them to you.  Our obligation is to 
provide them with the information as quick and as early as 
possible, and we will do that at the earliest opportunity.  If you 
have municipal councils calling you, refer them to us and we 
will allow them the information that we've provided you, that 
we're working with the associations finalizing the formula and 
we will provide for them as quickly as possible the final 
allocation. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You have an 
obligation -- you're correct -- to those people but you also have 
an obligation to this legislature and to the members of this 
legislature to be held accountable, Madam Minister.  And you 
don't seem to recognize that you do have that obligation.  And 
I'm saying to you, Madam Minister, that we don't feel very 
good about the fact that you are willing and feel it's perfectly 
acceptable to ask for a global budget, Madam Minister.  I just 
want for you to give us the commitment that you're going to 
provide to this legislature before you're going to ask us further 
to give you money. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The pool is fixed.  You have before you, 
on the subvote, the allocation of the pool.  There is a formula 
that has been in place for a number of years.  There are some 
variances within the formula from year to year that we're 
working through, and again you cannot vote specifically on 
each allocation that we give to each RM or to each municipal 
government.  You vote on the pool of money that we have here. 
 
There is a formula that you can ask us about how it's 
developed, but we are not going to arbitrarily because you 
come to this Chamber and say, I want you to provide 
Kindersley with more money . . . I cannot do that.  It is based 
on a formula that is equal and agreed to by all municipalities.  
And once that formula has kicked in there is no discussion here 
at the House 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

except to say, this is how the formula applied to Kindersley as 
opposed to somewhere else. 
 
So you're not voting on the specific allocations to each 
municipal government.  I will give you the factors as far as I 
have them on the formula and the criteria on the formula, on 
the factors that influence the formula, and I can tell you what 
the pool is going to be, but when it comes down to voting, 
you're not going to vote on the 560 different allocations that go 
across this province to the 560 municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- That's true, Madam Minister, but what we can do 
is hold you accountable for what your actions are towards those 
communities.  If you decide to exact political revenge on one of 
the communities in Saskatchewan that you don't particularly 
like, Madam Minister, we will hold you accountable.  That's 
what this process is all about, Madam Minister, it's holding you 
accountable for the spending that you decide is going to go to 
each municipality in Saskatchewan.  And until you can get it, I 
think you're asking us for something that we're not prepared to 
give. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I don't know whether to laugh or 
cry.  There is no way that any . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Try both, see which works. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, right it might.  We are not about to 
penalize any community because they happen to be 
communities that have you as a representative.  I mean that is 
irresponsible.  We go on a formula every year, as you have 
done.  We don't manipulate any formula. 
 
It applies equally and fairly to everybody across Saskatchewan 
and it doesn't make any difference to me whether you represent 
Kindersley or whether one of our members represent 
Kindersley; the formula is the same and whatever the numbers 
come down to, the numbers come down to.  And they're not 
influenced in any way by political thought so I don't know what 
it is that upsets you. 
 
I can tell you that this is the earliest date -- the earliest date in 
10 years that we have been providing information to 
municipalities.  I can remember when I was a mayor, we waited 
past June before we knew what those municipal allocations 
would be. 
 
This is the earliest date that these estimates have ever been 
brought forward and we are working as quickly as possible 
with municipal governments to provide them with their 
allocation.  The pressure is not coming from them.  The 
pressure is from you and it's for your own political reasons.  It 
has nothing to do with the good or the quality of life of any 
municipality in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, you say that there isn't any 
political interference and when you were the mayor, you didn't 
get it for the long time and all that 

kind of stuff.  Well I also remember you howling from the 
highest building in Melfort that there was political interference 
and now you're saying to us, there isn't any political 
interference because I'm running the show now, folks.  That's 
what you're saying to the people of Saskatchewan tonight, 
Madam Minister, and it isn't good enough. 
 
And for that reason, we're not going to grant you the money 
you're asking for tonight, Madam Minister, until you do 
provide it so the the people in communities around 
Saskatchewan, if they think there is political interference, the 
way you thought there was political interference when you 
were a mayor, Madam Minister, will be able to stand on their 
high horse, the same way you did then and they will now hold 
you accountable. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well that is absolutely untrue.  There was 
never any comment made by me when I was mayor about any 
political fix on any revenue-sharing formula.  You are, sir, 
making an incorrect statement and I am very offended by it.  I 
did not do that when I was mayor and I do not intend to do it as 
a minister. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- So there's no political considerations whatsoever 
you're telling the people of Saskatchewan tonight.  I don't think 
they believe you, Madam Minister.  I most certainly don't 
believe you and I don't think the people of Saskatchewan will 
believe you either. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I can't work with your paranoia.  I 
mean you see the world one way and I see it another.  Maybe 
you'll be pleased to know that Saskatchewan will be the home 
of the next Grey Cup.  Would that please you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 
Minister, perhaps you've never heard but even paranoid people 
have enemies.  Madam Minister, when it comes to collecting 
taxes in the municipal system, it's my understanding that as a 
person pays their taxes, that is divided up equally based on the 
tax arrears both for the RM and for the school division, and it's 
proportioned out based on what the mill rates of each are.  Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's right. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If that tax 
goes into arrears, how is it then divided?  If my taxes are due 
January 1 but I don't go in there until January 2 to pay them and 
I only pay 50 per cent of my tax owing, how is that divided? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The mill rate applies the same on arrears 
as it does on taxes owing in the current year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, it would then be 
divided . . . Let's say the RM had a 50 per cent mill rate and the 
school division had a 60 per cent, it would be divided up 60:50 
then would it? 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Again, the municipal mill rate and the 
board of education mill rate compose the total tax owing on a 
piece of property, and when it's in arrears that mill rate applies 
the same as the current tax owing.  And there is no system that 
I know that deviates from that.  And when it's collected as 
arrears, the appropriate portion is transferred over to the board 
of education. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What if I 
walk in on January 2 and I owe a thousand dollars in taxes, and 
I pay $500.  How is that allocated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's allocated proportional to the mill rates 
that apply against it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I go into my RM office 
on January 2.  And my municipal taxes, I owe $500.  And my 
school taxes, I owe $500.  And I say to my RM administrator, 
I'm paying $500 on my taxes, and I want that all allocated to 
my RM taxes.  Can I do that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, you cannot. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, there seems to 
be some discrepancy in this then because my RM administrator 
informs me that I indeed can do that, that I can allocate my tax 
dollars when I'm in arrears to the municipality or to the school 
board or whatever portion I wish to allocate to each. 
 
In discussions with Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 
they tell me the same thing, that people can direct their taxes 
once they are in arrears.  Is that the case, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That certainly isn't the policy that urban 
governments work through, and I will check that out.  It has 
been, as far as I know, in legislation that there has to be a 
proportional allocation, if the total taxes aren't paid, divided 
between the school taxes and the municipal share. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you have a large 
number of officials in here.  I haven't counted them, but you 
must have at least 15 of them.  Surely someone amongst all 
those highly paid help can supply you with the answer on this.  
It's not that difficult. 
 
My rural administrator knows that you can allocate your 
funding once you're in arrears.  The SSTA says that's the case.  
The SSTA says they have approached your government about 
this issue to get it changed.  And you, Madam Minister 
responsible for the municipal Act, seem to know nothing about 
it.  How about your highly paid help?  Do they know anything 
about it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I think there is a couple issues here.  
There was for many years a discussion with the SSTA about 
discounts, and whether discounts can be 

applied specifically to the municipal portion or the education 
portion.  And the SSTA is still uncomfortable with the 
legislation around discounts.  I'm told that if you're paying your 
current tax bill in instalments you can designate where you 
want that instalment to go. 
 
So if you come in and your taxes are due and payable on June 
30, and you only have half or a quarter of what your total tax 
bill is, you can designate it, if you choose, to the municipal 
portion.  But if that goes into arrears . . . By the end of the year 
you have to pay the total.  If that goes into arrears and you have 
not paid the education portion, then when you pay your next 
bill, it immediately applies to the part that was in arrears from 
the year before. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, if someone was 
continually in arrears on paying their taxes, they could then 
allocate whether they wanted their tax dollars, the limited 
amount that they're prepared to pay, to go either to the RM or 
to the school division.  I asked the SSTA about this, Madam 
Minister, and I clearly asked them about arrears situation; was 
it possible to direct your tax dollars either to the RM or to the 
school division.  And their response was, yes it is possible.  
They are having some concerns about that because on the rare 
occasion it is happening and they would like to see something 
done about it, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I would like them to contact us 
because I think there is an inappropriate interpretation of the 
Act.  If you do not pay your total taxes owing in one year and 
you pay taxes the following year, the amount that you pay has 
to be applied first to the arrears from the year before. 
 
So there is no way that you can continue to pay only the 
municipal portion and not the school board portion because if 
you only pay the municipal portion this year, you go in to pay 
your taxes next year, what you are paying your taxes on is on 
the education portion that was left unpaid from the preceding 
year.  So there's no way that you can escape not paying both the 
municipal and the education tax even if you are in arrears. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, let's drag this out 
a little longer.  I'm not one year in arrears; I'm three years in 
arrears.  This person can then turn around and take their tax 
dollars in a limited fashion, they're not paying the whole thing, 
they're going to pay a portion of that first year's arrears.  Let's 
say they pay half of it and they say, I want that tax dollar to go 
to my municipality.  They say, nothing for the school division, 
just the municipality.  And I'm told from two different sources, 
Madam Minister, that they can indeed do that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, they cannot do that, and I think that 
those administrators should get in touch with our staff and be 
provided with the accurate information on the interpretation of 
the legislation. 
 
It is very clear that when taxes either are current or in 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

arrears, that the year that they're in arrears must be paid off 
before you can apply anything to the current year, and you 
cannot go from year to year to year neglecting to pay the 
education portion of your property tax. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, in my 
discussions with the SSTA, they said they have approached 
your government about this very issue and as yet there has been 
no resolution to it.  I don't know who they were talking to but 
obviously whoever it was has not talked to you, Madam 
Minister, about it or you would know the answers to this. 
 
Madam Minister, it's your department that is in charge of the 
legislation that allows municipalities to collect the property tax 
both for the RMs and the urban municipalities and for the 
schools.  It's your department, Madam Minister, that is 
responsible for this and you should be responsible to know 
what these concerns are. 
 
When a large body such as the SSTA is having a tax problem 
dealing with the legislation of your department, Madam 
Minister, I would think it's incumbent upon you to have looked 
into that situation when they had approached the government 
and to have found out the answers.  They told me that they had 
approached the government looking for legislation to plug this 
loophole, a loophole in the law that allowed people to escape 
paying the education tax by going into arrears and then 
directing their tax dollars. 
 
Now if that is not the case, Madam Minister, then I think 
perhaps it would be incumbent upon you to make that law clear 
to all RMs and all RM administrators and to the school 
divisions that their tax dollars could be collected fairly. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- With all due respect, sir, I think you are 
misinterpreting what you have been told.  There has been a 
discussion for many years about abatements and discounts and 
exemptions.  And there were some municipalities that were 
abating or discounting or exempting business tax -- now we're 
talking about business tax, we're not talking about property 
tax -- and the discussion I've had with the SSTA has been about 
that issue, is where a municipality chooses to exempt or abate 
the municipal portion of business assessment, thereby obliging 
or not obliging, wherever way you choose . . . (inaudible) . . . 
making them pay education. 
 
Now that's the issue that we have discussed with the SSTA.  I 
talked to the SSTA executive two weeks ago and it was around 
the issue of discounts, abatements and exemptions on business 
assessment.  And no one that is in our staff has ever heard an 
interpretation the way that you have.  And I believe, sir, that 
you are mixed up in what you are saying here as far as what the 
municipalities are doing or the advice that you've been given.  
It is not on property tax and it is on business assessment and it 
has to do with the issue of exemptions and abatements. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, in my 
discussions with the SSTA, never did they mention business 
taxes and never did they mention discounts to me on this issue.  
They clearly said arrears, Madam Minister, and I realize you 
were not there but that was the word they used, was 
arrears -- not business taxes, not discounts, but arrears where 
someone had not paid their taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, will you look into this issue to find out 
whether or not that loophole exists and whether or not anyone 
is taking advantage of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we will look into it.  I will tell you 
that neither me or my officials have had that discussion with 
anybody in SSTA or any school board, but I've had the 
discussion on the other issues and I know it very well.  And 
there have been legal challenges in court on that issue.  So if 
this is a circumstance that concerns people we'll be more than 
willing to clarify the legislation if it requires clarification.  But 
what I think is happening is there is an inappropriate 
interpretation of the Act. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How 
much arrears are there on the books for municipalities across 
this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have the number on the total 
arrears in the province.  It's somewhere, we think, below 10 per 
cent, but we're not . . . at this point we can't be accurate about 
that.  It's been fairly stable over the last number of years.  We'll 
get our officials to do some research and bring that correct 
information forward. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When you 
throw out a figure like 10 per cent, that's a rather innocuous 
number.  It doesn't mean anything to most of the people in 
Saskatchewan.  Could you give us an estimate within the 
nearest million of what a 10 per cent arrears on property taxes 
in this province would mean? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We'll provide you with that information 
after we've done our research. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:48 p.m. 
 
 


