




















































Hansard: March 14, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 837 

 March 14, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just noticed sitting in 

your gallery is a former mayor of the town of Wawota, Mr. 

Ron Choquette, and I'd like to welcome him and ask the 

members to join with me in welcoming Ron to this Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a guest 

in the west gallery, Mr. Jim Prokipuk.  Mr. Prokipuk is a 

constituent of mine who is in town taking some courses and 

dropped in to see what it is we do here.  Have a good time 

while you're in Regina, Jim. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Royal Canadian Legion Dominion Curling Championships 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of our members an 

event that it is taking place in my constituency in the town of 

Unity.  The Royal Canadian Legion Dominion Championships 

will be played in Unity. 

 

This is a national event and it takes place at the Unity 

Community Centre curling rink.  Mr. Speaker, we will be 

hosting nine rinks from the different provinces throughout 

Canada, and the games will be opened by Lieutenant Governor 

Sylvia Fedoruk, which we're really pleased to have Her Honour 

there. 

 

The dates of this event, Mr. Speaker, is from March 19 to 25.  

And we certainly expect a great turnout judging from the 

interest that's been shown so far, and the Legion are already 

scrambling to find accommodations for the visitors they expect.  

And needless to say, Mr. Speaker, we welcome everyone to 

come and enjoy this very good standard of curling. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Commonwealth Day 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today is 

Commonwealth Day, a day when 50 member countries of the 

Commonwealth pay tribute to 789 years of parliamentary 

government -- a system of government that began when bold 

representatives of the English people suggested to King John 

that they preferred to have a say in the affairs of their country at 

the time. 

 

Well since the signing of the Magna Carta, parliamentary 

democracy has over the centuries been refined and has adapted 

with the times.  And to this day, parliamentary democracy 

continues to be effective and the most liberating form of 

government available to people around the world.  It is the 

legitimate and important role of political parties that 

differentiates ours from other forms of democracy, like our 

neighbour's to the south, and it is that reality that allows people 

with less wealth and power to influence public policy and 

political opinion. 

 

As we acknowledge our ongoing commitment to parliamentary 

democracy here today, Mr. Speaker, I remind members of 

Winston Churchill's famous statement: 

 

 No one pretends that democracy is perfect or all-wise.  

Indeed it has been said that democracy is the worst form of 

government except all those other forms that have been tried 

from time to time. 

 

Favourable Reports from Bond Rating Agencies 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan have received some good news in the past few 

days.  Reports that tell that their hard work, sacrifice, and 

perseverance are paying off.  The reports of the bond rating 

agencies on the financial situation of the province are in and the 

reports are uniformly favourable. 

 

For instance, Nesbitt Thompson reported: 

 

 In an environment which recently has been characterized 

by downward pressure on provincial credit ratings, we 

believe that Saskatchewan may well be the first Canadian 

province to be upgraded in the present economic cycle. 

 

Burns Fry said: 

 

 We expect Saskatchewan to continue to hit its targets and 

therefore view the provincial credit rating outlook as 

positive. 

 

Canadian Bond Rating Service has received its ratings outlook 

for Saskatchewan, and they are very stable.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

Ted Chambers, the director of the Western Centre for 

Economic Research, said: 

 

 It seems to me that Saskatchewan has achieved a dramatic 

reduction in its deficit without a lot of fanfare . . . It was 

not done in a disruptive way. 

 

It is reality, Mr. Speaker, that we must pay attention to these 

bond rating agencies and I'm pleased that these reports are 

positive.  At any rate, the credit goes to the people of 

Saskatchewan and all third parties receiving funding from 

government, including boards 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

of education, post-secondary educational institutions, municipal 

governments, and hospital districts. 

 

I wish to thank all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Canadian Taxpayers' Federation Deficit 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to express 

my empathy with an organization that is currently undergoing 

some financial difficulties.  As you may know, the Canadian 

Taxpayers' Federation, the national parent of the Association of 

Saskatchewan Taxpayers, recently announced an operating 

deficit for this fiscal year of $60,000. 

 

The members of this side of the House know very well, Mr. 

Speaker, how hard it is to operate with a deficit and still offer 

necessary programs and services.  I can only hope that the 

measures the taxpayers' federation takes to eliminate its deficit 

are neither harsh nor unreasonable. 

 

I would also hope, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers' federation 

will take action to prevent further deficits by perhaps amending 

its by-laws to prevent such occurrences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the 

federation to seek advice from the Hon. Minister of Finance.  

As you know, she has had a great deal of success in 

overcoming deficits, some even bigger than those of the 

taxpayers' group.  I'm sure her advice to them would be both 

wise and practical.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Wildcat Mushers Marathon 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this past week I had 

the honour to drop the flag and to attend the awards banquet for 

the longest dog-sled race in Canada, the Wildcat Mushers 

Marathon.  The 450-mile trail covered snow and ice and uphill, 

downhill, through open and through the beautiful forest areas in 

the Hudson Bay area. 

 

We must congratulate all the entrants in this year's race.  This 

year's winner and returning champion, coming in at 2:40 a.m. 

Friday morning, was Jim Tompkins of Christopher Lake; 

second, Roy Guignon of Stony Plain, Alberta at 6:24 a.m.; and 

Brian Wiese of Solway, Minnesota came in at 9:28 a.m. Friday.  

Ed Jenkins, the local musher, was fourth in a very respectable 

showing.  Carole Danku of Prince Albert was the first lady 

musher and came in fifth. 

 

I would like to commend the race organization, officials, 

volunteers for their hard work and dedication from grooming 

and marking trails, servicing checkpoints, to keeping the public 

updated as the race progressed.  Congratulations to the mushers 

and congratulations to the community of Hudson Bay for 

hosting this world-class event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

Palliative Care Week 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I am humbled today to rise in 

recognition of a historic event in Saskatchewan, and that is the 

first ever Saskatchewan Palliative Care Week being observed 

this week for the first time. 

 

I also want to pay tribute to all those men and women across 

our province who work in the field of palliative care.  And I 

especially want to recognize the work of Dr. Zach Thomas, the 

president of the association, for his tireless efforts on behalf of 

those who are terminally ill. 

 

Yesterday afternoon I had the opportunity to visit the palliative 

care unit at the regional centre in Saskatoon St. Paul's Hospital 

and to have a tour by the volunteer coordinator, Carol-Lynne 

Zapf.  They're doing wonderful work up there for the 

terminally ill.  We all need to be thankful for that. 

 

I urge residents of Saskatoon to visit the display in Market Mall 

this week, and better yet, to go up to the palliative care unit at 

St. Paul's Hospital and to visit the unit and see the work of Dr. 

Srini Chary and Nancy Guebert who are the team leaders up 

there. 

 

This is a wonderful complement to the work of health reform 

here and if people want more information, contact me or the 

Saskatchewan Palliative Care Association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Workers' Compensation Board Rates 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased today 

to present the first question in our ongoing direct democracy 

initiative.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, the initiative gives 

members of the public the opportunity to participate directly in 

the question period. 

 

This question comes from Margot Bussiere from Vonda, and 

she asks: Mr. Premier, I want to know, regarding the Workers' 

Compensation Board, why are companies penalized when we 

make a mistake in estimating wages for the year?  It is an 

estimate at the board's request. 

 

Our 1993 year greatly improved after our estimate was 

submitted.  We created two jobs and therefore the estimate was 

inaccurate and we were penalized $66.  Why are you penalizing 

those who create employment in our province, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The system employed by the 

Workers' Compensation Board, Mr. Speaker, has not 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

changed in many years, and certainly was in place when 

members opposite were in government. 

 

The system is that each industry has, in a way, a fund of its 

own.  And if the claims are higher than the fund, the rates are 

increased.  If the claims are lower than the amount in the fund, 

the rates are decreased.  Each industry sets its own rates. 

 

And we might advise the correspondent that without knowing 

more detail, it's hard to comment without knowing the nature of 

their business and so on.  But each industry sets its own rates 

by its claims experience, and my discussions with the workers 

and with the business community suggests that that's the way 

they'd like to keep it.  They would like to have a high degree of 

accountability here so that those which do improve their safety 

record get the benefit of it; those who are careless take 

responsibility for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Trans-Canada Highway Repairs 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, minister, 

you can be assured that every word will go to your constituent 

for their evaluation, and I'm sure they'll be disappointed to 

know that you consider estimates to be the bottom line at the 

end of the year where facts are reality. 

 

I have another question, Mr. Speaker, and this question comes 

from Terry Schmaltz from Fox Valley, a small town in my 

constituency: Minister, or Mr. Premier, when are you going to 

finish four-laning the Saskatchewan section of the 

Trans-Canada Highway.  It's bloody dangerous.  The whole 

country knows we're the highest taxed citizens of the province 

. . . of any province, rather.  Can you at least show some results 

of this stifling taxation and rebuild and double-lane the No. 1 

Highway? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the . . . I 

think it's the hon. member for this question.  I'm not quite sure 

who it's from, but presumably on his own behalf he's asking. 

 

The answer to the question is very simply this: the member 

knows that we inherited, two and a half years ago, a horrendous 

financial situation which was the cause of the former 

administration of which this member is currently a party to.  

And I think that the person who wrote you understands full 

well the circumstance.  I'm getting some of these Mr. Premier, I 

want to know, questions as a result of your advertisements. 

 

And why I say that the questioner must know is because the 

one that I got a few days ago said like this: Mr. Premier, how 

you can tolerate this ridiculous, picayune nit-picking the Tories 

are flapping their gums over, considering the financial 

destruction they have unloaded on this province.  They should 

be quietly hiding under Parliamentary desks acting like dust 

bunnies.  Ellen Pegg. 

 

And I think that this answer that Ms. Pegg wants me to give to 

her, which I'm very pleased to provide to her, is the answer 

which I would give to the hon. member to provide to the people 

in his constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Cataract Surgery Waiting-list 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm glad that the 

Premier is in an answering mood because Mrs. B. Cox from 

Melfort would like you to answer and give your opinion: why 

does cataract surgery take a wait of a year and a half? With an 

ageing population, it is ridiculous that we go for so long not 

seeing properly.  It is time we were able to just pay to have this 

service done. 

 

Mr. Premier, would you answer that, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

First of all, the waiting-list for cataract surgery will depend on 

which specialist the person is seeing, and on whether or not it's 

indicated as an emergency.  It will depend on the individual's 

case as to how long the waiting-list is and it will depend on the 

physician who's responsible for that person as to how long it 

will take before their surgery is dealt with. 

 

Wildlife Damage to Crops 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, John 

Filipowich from Chelan would like to know if the government 

is willing to compensate farmers for the wildlife damage this 

winter, and if they are not, why not allow kill permits so the 

farmers can solve this problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We are 

certainly aware of the problem with wildlife damage in the 

north-east where some of the crops are laying out.  We've done, 

through the Department of the Environment, considerable work 

to prevent that.  We've had some meetings; we have a 

committee that's been struck to look at it. 

 

We do not have special damage.  They will be covered under 

crop insurance if they create a position where there's a crop 

insurance liability.  If that occurs, then they will be covered 

under crop insurance.  If not, there is only prevention that's 

available. 

 

Saskatchewan Education Council 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Cheryl Nickolson of Wood 

Mountain.  She writes:  Mr. Premier, I want to know the 

purpose and cost of all the Saskatchewan Education Council 

established in 1993.  Are you not reinventing the wheel? 

 

There is a problem with Saskatchewan's education system.  The 

solutions are coming from the Canadian Labour Market and 

Productivity Centre 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

recommendations, from the Saskatchewan Association of 

Communities and Schools Co-op, from the students, parents, 

teachers, and other individuals.  All you have to do is listen. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for his 

question.  As the member may know, the Education Council 

was set up by the Government of Saskatchewan about a year 

ago.  The Education Council is representative of all of our 

partners in education ranging from school trustees, the 

Teachers' Federation, the administrators, all the way to the 

University of Saskatchewan, University of Regina presidents. 

 

The purpose of the Education Council is to advise the 

government of educational policy and the direction that all of 

our education partners would like us to go in the area of 

education and training. 

 

Ethanol Production 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Premier as well.  And my question comes from Edna Dash 

from Kipling: why do we not have more ethanol plants in 

Saskatchewan?  Why is this environmentally friendly fuel not 

encouraged and promoted more?  We would be the best 

province to produce ethanol as we often grow wheat that is not 

no. 1, and even the poorest wheat could be used to produce 

ethanol. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the 

production of ethanol does occur in the province.  The problem 

of course is making it economical and the plants that are in 

place require a fair subsidy from the taxpayers to make them 

economical. 

 

But on the bright side, we are working with a number of 

companies in the province who are very, very close to having 

their plants economically viable.  And obviously, when that 

point is reached they will be a very good opportunity for people 

to invest in. 

 

Underground Fuel Tanks 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Environment. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are 7,500 gas stations in Saskatchewan, 

many of which are family businesses.  And these owners 

employ people, they pay property taxes, and they collect a great 

deal of revenue for your government in gasoline tax. 

 

Your government, through changes to the legislation governing 

underground fuel storage tanks, has decreed that the cost of 

digging up a large number of these tanks is to be borne by the 

owners, and the costs of excavation and removal range 

anywhere from 20,000 to $300,000.  An environmental 

assessment to determine whether an extension can be granted to 

low-risk sites is going to cost $10,000, which is another cost to 

the owner. 

 

My question is this: exactly what assessment have you done to 

determine whether independent businesses can afford to pay 

these huge costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, there has been -- I appreciate 

the question from the member opposite -- there has been a great 

deal of discussion on this issue since the time I've taken over 

this portfolio.  And one thing about which there is agreement is 

that before tanks begin to leak, they should be removed from 

the ground.  And they're part of the capital equipment of a 

service station and as such are part of the equipment that is 

wearing out as time goes on.  They tend to leak after 17 or 18 

years, at a fairly high rate. 

 

The other conclusion about which there is agreement is that if 

they do leak and there's a hazard to the public, that there needs 

to be a clean-up of the result of the leak.  And to this time it is 

generally the owner of facilities where there are these kinds of 

spills who are held responsible to pay for those. 

 

Now we have been working on the regulations to sensitize 

them.  We've created a working committee in which the 

Environmental Fairness Association is represented, and 

hopefully we will make these regulations as sensitive as we can 

to address these questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's 

interesting that you say that you have a group working on this 

and that you are being sensitive to the issues, because some of 

the people even involved in that do not think that you are being 

sensitive to the issues. 

 

This legislation could cripple many family businesses, 

particularly those in rural Saskatchewan.  The Double R service 

station near Yorkton is one of about 700 independent gas 

stations in Saskatchewan.  Greg Rushka and his wife have 

owned and operated this business for some 29 years, and they 

listed their business for sale recently because they are hoping to 

retire.  But the $5,000 cost of upgrading their tanks is scaring 

away all prospective buyers.  They fear that the business may 

in fact face even more government regulation and therefore 

people will not buy their business. 

 

Mr. Minister, is your government addressing the fact that this 

legislation is sounding the death knell for so many 

Saskatchewan businesses in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the realities of doing 

business in the '90s is that we need to prevent liability accruing 

to our businesses, and more and more people are becoming 

conscious of that need at this time.  This is not a function of 

government regulation; it is not a function of anything other 

than recognizing that if certain kinds of things spill into the 

atmosphere or into the environment, for public safety interest 

they have to be controlled.  And that's something that we did 

not know to this extent some 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

time ago. 

 

The difficulty is that people now in the circumstances you 

describe are finding this out for their businesses, through no 

one's fault -- not their fault, not anyone else's fault -- but they're 

now finding it out.  And it's a business factor in the decisions 

they're making. 

 

The regulations are there to try to guide people in becoming 

aware that these are risks and trying to be sensitive on the 

regulatory side to allow some time for these improvements to 

be made. 

 

I can tell you that the . . . that what we did immediately upon 

seeing the dilemma that some . . . many Saskatchewan owners 

were in, we had an action plan that we announced about a year 

ago, and we've extended the deadlines for compliance with the 

regulations for all but the class A sites where the highest risks 

exist, for one year, from April 1, '94 to April 1, '95, and that we 

additionally have provided a three-year extension to 1998 for 

people to come into compliance with the regulations, providing 

they can demonstrate that their tanks are not presently leaking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, like the Rushkas, there are 

many other independent gas station owners who may conclude 

that the costs of excavating and upgrading their tanks are 

simply unrecoverable.  And if they are forced to abandon their 

businesses, what's going to happen to those tanks then?  Who 

will pay for their removal from an abandoned business, and 

who's going to compensate the local rural municipality or 

council for the lost property tax?  Ultimately, who is going to 

replace all the jobs that your government regulations have 

destroyed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I think the question the member opposite 

asks, Mr. Speaker, contains within it its own answer.  It is 

because we do not want to have business people in the 

circumstance of needing to pay for expensive clean-ups that the 

regulation and guidelines are there with respect to the timing of 

replacement of tanks. 

 

And it is in fact so that there . . . we have extended the deadline 

so that there can be a gradual approach to upgrading, so that 

business owners can plan those improvements.  Yes, it's still 

difficult, but they can plan their improvements and they can 

come into compliance with the regulations before there's a leak, 

before those rather more extensive costs of clean-up are there 

to be borne either by the owner, or in the event of the owner not 

being able to bear the cost, the public. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, part 

of the problem here is the left hand doesn't know what the right 

hand is doing in government, and with a stroke of the pen, your 

government has destroyed the viability of numbers of 

businesses in Saskatchewan. 

 

As Greg Rushka, the owner of Double R puts it, and I quote 

him: our business used to be an asset; now all we have is a 

liability. 

 

If Mr. Rushka cannot pay for the costs of upgrading, he and his 

wife have no choice but to walk away empty-handed from a 

lifetime of hard work because of your government's decision.  

They employ people, people who need jobs in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How can you profess to care about job creation and the 

small-business economy when every move that your 

government makes serves to dig a deeper hole for struggling 

businesses and the workers who depend on them for jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe I answered the 

question that the member opposite has asked, in my first 

answer.  The thing about which there is no disagreement is that 

underground storage tanks should not be left to the point where 

they leak, because of the damage they then cause to the 

environment.  And I would think the member opposite would 

be concerned about that, and the health risks which that causes 

to the public.  I think the member opposite would be concerned 

about that. 

 

So no one quarrels with that.  It doesn't make it any easier for 

the persons writing you to pay that cost; it doesn't make it an 

ounce easier, knowing that it's the right thing to do. 

 

But I'm a bit surprised that the member opposite would, in 

sympathizing as we all do with the plight of someone who has 

an expense that's difficult to bear, and the economic 

circumstances in which they exist, to then pretend to deny that 

there is a real environmental concern here that needs to be met.  

I'm very surprised at that. 

 

Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government members opposite were elected partly because of 

their promise to eliminate patronage in government 

appointments.  The pledge was put in writing in the NDP 

Democratic Reforms for the 1990's, and it claimed that during 

the nine previous years the former administration had no fewer 

than 15 former or defeated MLAs appointed. 

 

It goes on to say that the NDP government would 

unequivocally remove systematic patronage, partisan 

patronage, from government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lid is coming off of that pledge.  And when 

we brought to this Assembly the fact that the Premier had 

appointed 37 former NDP (New Democratic Party) MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly), appointees, or cabinet 

to government boards and commission -- 37 in two and a half 

years. 

 

My question is to the Premier: Mr. Premier, I'm wondering if 

you would once again state your policy on political patronage 

and deny that your government is engaging in patronage. 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'd like to say is 

thank the hon. member for the question in another of the 

ongoing series of:  Mr. Premier, I want to know, questions, 

which I get directed to me.  Perhaps the answer is set out. 

 

This is delivered to my office.  It says: Mr. Premier -- and I 

have to read the name because it's the way the question is 

worded -- I'd like to know why Mr. Rick Swenson and his team 

are so interested in hearing from us now.  When they were in 

power they did their own selfish patronage and helping their 

buddies.  Why now do they want to hear from me?  That's what 

I want to know. 

 

Mr. Ray Sider writes from Saskatoon.  And I'm going to write 

Mr. Ray Sider. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You see what I say, Mr. Speaker, in 

answer to the hon. member opposite, is that the public at large 

is a couple of steps ahead of the official opposition and the 

third party.  They know exactly what Liberals and Tories do 

when they're in office. 

 

And our position with respect to the civil service is that we 

believe in a qualified, competent, professional civil service 

which is protected by the Public Service Commission.  There'll 

be always areas where in ministerial advice or certain boards 

and agencies the policies of the government should be 

supported by men and women who support those policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, again the Premier denies 

that he is doing political patronage.  Perhaps he isn't out of 

control and perhaps there is control in place, and indeed that's 

the problem, because unfortunately for you, Mr. Premier, and 

fortunately for the public, the lid is coming completely off of 

your government's patronage parade. 

 

We have received a leaked copy of such a list dated May 19, 

1992.  And the list shows a very systematic and deliberate 

government operation to appoint certain people to government 

boards and positions. 

 

Mr. Premier, the document lists 92 people, sorted by 

constituency, that were to be appointed by your government to 

boards and commissions.  It also provides a list of people who 

were to be considered for future appointments. 

 

Mr. Premier, please tell this Assembly how this list was put 

together.  What's so special about those 92 people?  How were 

they chosen out of the hundreds of thousands of people who 

might be eligible for appointments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I obviously don't know 

what the hon. member is referring to.  And quite frankly, 

judging by the tone of his question, I don't think he knows what 

he's referring to either.  So we're at least on common ground in 

this regard. 

 

I take the view, Mr. Speaker, that in the appointment of boards 

and commissions and agencies, men and women from around 

the province of Saskatchewan are entitled to apply, and in fact 

our system that we implemented very quickly on change and 

government was an application system and a screening system 

and then a vetting-out system to make sure the proper person is 

appointed to the proper agency, board, or commission. 

 

I'm sure there are a number of documents that are floating 

around as we try to achieve that objective; that the hon. 

member has one or purports to have one I think adds nothing to 

the debate whatsoever. 

 

I repeat again, our approach here is a great improvement to 

what's gone on from '82 to '91; much more can be done and we 

continue to work toward improving it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Vetting 

indeed, Mr. Premier.  When you go through this list it becomes 

obvious that there's a common thread here and it's not merit. 

 

Every one of these individuals are NDP supporters -- all of 

them -- 100 per cent of the people on your list are either former 

NDP MLAs, candidates, financial contributors, supporters or 

lifelong members.  And a few of them even double as union 

leaders -- 92 out of 92. 

 

Most appalling is the fact that in addition to the 37 former NDP 

MLAs and candidates you have already appointed, this list says 

that at least 15 more are being considered for future 

appointments, namely: Allan Oliver, Bob Robertson, David 

Miner, Barret Halderman, Allen Engel, Lawrence Yew, Ted 

Bowerman, Brian Oster, Earl Mickelson, Bob Porter, Carl 

Siemans, Owen Davies, Mel McCorristen, David Bridger and 

Wayne Welke. 

 

This appointment system sounds an awful lot like MCI's new 

calling system -- friends and family.  Mr. Premier, the jig's up.  

Your government has been exposed for what it is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  The member put his question, please. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Mr. Premier, will you admit this today 

and join with us in ensuring that government appointments are 

based on merit and not political affiliation.  Support our 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we were around 

this discussion a few days ago, question 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

period, and I say to the hon. member opposite as I said then -- I 

repeat again today: if he is of the view that government should 

be as independent and competent and as professional as 

possible, I support him in that regard. 

 

I think again as this questioner who writes to the Premier 

wanting to know suggests, it rather ill behoves the members 

opposite to make this suggestion, and that's why he's so 

agitated when I bring up his old record.  But our record is very 

good in this regard.  I think we can improve.  There's no doubt 

about that.  And we're going to intend to improve. 

 

But I do repeat again that there is and always will be a place in 

government where people of a persuasion and a belief which 

conforms to the government's require a point.  And I repeat my 

example . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the former 

premier says that I didn't promise that.  Exactly is what I 

promised, and I give you a good example -- the health boards.  

You're opposed to health boards.  How could we appoint 

anybody that you suggest in the appointment of health boards?  

Can't do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Rural Emergency Health Care 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, on Friday last, the member from Kindersley had asked 

me a question to which I said I would look into the matter on 

his behalf.  And I would like to table today a letter from the 

North-East Health District that responds to the concerns he 

raised in the House.  This letter clearly shows, Mr. Speaker, 

that once again the member opposite had his facts wrong. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that when the father 

phoned for emergency services, an emergency was not 

indicated.  Also the nurse was not asked to attend at the arena, 

but did anyway as soon as possible.  Furthermore, the parents 

indicate, and the mother is a registered nurse, that their son was 

well looked after and that the response times were quite 

appropriate. 

 

I have tabled the letter, Mr. Speaker.  I want the members 

opposite to know that in situations like this where they are 

genuinely concerned, they should be working with their district 

board instead of raising incorrect facts in the legislature to 

fearmonger.  And we are working closely with district boards 

to make sure that there is proper attention.  There was not 

convulsion or seizure, Mr. Speaker, in this case as the member 

opposite indicated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Appointments Review Committee 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, my colleague has pointed out that there is a 

serious credibility problem with the promises that you made in 

1991.  And I remind you, Mr. Premier, that my party lost an 

election in 1991 partly because you made a personal 

commitment.  And I've got a whole page of quotes here, Mr. 

Premier, about why you as Premier would not indulge in a 

patronage system. 

 

Today that's been revealed that you not only indulge in it, sir, 

that you have institutionalized that process.  Mr. Premier, there 

is a solution being offered to you.  And as I asked you last 

week, given the fact that you would have 92 of your friends 

either appointed or on a list ready to be appointed, that you've 

institutionalized patronage. 

 

Wouldn't you agree that an all-party committee with a majority 

of members from your party, sir, reviewing appointments, 

would be better to the public than what you are doing with this 

institutionalized list of New Democrats?  A party with the 

majority of your members, Mr. Premier, don't you think that is 

a better solution to the problem we face today, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it is laughable to hear the 

leader, interim Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, 

make this plea for legitimacy in the public service and in the 

appointments process.  As Mr. Sider and others who write to 

me wanting to have me answer questions point out, this is the 

very last group that should be doing this.  Working from a 1992 

list -- gotten goodness knows from where, from what agency or 

what person that they obtained it -- working in that kind of a 

context and then assuming and concocting a case, I think is 

hardly the basis upon which to make the sweeping and unjust 

accusations the hon. member does. 

 

Look, if the answer that you ask should be given is that we 

need to work toward having a professional civil service which 

is based on competence and ability, protected by a Public 

Service Commission, we have that.  We have that.  In the 

appointment of agencies, boards, and commissions, that's of a 

different matter.  That is a matter where the public interest in 

the wider sense, other than Public Service Act regulations, is to 

come into place. 

 

The example, I repeat again for your consideration, is health 

boards.  For example, there's nothing that you could do in this 

regard because you oppose health boards and you oppose 

health reform, as does the third party.  So what's the sense of 

seeking for your input? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Animal Protection Act be now introduced and read 

for a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting Agrologists 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Agrologists be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On a 

point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, on March 11, '94, the Hon. 

Minister of Health was asked a question by one of my members 

here, and the minister chose not to answer the question 

specifically, but did answer in a political way. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, she gave . . . came up . . . stood up rather 

and gave an answer to a question that she had not taken notice 

of.  So she got two opportunities to answer the one, single 

question -- first of all, on a political note and then on the 

premiss of having taken notice which she did not do, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think she should be chastised for that action. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's just for the . . . Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of answering questions in the House and the 

need to respond, it seems hard to satisfy the members of the 

opposition.  When you don't answer the questions, they're 

critical; when you do answer them, they're critical. 

 

In this case, the minister said she would bring back 

information; she brought it back.  And I'm sure that the 

members opposite will appreciate, once they bother to read the 

letter that has been tabled, the real answer to the question they 

asked on Friday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Members will appreciate that I was not in the 

legislature on Friday and I will check the records and defer my 

decision and bring a decision back to the legislature. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to question 

43, I do have a response here and I'll just find it in a moment 

and submit it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Question no. 43, the answer has been tabled. 

 

(1415) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I will at the conclusion of my remarks move second reading of 

a Bill to amend The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Amending The Labour Standards Act, Mr. Speaker, is part of 

this government's plan to reform our province's labour laws.  

Our goal, throughout a number of Bills, has been to enact 

legislation which is fair, which is balanced, which is up to date, 

and which is the product of extensive consultation, which is 

consistent with today's economic development strategy and 

which attempts to build consensus and develop a cooperative 

relationship between labour and business. 

 

I would like to speak briefly about the background to the 

current labour issues that this province faces.  As I am sure all 

hon. members are aware, the workplace has been changing 

dramatically and rapidly in the recent past.  For example, the 

first personal computer appeared only about 20 years ago, a 

year or two after The Labour Standards Act was last amended.  

It is now a common tool.  The primary objective of the 

government then is to update the legislation to respond to 

current social conditions and current conditions in the 

workplace. 

 

As well we see the function of the government as one striking a 

balance between the interests of workers and management.  

This government's essential interests are fairness in the 

workplace and working towards a cooperative approach 

wherever possible with management and labour. 

 

The government has pursued these objectives through its 

efforts to broadly consult with people who are interested.  For 

example, Mr. Speaker, in August 1993, CanWest Opinion 

Research surveyed 800 workers and 700 employers including, I 

might add, 300 farm workers. 

 

Last October, over 1,400 employers, employees, employer 

organizations, labour organizations, community organizations, 

government organizations, aboriginal organizations, and others 

received a discussion guide and an invitation to submit their 

comments to the Department of Labour.  Community 

round-table discussions were held in 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

eight centres in the province to solicit the views of business, 

labour, women, youth, persons of aboriginal ancestry, and 

persons with disabilities. 

 

Input by business and labour has been strengthened through 

ongoing consultations with various parties as well as 

discussions with municipal bodies, with SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), with health organizations, 

and the like. 

 

The review process was extended through outreach meetings 

with low income workers themselves, with women's 

community groups, with group home workers, with students, 

with farm workers, employers, and again, the aboriginal 

community.  In the past three months, Mr. Speaker, I've toured 

the province and spoken with many people to determine the 

appropriate course of action in amending The Labour Standards 

Act. 

 

With respect to the interests of labour and business, the 

consultation process has reached beyond the traditional 

stakeholder groups.  We have tried to directly meet with and 

solicit the opinions of unorganized workers and many of the 

small businesses which employ them.  In summary, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has made every effort to ensure that 

The Labour Standards Amendment Act reflects the general 

attitudes of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Through our broad consultation, I believe, Mr. Speaker, we 

have reduced the areas of controversy between business and 

labour, maximized the areas of agreement on the legislation 

and the policies it contains. 

 

In essence, we want to provide a framework which minimizes 

points of conflict between business and labour and provide a 

framework within which business and labour are able resolve 

their own problems. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, consultation is a new approach to 

labour legislation in Saskatchewan and many other provinces.  

It is, in many ways, the development of the same logic which 

first gave rise to labour legislation.  That is, we're moving from 

developing a better process to resolve conflicts to developing 

ways to avoid conflicts and to develop ways of cooperating 

together. 

 

Labour legislation originated from the recognition that the 

violence which was common during the conflict between 

employers and workers is harmful to everyone.  Early trade 

union legislation such as the Wagner Act, for example, which 

was passed in the '30s under Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal 

era, attempted to curb the violence that often attended strikes 

but made no attempt to change confrontation as the basic 

underpinning of labour relations.  Instead, it simply sought to 

provide a process to which confrontation and conflict could be 

channelled without bounds. 

 

Other societies, Mr. Speaker, have got beyond this.  Perhaps 

the primary reason for Germany's post-war success was the 

partnership -- they call it co-determination -- partnership which 

was developed between business and labour. 

 

In Asia the relationship has never been as confrontational as it 

has been in North America.  The ability of labour and 

management to cooperate in Japan, for example, has been a 

major reason for that country's astounding success after the 

devastation of the Second World War.  In short, there is 

irrefutable and a strong correlation between the effectiveness of 

the cooperative process, economic prosperity, and the wealth 

and health of a nation's population. 

 

In many ways and for a variety of reasons the quality of life in 

the workplace has declined rather than improved over the last 

15 years.  Mr. Speaker, in the '70s when this Act  was last 

changed, we didn't see or indeed imagine that people would 

treat other people in the ways we see now.  An example, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in 1977 when this Act was last passed, we 

legislated a 40-hour work week.  It was assumed that a 40-hour 

work week meant five eight-hour days.  However, Mr. Speaker, 

we've got documented examples of workers coming forward 

who work a single 36-hour shift. 

 

Another example has to do with scheduling part-time work.  

Some part-time employees are virtually under house arrest 

because they can't afford to leave the telephone.  If they do, 

they may miss a shift; if they miss many shifts, they may lose 

their job. 

 

Through our consultation with workers and employees, we 

have reviewed our current treatment of workers against the 

basic standards which society agrees and respects.  We must 

have labour standards, Mr. Speaker, which are in conformity to 

this province's basic social values. 

 

The amendment to the Act will, I believe, Mr. Speaker, remedy 

some of the most pressing problems.  The proposed 

amendments will improve protection and benefits for part-time 

workers including, provide that part-time workers in larger 

firms will receive, in proportion to the hours they work, the 

benefits available to all full-time employees. 

 

It will provide the most senior part-time workers will get first 

opportunity to work more hours when they become available.  

It will require prorated calculation of public holiday pay for all 

employees.  It will provide calculation of pay in lieu of notice 

for lay-off or discharge on the basis of the average weekly 

wage over the previous 13 weeks. 

 

It will improve maternity and other family-related leaves, all 

with leave without pay -- I'm sure that's understood.  The 

changes will reduce maternity leave qualifying period from 52 

to weeks to 20 weeks so that it will be in conformity with the 

Unemployment Insurance Act. 

 

It will provide an opportunity for job modification or 

reassignment before an employer may require earlier 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

starting of maternity leave; replace the 6 weeks paternity leave 

with 12 weeks paternal leave.  It'll increase adoptive leave from 

6 weeks to 18 weeks, to be the equivalent of maternity leave.  

It'll provide for the accrual of seniority and access to benefits 

for the period of maternal leave and parental leave. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing with the way 

we're organizing the workplace is that we are producing 

dysfunctional families.  There's no way a single parent can hold 

down two or three part-time jobs with minimal notice of 

scheduling of each and still provide proper and adequate 

parenting for their children.  We, Mr. Speaker, are remedying 

that, and hopefully one of the results of this will be fewer 

dysfunctional families and less stress on the family. 

 

We're going to be providing the following improvement in 

protection against arbitrary dismissal.  We're going to provide 

increased notice for employees who are dismissed without just 

cause from two weeks for people employed less than a year, to 

a maximum of 14 weeks for an employee of 10 years or more. 

 

We're going to provide employees protection against dismissal 

in cases of illness or injury. 

 

We're going to provide for the right of employees to be 

reassigned, where possible, where they become disabled, and 

we're going to protect employees against dismissal who report 

illegal activities to proper law enforcement authorities. 

 

We're going to address the issues respecting hours of work and 

part time, including require one weeks notice of changes in 

work schedules.  We're going to require a minimum of eight 

hours rest in a 24-hour period, provide 30-minute unpaid meal 

breaks, and specify daily overtime in averaging permits. 

 

We're going to, Mr. Speaker, improve lay-off provisions by 

requiring one weeks notice for every year of service, to a 

maximum of 10 weeks. 

 

We're going to provide for staged payment in lieu of notice 

according to regular pay schedule, and a reduction of pay in 

lieu in the event of early recall. 

 

We're going to be increasing break in service without affecting 

continuous service from 14 days to 13 weeks. 

 

We're going to improve the administration and enforcement of 

the Act in the following ways: we're going to clarify procedures 

for collection of wages; we're going to clarify that wage 

assessments may include holiday pay and pay in lieu of notice; 

we're going to clarify the procedure for issuing a wage 

assessment; we're going to provide for the recovery of 

enforcement costs, so that those who repeatedly violate the law 

will pay for the cost of the investigations against them where 

they're held to be in violation of the law. 

 

We're going to establish the director's power to represent 

employees in a reasonable manner and to negotiate settlements. 

 

We're going to establish a one-year time limit for the pursuit of 

claims and a two-year time limit for prosecutions. 

 

We're going to clarify that the Act establishes minimum 

standards.  We're going to increase maximum penalties -- 2,000 

for the first offence, 5,000 for the second offence, and 10,000 

for the third offence. 

 

We're going to clarify that employees who work out of their 

home are covered by the Act and location is not relevant in 

determining an employer-employee relationship. 

 

We're going to require additional notice for group termination 

of 10 or more employees within a four-week period.  The 

notice must be provided to the Minister of Labour, each 

employee, and the union if applicable.  Notice must include 

those dates, those affected, and the reasons. 

 

We're going to clarify calculation of annual holiday pay and 

require employees who have paid for previously approved 

vacation to be reimbursed.  And we're going to establish a new 

adjudication and appeal system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before concluding, I want to comment that 

members opposite, when they read the Act, are going to find in 

the Act a framework for these principles, but much of the detail 

has been left to regulation. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that was one of the ways that 

this draft legislation changed as the consultation process went 

on.  Someone in the department, Mr. Speaker, estimated 

that -- I have a speech of about 35 minutes -- someone in the 

department estimated I gave it over a hundred times to a 

hundred different groups. 

 

During this very lengthy consultation process, some things 

became apparent to us, one of which was that the world of 

work is varied.  A system which will work . . . we were this 

morning in Prince Albert.  The example I used was that a 

system which will work in a pulp mill will not work in a 

newspaper, and a system which will work in those two places 

of employment will not work in a restaurant. 

 

(1430) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have left much of the detail to regulation.  

We are going to be using a method which we used successfully 

in drafting the regulations of The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act.  Mr. Speaker, we set up a system which, as far as I 

know, is unique.  We set up about 20 committees to draft 

regulations, really an industry-by-industry committee -- one 

management, one labour, chaired by someone in the 

department. 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

Mr. Speaker, even people who are unrelenting critics of the 

Department of Labour -- and given our nature, there are 

some -- even people who are unrelenting critics of the 

Department of Labour will say of the process for drafting 

regulations under The Occupational Health and Safety Act, it's 

been a great process. 

 

It is often said, Mr. Speaker, that a camel is a horse put together 

by a committee.  Well the occupational health and safety 

committees were a group which took a camel and made it into a 

very fine racehorse.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the process which 

we intend to duplicate in The Labour Standards Act. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as we travelled around the 

province, meeting workers and meeting employers, when we 

indicated that we were going to repeat the process used in The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, in most cases most of the 

concerns evaporated.  It is a process, Mr. Speaker, which the 

public in Saskatchewan have come to understand and trust 

through the occupational health and safety process; and it is a 

process and a success, I'm going to say, which we're going to 

repeat here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning of my remarks that our 

goal is fair, balanced, and up-to-date labour legislation which 

attempts to build consensus and develop a cooperative 

relationship between labour and business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the documents which was brought to my 

attention a few weeks ago was a letter from the International 

Labour Organization in Geneva.  In their annual conference 

this year, the theme of their annual conference is part-time 

labour.  It's apparent, Mr. Speaker, that . . . and I read through 

briefly some of the material which they had sent.  It is apparent 

from that material, Mr. Speaker, that throughout the 

industrialized world, from Finland in the East to Japan in the 

West, the industrialized world has a problem with part-time 

workers.  It's equally apparent that no one has attempted to 

solve the problem. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, it is in Saskatchewan where the 

government, through this legislature, are pioneering new 

approaches to deal with a problem which exists worldwide.  

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud therefore to move second reading of a 

speech to amend The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just want 

to take a few moments to raise a few questions, a few concerns, 

make a few comments regarding the presentation the minister 

has given us today as to why the government feels that it's time 

to revamp The Labour Standards Act. 

 

I would like to indicate, first of all, Mr. Speaker, that my 

colleagues and I find that there are certainly a number of things 

in the Bill that certainly aren't unobjectable and can be 

conceded as positive improvements regarding labour standards 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

For example, the requirements to reimburse employees for 

cancelled holidays, or the improved maternity benefits, and the 

extension of funeral leave to death of grandparents -- I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, these can easily be seen to be progressive steps.  

And no doubt many people across this province, certainly 

part-time employees, will be looking forward to getting more 

information on these changes that are being suggested by the 

minister and by the government. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as usual the government would appear 

to have tunnel vision on this issue and ignores many important 

concerns.  Many changes, Mr. Speaker, may end up hurting the 

very people that they are meant to help.  Mr. Speaker, by 

making it more difficult, expensive, and complex for employers 

to deal with part-time employees, this legislation may end up 

discouraging employers from hiring more employees. 

 

And I must add, Mr. Speaker, that even in the area I represent, 

the constituency of Moosomin, I've run across a number of 

people who've indicated that they have no problem in working 

in part-time positions, especially housewives who do not want 

full time but are looking at part time so they can give a fair bit 

of their time and effort into raising their family.  Some of the 

benefits that the minister has talked about will be a benefit to 

these individuals, but they don't consider it a major issue in 

their decision to find and seek part-time work. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill creates a competitive 

disadvantage for Saskatchewan in attracting business, again 

reducing not only the number of part-time but even the number 

of full-time jobs available in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister claims that his government has 

consulted thoroughly with both labour and business on this 

legislation. However, considering that the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business has already come out against the 

legislation, one has to wonder just how two-sided the 

consultation really was.  It seems that even the government 

appears to be uneasy with some aspects of this legislation since 

it has found it necessary to play with the numbers to justify 

their case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government claims that these changes will 

have only minimal costs to employers.  The number they use is 

that it represents only one-tenth of one per cent of total payroll 

costs.  However, Mr. Speaker, by the very figures the 

government commissioned from Price Waterhouse, the 

legislation relating to part-timers only affects 10,900 

employees in this province. Yet the incremental cost to 

employers is estimated -- and we all know how accurate 

government estimates are -- to be between 9.5 million and 14.2 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that would translate into, per employee 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

cost to employers, of between 871 and $1,302 per employee 

per year, which for a lot of small businesses struggling to 

survive in our economic times will be a major impact upon 

their bottom line.  For a small firm employing 25 people, this 

would increase the business cost by around $25,000 per year.  

And, Mr. Speaker, this certainly is not small potatoes for 

businesses trying to get by in difficult economic times. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the benchmarks set by the 

government are arbitrary and will lead to widespread confusion 

and unfairness in the workplace.  And I've already read a 

couple of editorials where there is a fair bit of confusion in the 

workplace and a number of employers aren't endeavouring to 

try and understand what the government and what the minister 

is saying regarding this piece of legislation. 

 

People who work in businesses that have franchises, their 

branches may or may not be covered, depending on who owns 

the franchise.  If someone works in a suit store whose owner 

only owns one franchise, he probably won't be covered.  If his 

boss owns two, he will.  Employees' benefits will vary widely 

from store to store within the same franchise. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, setting any arbitrary number relating to 

employees simply encourages employers to stay under that 

limit.  If an employer has 20 people on his payroll, the simple 

knowledge that he will face additional regulations and costs if 

he hires someone else will likely cause him to delay hiring that 

extra person as long as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this might be acceptable if the economy were 

prospering and growing strongly.  But when the economy is in 

a downturn, any kind of delay and sluggishness in the labour 

market can be deadly to plans for recovery. 

 

And I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that even if the 

economy is recovering, I would think that a number of 

businesses, as the farm community throughout rural 

Saskatchewan has found out in tough economic times, most 

people have learned that you don't just jump in because the 

economy is turning, because your business is doing better, that 

you start spending wildly again.  But you take a closer look at 

your bottom line and you're very careful in how you spend your 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a couple things I also noticed in the speech that 

the minister was giving, he talked about protection for 

employees through dismissal.  It would seem, Mr. Speaker, that 

there were a number of people following the October '91 

election who would invariably have loved to have this piece of 

legislation in place as the government of the day decided that it 

certainly wasn't appropriate to offer severance packages -- in 

fact, took them away or froze those severance packages and 

just fired people at will. 

 

So I would trust that, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation 

covers everyone in the workplace, not just the part-time 

employers.  That if it's appropriate for one, that it's appropriate 

for everybody else. 

 

The legislation also, as the minister indicated, has greater 

penalties or is incurring penalties upon offenders or businesses 

that may not follow the Acts or the intent of the Act that is laid 

before them. 

 

It would seem, Mr. Speaker, as we've seen through the 

legislation that has been brought forward time and time again 

since October of 1991, we are putting in more hindrances, not 

only in the way of business but also, Mr. Speaker, we keep 

bringing in penalties for, as I would term, putting penalties 

upon law-abiding businesses, individuals.  When at the same 

time, you'd look at the cases around us and the court cases that 

appear, Mr. Speaker, we find that the courts tend to deal with 

individuals who are breaking the criminal law much more 

leniently than the way the government is now going to deal 

with individuals who may even break The Labour Standards 

Act.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, as we get into Committee of the 

Whole and into this discussion, there are a number of points we 

want to raise.  Because I don't think, Mr. Speaker, we want to 

be seen as holding a hammer over people who are trying to 

create business and generate jobs in this province. 

 

Another thing I might bring out, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 

the greater intent or the points of this legislation are going to be 

brought about through regulations.  And I find that somewhat 

disheartening, Mr. Speaker; I find that somewhat offensive, 

because of the fact that regulations are brought into place and 

implemented by Executive Council.  And Executive Council 

has to answer to nobody.  They don't even have to answer to 

the Legislative Assembly when it comes to regulatory changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very important -- it should be 

important, it should be number one, high on the government's 

priority list -- that any major changes that would affect 

business, that would affect job creation in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that would affect employer-employee 

relationships, should be discussed at least at this level, at the 

floor level of this Assembly, rather than going to regulations 

and then deciding how you're going to implement all the stages 

of the Bill outside of public perusal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see there a number of areas that 

even though there are some very good, solid points in the Bill 

and areas that men and women across this province, and 

teenagers, young people finding jobs, can agree with, there are 

other areas that we must take the time in committee or when we 

reach that stage to raise some of these very strong points. 

 

And I trust that the minister will have some very solid, serious 

answers with us.  And we also would ask that the minister 

would even give some consideration to some of the suggestions 

that we would put forward that could be beneficial in the long 

run for employment throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that this piece of legislation is quite new, 

is quite extensive, and that we would 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

like an opportunity to talk to interested groups across the 

province and seek their input and before we get into the major 

discussion, I now move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 17 -- An Act 

to amend The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

aren't going to have any objection to this Bill moving along 

into committee.  I think having had the opportunity to consult 

with a number of people around the province, that my opinion 

of this Bill is that it does alleviate many of the concerns that 

municipal employees have had.  The question of portability of 

pensions has been one that has become a real issue in Canada 

in the last 10 years, and I think it's very important that that 

portability be recognized. 

 

Surviving spouses is a question that this Bill I think goes a long 

way to addressing, as does the issue of marital break-up when 

there is a pension issue at stake. 

 

And I think, from what I've heard so far, that this particular 

piece of legislation . . . And I congratulate the minister 

responsible for taking the time to consult with the people that 

will be most affected.  And I think it's important now that the 

House go to the next stage, which will allow us to ask some 

very detailed questions in a few areas, comparisons of this new 

Act with the pension Act that was passed in 1992, and see how 

those things stack up. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we go to third 

reading. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 18 -- An Act to 

amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have only a few 

comments to make on this Bill to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act, and as such we're not going to stand in the way 

of this Act, Mr. Speaker.  But I want to make a few comments 

before we allow this Bill to proceed in the next stage, and that 

being the Committee of the Whole. 

 

I notice, Mr. Speaker, that essentially what this Act is going to 

do is implement some budget-related decisions.  The biggest 

budgetary decision I think has been made, is that essentially the 

'94-95 funding is going to be frozen at the previous year's level. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that kind of thing obviously puts a fair 

degree of restraint and constraints on any kind of a board that is 

going to be trying to operate and fulfil its mission, and that is 

essentially of maintaining at least . . . at least maintaining the 

degree of program services and so on that it was used to doing.  

So essentially what this means is that there is a cut because of 

inflation and so on.  It means that they will really have less 

purchasing power to implement those kinds of things that they 

would feel are necessary. 

 

So I would ask the question of the minister: can this Authority, 

can this board, can this Meewasin Authority board now be . . . 

fulfil the functions as they would like, as they feel should be 

done in order for them to do it properly? 

 

Now that does not mean, Mr. Speaker, that it is only the 

Government of Saskatchewan that funds this organization.  

And I know and -- it's in your home area as well -- you know 

that it is the city of Saskatoon and the University of 

Saskatchewan that are also partners in sharing the 

responsibilities of this Authority. 

 

So while the minister says that this is not going to have a 

significant impact on the operations of the Authority, Mr. 

Speaker, when the appropriate time comes during Committee 

of the Whole, I certainly intend to pursue this line of 

questioning so that indeed all of the residents in the area of 

Saskatoon can be assured that the Meewasin Valley Authority 

has the wherewithal to see to it that its mandate is fulfilled. 

 

So having said those few words, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 

take my place, and hopefully other members will concur with 

me that this Bill now be allowed to go to committee. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I concur also with 

the member from Rosthern that this Bill be allowed to go to 

committee.  And more than that, I would concur with many of 

his observations regarding the impact of this Bill on the ability 

of the Meewasin Authority to function.  There's no question 

that it will function but will function in a little bit of a 

constrained fashion as a result of this Bill. 

 

I can reassure the public however that it was a New Democratic 

government that gave birth to the Meewasin Valley Authority 

in Saskatoon and that we don't intend to preside over its 

demise, even though there are serious fiscal constraints on the 

Authority, as there are in municipalities and the University of 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

As we all know, this is a partnership funding arrangement 

between the University of Saskatchewan, the city of Saskatoon, 

and the 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

Government of Saskatchewan.  The province, incidentally, 

kicks in $740,000, the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 

kicks in $573,000, and the city of Saskatoon kicks in $556,000, 

to make a total of almost $2 million for the Meewasin Valley 

Authority in Saskatoon. 

 

I might say, on behalf of many citizens in Saskatoon, we are 

not happy that funding has been frozen a second year, but we 

understand it and we're pleased that funding hasn't been cut 

from what it was last year. 

 

Finally, we all look for the day when there will be a return to 

financial solvency in the province so that we can begin to fund 

Meewasin Valley Authority in an expansionary kind of fashion 

as it really needs to be funded these next years for future 

generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too am very 

pleased to speak this afternoon in support of the Act to amend 

The Meewasin Valley Authority Act.  In speaking to the people 

at the MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority), it is clear that the 

impetus for the changes to the structure of their committees 

comes from them and is, therefore, welcome to their members. 

 

Essentially the amendment changes the composition of the 

advisory committees in order to reduce the amount of time on 

committee work without reducing the scope or variety of 

perspectives that are offered on the applications for 

development of the river valley which are put before the MVA. 

 

Previous to this amendment, there were actually two 

committees which review applications coming to them under 

development review.  One committee consisted almost entirely, 

I think, of engineers, while the other committee involved 

architects and planners.  And the change to this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, will establish a joint committee which ensures that 

there will be a reduced number of engineers involved but which 

will retain the engineering perspective on all decisions. 

 

I believe this speaks to the desire of the committee to operate as 

efficiently and effectively as it can while not diminishing the 

scope of the review process. 

 

The Meewasin Valley Authority is an extremely significant 

part of Saskatoon's development -- as you well know, Mr. 

Speaker, representing a seat in Saskatoon for so many 

years -- and indeed it has an impact on our province overall.  

Since its establishment in 1984, the MVA has brought 

enhanced enjoyment to the North Saskatchewan River valley 

while respecting the delicate balance between man and nature 

which must co-exist in the system. 

 

The members of the Authority are to be congratulated for 

fostering a cooperative effort between all levels of government, 

industry, service clubs, and private individuals to generate 

support for the many valuable projects undertaken during its 

first decade in existence. 

 

Anyone who has strolled along the trails or participated in 

events that take place in our beautiful river valley in Saskatoon 

has surely reflected, as I have on many occasions, on the 

enormous difference the MVA has made to the quality of life 

that we all associate with Saskatoon. 

 

It is no accident that Saskatoon was chosen among the top three 

places to live in Canada, and the tremendous vision evident in 

the development of our river valley has a great deal to do with 

the impression Saskatoon makes on tourists and visitors every 

year. 

 

There have been difficult times for the MVA over the years and 

much of that difficulty has come at the hands of continued 

funding cut-backs by different levels of government under 

various administrations.  But the members and supporters of 

the MVA, which include the University of Saskatchewan and 

the city of Saskatoon, have continued their support in spite of 

those difficulties. 

 

So the changes to this legislation provide some relief from 10 

successive years of cuts in that the amendment establishes that 

the funding for 1994 and 1995 will be held at last year's level.  

I share the hope of those involved with the MVA that this is a 

sign of brighter times to come and that the province will 

consider increases to that funding if our economy improves. 

 

What is important to acknowledge is the support that has been 

provided to the MVA, not only by the provincial government, 

the University of Saskatchewan, and the city of Saskatoon, but 

the level of support that has come from private donors, local 

service clubs, and companies. 

 

If one includes the tremendous response to the Wanuskewin 

project, the MVA has generated more than $3 million in 

donations many of which, surprisingly, came from out of 

province -- national companies, Mr. Speaker.  And from that 

perspective, as well as from the value of tourism attracted by 

the river valley, the MVA is in itself an economic generator for 

the Saskatoon economy. 

 

But the efforts of the MVA are almost as far-reaching as the 

Saskatchewan River itself.  It is a little-publicized fact that the 

Saskatchewan River -- the North and South 

Saskatchewan -- form the second-largest river basin in all of 

North America, second only to the Mississippi system.  From 

their source in the Rockies, both the North and South 

Saskatchewan converge east of Prince Albert, flow through 

Saskatoon and across Saskatchewan and Manitoba into Lake 

Winnipeg and out through the Nelson River system into 

Hudson Bay. 

 

The Meewasin Valley, in addition to its efforts to develop the 

valley and to establish education programs in the schools in 

Saskatoon, is now reaching outside the local community. 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

The MVA is currently working, with the support of the federal 

government, to develop an information-sharing network about 

the Saskatchewan River system, which involves partners from 

the source of the rivers in British Columbia right through to its 

basin in Hudson Bay.  There are over 100 organizations 

partnered and all will join in promoting and sharing 

information about our rivers, the North and South 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I am very pleased to support this amendment to The 

Meewasin Valley Authority Act and to express my hope that 

their tremendous work will be improved and facilitated as a 

result of these changes. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 19 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 19 -- An Act 

to amend The Wascana Centre Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

basically want to reiterate the remarks that I made with the 

Meewasin Authority, simply because this Bill essentially does 

the same thing as the previous Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that is to 

limit the funding for the upcoming year to that of the last year.  

And I suppose if I take note of the comments made by the other 

speakers this afternoon, a no-increase-decrease budget is a 

good budget, according to what previous speakers have said. 

 

And recognizing obviously that with that limited amount of 

money we are going to be able to only do those things that we 

did in previous years by some very, very careful management.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, maintaining the same kind of budget 

and having the impact of inflation, even though that is very, 

very slight but increases the prices of goods, and then still 

maintaining the same level of service is very, very difficult to 

do.  And certainly we are very fortunate that we have the types 

of leaders, both in Meewasin and also in this Wascana Centre 

park as well. 

 

And I think it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that indeed we in 

Saskatchewan can be very proud of what we have in Regina 

here, because I don't view this park in Regina as being the 

exclusive enclave of Reginians but rather that of all of 

Saskatchewan because it is indeed, to a large extent, the 

taxpayers' dollar, Mr. Speaker, that maintains this. 

 

And rightfully so.  This is the seat of government.  This is 

where our legislative buildings stand.  And I know that visitors 

who come in here from outside of Saskatchewan, perhaps even 

outside of Canada, when they come in July and August, Mr. 

Speaker, these grounds are something to be very, very proud of. 

 

And I know the various activities that go on here, from 

canoeing to boating to walking in the park; and of course, I 

think it's only Regina, maybe Vancouver, that has the geese on 

the grounds and so on.  So certainly, we have something that 

makes this a rather unique place -- a place to be proud of. 

 

I recall back in my younger days, when I was a high school 

student, we came into this centre and we visited many of the 

activities that you can in Wascana, from the heritage park to the 

museum to the science centre, I believe it is.  Something that 

certainly stuck in my mind, and even at that stage, I was kind of 

awed by these premises. 

 

And so having said that, I think all of Saskatchewan recognizes 

how important this Wascana Centre is, and we are pleased, I 

must say, that the government has been able to see to it that at 

least it is able to maintain the funding, even though the 

increase, which I'm sure most people would have liked to have 

seen, has not been coming. 

 

(1500) 

 

But with those few, brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, and a few 

questions that I would have from the minister in respect to the 

significance of this centre, for example in Regina . . . I know 

that many centres around the world -- well maybe that's 

stretching it -- but certainly many centres in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, look upon Regina and what we've done with the inner 

core of this city, which I think this centre is largely responsible 

for, they stand in envy.  Because while the inner core of many 

of the larger cities of Canada are decaying and people moving 

out and becoming centres for crime and so on, this is certainly 

not the case in Regina, which goes exactly the opposite of the 

traditional things that happen to cities as they become larger. 

 

So again, we have a lot to be proud of.  And when this Bill 

goes to committee, we have some questions but we certainly 

will not stand in the way of its progress.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd certainly 

like to elaborate on some of the remarks that the hon. member 

from Rosthern made with regards to Wascana Centre 

Authority.  It is certainly my belief that Wascana Centre, here 

in the heart of Regina, is certainly a major attraction to the city 

and a great benefit to the people of not only Regina, but also of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This 2,300 acre park which includes 300 acres of water is by 

far the largest man-made urban park in Canada, and certainly is 

something that the people of this province can be proud of. 

 

As the hon. member from Rosthern mentioned, the Wascana 

Centre is the home for the seat of government here in 

Saskatchewan.  But there are many other facilities in the centre 

as well, including the Saskatchewan Museum of Natural 

History, the 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

science centre and IMAX Theatre, the Douglas Park track and 

field, the Plains hospital, and the Wascana Rehabilitation 

hospital, Centre of the Arts, University of Regina, MacKenzie 

Art Gallery, several government office buildings, and even the 

CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation).  So, Mr. Speaker, 

you can see that many facilities do exist in the centre and 

obviously these facilities attract hundreds of people every day. 

 

Wascana Centre is also a place for people and celebrations as 

well.  In addition to the hundreds of thousands of people which 

visit the park on a daily basis to walk or cycle or play sports, 

have picnics, reunions, musical entertainment in the band shell 

throughout the summer, and even weddings are held here in 

Wascana Centre.  There are some major celebration days such 

as Waskimo, Canada Day, Pile 0' Bones Sunday and, more 

recently, the Dragon Boat Festival which gets bigger and better 

every year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The natural area of Wascana Centre is certainly of great interest 

to many people.  And in addition to the 200 or so pair of 

Canada geese which nest in the centre each year, there's many 

other wildlife species.  Wascana Centre is a very important 

staging area not only for migratory waterfowl, but also for 

neotropical birds coming all the way from South America.   

Many of them rest and feed in Wascana Centre during their 

spring and fall migration. 

 

Rare species such as white pelicans, bald eagles, are also found 

in Wascana Centre at certain times of the year.  And even the 

first sightings of particular birds ever seen in Saskatchewan 

have been found right here in Wascana Centre, including the 

green heron and Mississippi kite. 

 

So the importance of the natural areas in this park is very 

valuable to the people of Regina and the province.  And it is 

certainly a tribute to our forefathers for making sure that green 

spaces were left in the city here so that our children can go and 

feed the geese and bird-watchers can scout around looking for 

birds throughout different times of the year.  And certainly it is 

up to the people of today to maintain these natural areas for the 

people of the future. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, like many other agencies and departments, 

the Wascana Centre has over the years, the last number of 

years, received budget cuts, and at the very least, frozen 

budgets.  This has certainly taken its toll on the staff of 

Wascana Centre. 

 

We've seen the staff, the permanent staff complement drop 

from 104 down to 46.  And despite this major impact, the staff 

at Wascana Centre have been able to cope and make do with 

less.  And it is certainly a tribute to the people who are very 

dedicated over at Wascana Centre in maintaining the park to 

the best of their ability.  And certainly some things had to be let 

go, but by and large, Wascana Centre is still a show-piece for 

Regina and this province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in closing, it certainly behoves the three 

agencies responsible for Wascana Centre, including this 

government, the city of Regina, and the University of Regina, 

to pool their resources and expertise in maintaining this great 

asset for the city.  And not only for the residents here, but it is 

also a tourist attraction for people from not only in 

Saskatchewan, but throughout North America and elsewhere. 

 

And as we get closer to a balanced budget and hopefully better 

economic times, urban parks need to receive immediate 

funding attention as we try to catch up on some of the things 

that may have fallen behind over the years. 

 

So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm almost reluctant to 

rise and speak to this Bill in the legislature, following that 

excellent speech informing us all about the Wascana Centre 

Authority from the member from Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a bit of a note, I'm very proud of the job that 

that member did.  And as many of my colleagues will know, I 

was the buddy MLA for Indian Head-Wolseley.  And I want to 

just take a little bit of a bow for the fact that Lorne is here.  In 

some small part I may have helped that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows he 

can't refer to the member's first name, but by his constituency. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that -- I assure you, 

an oversight. 

 

Speaking to the Wascana Centre Authority, as one who has at 

various times utilized one very, very beautiful park that we can 

all be intensely proud of here in Regina, I want to echo the 

sentiments expressed by the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley.  But there's a couple of slightly different things 

I'd like to speak about. 

 

Certainly the Wascana Centre Authority is one of the former 

premier, Hon. Allan Blakeney's proudest achievements.  And it 

is one that I recall vividly, as the former premier was having his 

final day in this Legislative Assembly, it was one Act . . . The 

Wascana Centre Authority was one of a select few 

achievements that he chose to speak of and that others who 

knew him well spoke of. 

 

I think that the former premier had great vision when he put 

together the Wascana Centre Authority and had partnership 

with the city of Regina and with the University of Regina to 

make that urban park something that we could all be very, very 

proud of. 

 

And it's especially so when you recognize that the city of 

Regina was blessed with a certain innate beauty; but it's a 

beauty that's unrecognized by a great many people and it's 

largely the Wascana Centre that makes 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

Regina an even more beautiful and prestigious city in which to 

reside. 

 

But I want to point out, in addition to that, the need, Mr. 

Speaker, for the . . . for example, the road and the path through 

the Wascana Centre are in desperate need of renewal.  There is 

no question about it.  I want to commend all Wascana Centre 

Authority employees and management for the job they've done 

in keeping the Wascana Centre patched together and as 

beautiful as it is.  Indeed, it is a remarkable effort on their part 

that has allowed the Wascana Centre to be as attractive as it 

really is. 

 

I, too, very much look forward to the day when we can be 

expanding and providing some of the much needed funds that 

the Wascana Centre Authority and its staff so richly deserve.  

This is one area that as we collectively, together, all 1 million 

people in the province collectively move towards a balanced 

budget, the Wascana Centre Authority is one area that 

unfortunately has been feeling the pinch, and I look forward to 

that pinch being loosened so that in fact the Wascana Centre 

can continue its advancement in making the park even greater, 

even more beautiful, than it is as it is today. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 22 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 22 -- An Act 

to establish Crown Foundations for Saskatchewan 

Universities be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Bill No. 22 

establishes Crown foundations for Saskatchewan universities, 

and this is similar to what's being done in British Columbia, in 

Manitoba, in Alberta, and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our universities are suffering.  They've received 

dramatic decreases in their provincial operating grants over the 

past two years and are struggling to provide quality education 

for Saskatchewan students. 

 

This is part of what this Crown foundation will be all about, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's because of these cut-backs that universities 

have received, they have to look outside of the provincial 

structure for funds.  Simply adding on tuition fees to students 

will not answer all of that need, Mr. Speaker.  This will allow 

. . . these changes will allow citizens and corporations to 

provide monies, research seed monies to the universities, in 

exchange for some tax benefits. 

 

They will be allowed to write off some, or perhaps all -- I'm not 

sure how that's going to work -- of their donation to the 

university.  This type of foundation, Mr. Speaker, has certainly 

benefited universities, other universities in Canada, and it has 

particularly benefited universities in the United States. 

 

It's my hope that the establishment of these foundations will 

help offset some of the slashes in funding our universities have 

received from the provincial government, because research is 

very important to the progress of our province and indeed to 

our society as a whole.  Since this proposal was initiated and 

brought forward by our universities, and because it has been 

approved by both the federal Department of Finance and 

Revenue Canada, I see no reason, Mr. Speaker, why it should 

not be sent to the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Act to 

establish Crown Foundations is legislation which does exactly 

what its title indicates.  The university currently operates under 

a tax deduction for donors which allows donations to be written 

off over a five-year period of time at 20 per cent per year. 

 

As many of you probably know, recently a donor who was 

terminally ill had plans to donate a sizeable amount to the 

University of Regina but requested that there be a provision to 

allow a 100 per cent deduction in that tax year, for obvious 

reasons.  The only way to accommodate this request and the 

situations of other donors who may not be in a position to 

benefit from the five-year carry-forward is to incorporate a 

separate body, distinct from the university, known as a Crown 

foundation, which is eligible under federal revenue statutes to 

offer the 100 per cent deductability in the current year. 

 

This Act puts in place the necessary legislation to establish the 

Crown foundation and will give the fund-raisers on both 

campuses a green light to pursue opportunities for donations 

without the restrictions previously faced by the absence of a 

Crown foundation. 

 

Both Ontario and British Columbia have had similar 

foundations and I believe this has been a very positive situation 

for them.  I hope that this will produce similar positive results 

for our universities, because they are most definitely in need of 

as much financial assistance as they can muster, given the 

reality of the funding cut-backs and spiralling costs of 

operation.  I note that the University of Regina will face a 

deficit of more than $1 million this year, and that speaks to the 

urgency of empowering the university to generate revenues 

from all available sources. 

 

(1515) 

 

It is significant to note the importance of The Crown 

Foundations Act and the stipulation that there cannot be 

conditions attached to the donation. 

 

I believe that it is important to consider and respect the wishes 

of those who donate to our public institutions, but it is critical 

that the final direction be left in the 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

hands of those responsible for carrying out the dispensation of 

those monies, in keeping with the needs and the vision of the 

recipient institutions. 

 

So I am pleased to offer the endorsement of the Liberal caucus 

for this important change to our statutes which will allow for 

establishment of Crown foundations at both of the university 

campuses in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

speak to Bill 22, An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 

Saskatchewan Universities.  As has been noted, this legislation 

is not new to Saskatchewan . . . is new to Saskatchewan, 

although it's not new to Canada or to North America. 

 

While other members have spoken to the letter of the 

legislation, some of the facts of the legislation, I'd like to speak 

to some of the spirit of the legislation this afternoon.  First of 

all, I'd like to say that this is an extremely important legislation 

for the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland-University.  It's 

important in as much as it gives the Saskatchewan public a new 

model of responsiveness to educational funding at a time when 

such a model is very badly needed. 

 

During tough economic times, during times of restraint, we 

have to look to the private sector increasingly for support of 

some of our public institutions.  This may not be the way we 

would choose to go, but this is the reality that we have to deal 

with, given the present financial circumstances of our province.  

These times will pass, these times of restraint.  But while we're 

in them, it's very important to come up with new models or 

vehicles for the good public of Saskatchewan to assist the 

University of Regina and the university of Saskatoon in the 

educational process. 

 

This doesn't mean the creation of Crown foundations; it doesn't 

mean that government can simply distance itself all the more 

from the educational process and from funding of education.  

The Government of Saskatchewan simply cannot walk away 

from the university system, and this legislation in no way 

sanctions the walking of the Government of Saskatchewan 

away from the University of Saskatchewan or the University of 

Regina.  It's intended to assist the university communities.  And 

this legislation is part of government's responsibility or 

response, even in the face of economic restraint, to the 

university communities. 

 

I want to comment particularly on the importance of this 

legislation for alumni who have graduated from the U of S and 

the U of R (University of Regina).  This legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, will allow U of S alumni or U of R alumni to 

personally make a living memorial gift to their Alma Mater, to 

extend some of the benefit they have received from their 

education back to the institution that gave them that education. 

 

And I think this is a very significant step for Saskatchewan to 

take.  We've been out of step with other provinces in this 

regard, not having such legislation enabling donations to 

Crown foundations.  With the passage of this legislation, we'll 

have provision for Saskatchewan alumni to personally make 

living memorials to their Alma Mater. 

 

And so this legislation is certainly important for the 

administration of the University of Saskatchewan or the 

University of Regina and we recognize their efforts in bringing 

this to the attention of the Government of Saskatchewan.  It's 

certainly important also to the faculty of the University of 

Saskatchewan, to the support staff -- I think of the support staff 

1971 at the U of S.  It's important also to the research 

community at the universities. 

 

But most of all and most importantly I say, it's important to 

students at our universities, students present and students 

future, that they will have a new vehicle for educational 

funding in this province at a time when it's desperately needed. 

 

So I conclude by saying Saskatchewan may be 

johnny-come-late with the establishment of Crown foundations 

here in Saskatchewan, but I'm sure, as all members of the 

Assembly who have spoken so far have said, it's better late than 

never.  And we welcome this legislation and we look for it to 

make a real difference in the lives of all students in our 

province.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 27 -- An Act 

to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to 

allow this Bill to move to committee but I think there are a 

number of questions that we're going to raise in regard to this 

Bill.  Number one is that the definition of what the age will be 

for pension and superannuation for individuals, and what the 

government will anticipate a threshold for moving these people 

into retirement position will be. We'll be asking those 

questions.  There, I believe, are a number of agencies of the 

Crowns and government that are involved, and we're going to 

be asking about that. 

 

One of the things that it does is it allows the cabinet to make 

this decision.  And we will be asking questions about whether 

that is legitimate, whether it is important enough to deal with 

outside the framework of this Assembly, to handle 

superannuation for those early retirements.  And we'll be asking 

questions in relation to that. 

 

I think the role of this Assembly is somewhat being restricted 

by having the changes to these pension plans being made by 

Executive Council.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we're going to 

be asking why the government thinks that they need to have 

this outside of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And there are quite a number of them that are going to be 

applied to this, I suppose.  In the overall scheme of things, 

there's about 30,000 people employed by the public service, 

and therefore we're going to take a look at how the government 

intends to do it and the process they intend to use in making 

these decisions.  And we'll be asking the minister questions in 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

relation to that. 

 

And we will be able to find out the majority of that 

information, Mr. Speaker, in Committee of the Whole, and 

we'll be looking forward to the minister's answers to those and 

other questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I just say to 

the member opposite, I thank him for the courtesy of notifying 

us of those questions.  We'll see that they're brought to the 

attention of the minister and that if possible the answers are 

available when it comes back to Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm not quite certain that that is in order.  If 

the member wishes to speak to the Bill, I think he should have 

done so, rather than . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well he was speaking to the expediency 

with which the opposition moved the Bill forward. 

 

The Speaker: -- We will not accept that as a precedent in this 

Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

 

The Chair: -- Before we proceed I should like to ask the 

minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 

here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me Mr. George MacKay who is the senior vice-president, 

external services and corporate development; and I also have 

behind me Ron McGrath who is the controller at the 

Saskatchewan Research Council.  I'd also like to pass on the 

regrets of Mr. Jim Hutch, who is the president, and is unable to 

be with us here today. 

 

(1530) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

and welcome to your officials.  I was also looking forward to 

renewing my acquaintance with Jim; we seem to be getting into 

an annual affair here. But I'm sure that George and Ron will be 

very, very adequate in answering the questions that we'll be 

directing to your direction this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm just wondering, your department, as every 

other department in the government, was the recipient of a 

sheet of questions, what we call the generic questions or the 

general questions.  And I'm just wondering if you have those 

questions answered, if you have them available for us today, if 

you intend to answer them.  Could you bring me up to date on 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'm sorry, I don't have that list of 

questions here today in any kind of completed form.  If you 

wanted to run through the questions quickly we could do that, 

or I could provide the answers to the question for you at a later 

date. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wouldn't 

want to go through them this afternoon because it would take 

me until 5 o'clock.  This is a standard set of questions that 

every department has been getting, not only this session but last 

session as well, and we thought that we had instituted a rather 

unique approach here which would be time saving. 

 

You people got the questions ahead of time and could prepare 

them, and then in the House you simply gave them to us, and in 

the evenings we could look at them, and if there were any 

subsequent supplementary questions that we had on those, then 

the issue was resolved. 

 

So what I would propose to do then, Mr. Minister, is if you 

have got these back in Saskatoon or whatever, your officials are 

going to have to come here at some future time anyway 

because you have an amendment to the Saskatchewan Research 

Council Act, and so at that time perhaps we could get back into 

the Committee of Finance and pursue these questions. 

 

So could you indicate whether you have them at all or not; and 

if not, I'll see to it that you get another copy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'm sorry. I apologize to the hon. 

member.  It seems that for one reason or another the officials at 

SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) did not receive these 

questions until Friday last, and have not had the time to put 

them in the form that you've requested. 

 

Now there's a couple of avenues I think we could use, and one 

is that I give you my undertaking that I will provide those to 

you as soon as the SRC have them completed.  And I do 

appreciate getting the questions in advance; I want to reinforce 

that.  Or we can come back another day; they can be provided 

to you either another day for estimates or when the SRC Bill 

comes before the legislature.  My preference is that I would 

provide them to you as soon as they're completed.  And if the 

member is willing to accept that, then I would undertake to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Member, I think what we'll 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

do is we'll just leave them for today and give your officials an 

opportunity to answer them.  And at some future time we can 

have a look at them and pursue them if there's anything of 

significance that we are concerned about. 

 

So leaving that for the moment then, Mr. Minister, I would ask 

you that I'm going to give you an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to 

indicate to the House and to interested people any significant 

changes that may have occurred in terms of direction, in terms 

of policy, that you would want to share with us in programing 

or whatever, since the last time we met here, approximately a 

year ago -- anything of significance to the SRC policy or 

general workings that you might want to share with us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I want to seek just a little bit further 

clarification from the hon. member before we do that.  I do 

have a list of some questions that ended March 31, 1993.  I do 

not have them for the year ending March 31, '94, of course, 

because that year is not completed and we would have to make 

some assumptions in that regard. 

 

So if the member is asking, I have on one sheet the questions 

that are at least very similar to what you asked in your written 

questions for the year ending March 31, 1992 and the year 

ending March 31, 1993.  I can provide those to you today, but I 

cannot provide you the year ending March 31, '94, of course, 

because that fiscal year has not ended and we would have to 

make some assumptions.  And since a lot of the people there 

are scientists that work with exact things, I'd rather provide you 

with exact rather than estimates, especially from the Research 

Council. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, we have a discrepancy here between us 

as politicians that don't necessarily work with an exact science, 

so I hope your officials will be able to accommodate us as we 

go through this. 

 

In answer to your concern, the end of '93 fiscal year is what I 

would be looking for then, as opposed to the end of '94. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will give you an opportunity now to respond to 

the previous question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- . . . Research Council in the past year.  

There have been some of what I would think minor, but 

nevertheless exciting changes. 

 

One of those changes are the start of an endowment fund, I 

think it could be described as, whereas an individual who was 

formerly a resident of Saskatchewan provided, I believe, half a 

million dollars to the Saskatchewan Research Council to start 

an endowment fund.  And the title of the fund actually is 

technology in action. 

 

And I would want to commend Mr. Wahn who is currently 

living in Toronto, a former Member of Parliament, a very 

distinguished Canadian who has seen fit to put some of his 

hard-earned money into the trust of the Saskatchewan Research 

Council for the work on future programs. 

 

The Saskatchewan Research Council, as I recall your questions 

from last year and you'd be interested in this, continues to draw 

the largest portion of its funding from the expertise that they 

provide to the private sector, usually on a contract basis to 

private sector firms and individuals who wish to seek out 

expertise that they do not have in-house or cannot afford to 

have on an ongoing basis in-house, and therefore contract with 

the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

Those avenues are continuing not only in Saskatchewan, but in 

Canada and internationally in where the Saskatchewan 

Research Council do have projects under way or being pursued. 

 

And I think that those are the two items that would be a change 

from last year.  I have nothing that comes to mind in term of 

change of direction.  We are quite pleased I think as you are, 

with the direction of the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

We view the employees and the people who contract as highly 

skilled professionals that do provide a needed service to 

Saskatchewan residents and those beyond our borders for 

transfer of technology and research. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, last year . . . you 

referred to last year's estimates, and during those estimates you 

stated, and I quote: 

 

 . . . the Saskatchewan Research Council will play a major 

role in helping Saskatchewan rebuild its economy. 

 

Could you give me some specific detail as to how the Research 

Council has gone about trying to achieve that goal and with 

what success? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well there are some major projects 

under way at the present time at the Saskatchewan Research 

Council.  I'm not sure that I'm at liberty in the House to discuss 

the specific projects.  But one that I can think of in particular 

has an environmental impact to it.  The same project would 

provide a much needed product to Saskatchewan 

manufacturers, and it will be undergoing a pilot project within 

the confines of the Saskatchewan Research Council facilities in 

Saskatoon. 

 

We are very hopeful that the pilot project will prove successful, 

and it could mean a major new industry for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I would commend the Research Council 

for having that expertise.  I'd also commend the proponents of 

the project who are very interested in seeing Saskatchewan 

develop along an economic as well as environmentally sound 

basis. 

 

That is one project that comes to mind that will in fact develop 

the province's economy, should the pilot project come to 

fruition and a plant is actually built within the province. 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

There are a number of other smaller ventures.  If the member 

would be more specific in terms of projects, I'd be more than 

happy to comment on specific projects as we go along here this 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm asking the question.  

You made the statement that the SRC was going to have a 

significant role in rebuilding Saskatchewan economy.  So I'm 

asking you for examples of specific objects or objectives that 

are being met through the work of the SRC. 

 

You are the one that made that statement.  And now what I'm 

asking you is for some specific examples of how that laudable, 

I might add, objective is being met.  And you have indicated 

one.  So it's not me who has to be specific about the projects.  I 

just want to know from you how that objective is being met.  

And I'm sure if the officials had the opportunity, they could 

probably talk for an hour or an hour and a half on an exposé of 

the things that they are doing. 

 

Now you could read that article, that booklet, which I get on a 

consistent basis as well, but I would like a brief summary of 

some of these projects of the SRC that attain that goal. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've already alluded to this in one of your 

previous comments.  I know for a fact that the funding of the 

SRC comes from a variety of sources certainly -- and we'll be 

discussing the exact budget here from the government -- so a 

certain amount comes from out of the Consolidated Fund.  I 

know that you have contracts from industry, and that's the most 

exciting part, and I think that's where the tremendous potential 

of the SRC lies. 

 

So we have government contracts, we have private contracts, 

we have money coming from the Consolidated Fund.  And I 

believe, if I recall correctly, and my figure here indicates that 

last year you told me that 53 per cent of these . . . 53 per cent 

came from contracts or the funding of the SRC. And I'm just 

wondering, has that figure changed and if so, in what way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- First off I'd want to comment, if the 

member is interested, in a number of specific projects.  There 

was just a release at the end of 1993 which is the agricultural 

green plan funds target rural water supplies.  The joint funding 

of this project, which could cost up to 3.2 million, the Research 

Council, the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration, and 

several provincial agencies, private companies, and educational 

institutions will be working on. 

 

The key components are to reduce levels of dissolved organics 

and prairie surface waters by identifying and evaluating 

catchment area management practices; to evaluate 

cost-effective, small-scale water treatment systems designed to 

remove dissolved organics and microbial contaminants of 

surface water; also to investigate and evaluate dugout systems 

designed to improve water quality for on-farm use; and to 

develop instructional material covering surface water quality 

management issues on the prairies, and improving the level of 

knowledge of the government staff who work with the 

producers. 

 

We also have been doing a lot of work in other areas that affect 

agriculture.  The work that has gone on in the automated 

ultrasound equipment concerning ultrasound in the beef 

industry have been very successful and I think there are some 

exciting things there that the Research Council and all 

Saskatchewan residents can be proud of. 

 

In terms of a private sector company, Agtron Enterprises of 

Saskatoon has developed a seed monitor which has the 

potential to save Saskatchewan farmers a lot of time and 

money.  We've done some work also with a company in Tokyo, 

and the Toyo Oil Mills company has entered into some work 

that will provide the Saskatchewan Research Council and more 

particular the Saskatchewan canola industry with economic 

benefits. 

 

If we look at other things in terms of the environment, the 

atmospheric dust collector provides accurate sampling of the 

extent and type of organic chemicals that atmospherically enter 

into the environment.  These are all issues or all projects that 

can help build the Saskatchewan economy, not only for direct 

use in Saskatchewan but also for use in a number of other 

places throughout the globe. 

 

A couple other things you may be interested in is the first phase 

of a Chevy Sprint Geo Metro gas vehicle conversion has been 

completed, and this is looking at natural gas vehicles.  And 

initially the project looks very, very good.  There are a number 

of people now in Saskatchewan who drive natural gas vehicles.  

This is a good, clean alternate fuel which is cheaper and more 

environmentally friendly than our traditional gasoline or diesel 

that have been used in engines. 

 

And there's been a successful evaluation of membrane 

technology for the production of sodium hydroxide for 

Ormiston Mining & Smelting, and this has resulted in 

submission to the western economic diversification for a 

20-cell pilot plant.  And that's the first one that I mentioned, 

and that has some very exciting possibilities for Saskatchewan.  

It concerns the environment; it concerns the pulp and paper 

industry; it concerns the sodium sulphate mines in the province, 

and has a great deal of spin-offs to it. 

 

(1545) 

 

I hope that that gives the member some idea of the projects that 

are being worked on by the Saskatchewan Research Council.  

And there certainly are many, many more. 

 

I wasn't trying to be flippant at all by suggesting that the 

member might be interested in other specific projects.  I only 

said that because there are so many projects that the Research 

Council are working on, that we could certainly spend well past 

5 o'clock going into each of the different projects here. 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

In terms of the revenue by source in the fiscal year '92-93, the 

breakdown of revenue to the Saskatchewan Research Council 

is, by grant, 27 per cent; provincial government, 8 per cent; 

federal government, 17 per cent; and industry, 48 per cent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One of 

the main reasons for me making that comment about the project 

was I thought that you, and I certainly thought that the officials 

would appreciate the opportunity to show all the good things 

that the SRC is doing.  And if we're going to be spending 

public money here, I wanted to give you that opportunity to tell 

the people who are watching and who are listening some of the 

things that the SRC is doing and the amounts of monies that we 

are allocating toward that. 

 

Now you indicated to me the breakdown for the '92-93 year of 

grants, 27 per cent, and then the provincial government, 8 per 

cent.  Now it would seem to me that those grants . . . could you 

indicate to me the difference between those grants?  Where 

would those grants be coming from on that 27 per cent?  And is 

the 8 per cent that you told me about the provincial 

government, does that include that 7.5-or-so million dollars that 

we're talking about, or is that the grant structure?  Could you 

clarify that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The amounts I mentioned on the 

breakdown to the hon. member when I mentioned provincial 

government, that would be contract work or joint shared work 

between other government departments and the Saskatchewan 

Research Council.  The 27 per cent is the core grant that comes 

from the Consolidated Fund.  Just for your records, the year 

before the amount of the grant from the Consolidated Fund was 

28 per cent of total revenue. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I thought that that 

would be the case.  So the provincial government is saying, we 

need some help on this particular expertise or some testing 

done, for example, in the Department of Highways.  And then 

you would go to the SRC and in effect hire them for services 

provided, and you pay them a fee for service.  That's what that 

8 per cent would indicate -- is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, the 8 per cent could be a number of 

things.  When the Research Council does work for a 

government department or agency, they would expect that 

government department or agency to pay for it in most cases 

just like they would expect private sector to pay for it. 

 

And I imagine the departments most often that deal with the 

Saskatchewan Research Council would be those involved with 

energy, those involved in mining. The Department of 

Highways, I would think, would undertake some work from 

time to time; the Department of Agriculture.  There's many 

departments and agencies of government that come into contact 

with the Saskatchewan Research Council, and when they do, 

they're expected to pay for that expertise that's acquired or is 

in-house at the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

There may be also circumstances whereby the Research 

Council will work with other government departments or 

agencies for a particular client.  In that case there may 

sometimes be a charge to the department or agency. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I notice also that in 

1992-93 -- the year that we're talking about right now -- the 

grant . . . and that's right out of the Consolidated Fund.  Is that 

correct?  Can you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, the grant of 27 per cent I 

mentioned comes directly from the Consolidated Fund.  It 

would be a line item in the budget. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Right, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, thank 

you.  One thing that catches my eye as I look on this document, 

which you might have as well, and the top half of that page 

indicates 1985-1986 SRC revenue by source.  And I notice that, 

while in last year the provincial government contract work to 

the SRC amounted to 8 per cent of their entire budget, in 

1985-1986 this contract work by the provincial government 

was, in my estimation, a whopping 30 per cent.  Why would 

there have been this reduction of work referred by the various 

departments to the SRC over that period of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Part of the explanation for that particular 

review, 1985-86, it's . . . You're correct, 30 per cent, and that's 

twice of any other year, or almost twice of any other year.  That 

had to do with some petroleum work which was jointly funded 

by the federal government and the provincial government.  And 

part of that is matching money that went in . . . or our money 

went into the Saskatchewan Research Council as our arm to do 

our share of the costs that were proportioned out.  And in later 

years it was decided to do it directly than rather through the 

Saskatchewan Research Council.  That's why, partly at least, 

why you would see a drop in '86-87 down to 22 per cent and 

then to the more traditional level in '87-88 of 15 per cent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, excuse me for not completely 

following because in the meantime the page brought me your 

answers, which I thank you for, and we'll peruse them and see 

if they are indeed what we were anticipating.  But that'll come 

at a later time. 

 

Did you say that part of the drop was because of less federal 

cost-sharing, or what was the relationship between the federal 

government contracts and the provincial?  I didn't quite catch 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- During those couple of years there was a 

petroleum program that the federal government was funding 

and the provincial government was funding.  The federal 

government put their funding directly into the program.  The 

province put their funding through the Saskatchewan Research 

Council.  And then there was a decision made, by your 

administration at some point, not to fund it through the 

Research Council and fund it directly into that 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

particular program. 

 

So no, there wasn't a drop of the federal funding, there wasn't a 

drop of the provincial funding; there was a federal-provincial 

agreement.  And in the initial years we funded it through the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, and then over a two-year 

period decided to fund it directly into the program itself. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I wasn't aware of that, Mr. Minister, and I 

thank you for that information. 

 

If we could just continue to compare the charts here.  In 

1985-86 the industry component of the SRC budget was 16 per 

cent.  And that I would assume would be direct contracts 

entered into by the SRC and private industry.  Is there any 

indication at that time that there were some of these contracts 

let out, not to industry as such, but to other research councils?  

And I'll give you the ARC as an example, Alberta Research 

Council.  What is the liaison that your SRC has with the ARC 

and perhaps with Manitoba as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Both of the research councils you 

mentioned, we have memorandums of understanding with 

them.  Also on a very, very regular basis there's contact from 

our president to the other research councils, not just within 

those provinces but other provinces as well. 

 

And the work that we do is certainly not confined to the 

province of Saskatchewan.  There's a history of expertise that's 

been built up at the Saskatchewan Research Council.  And as I 

mentioned in my opening statement, quite often the expertise 

that we have in-house or have access to is required not only in 

other parts of Canada but in the international market. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I'm well aware of the memoranda of 

understanding.  I accompanied the Hon. Ray Meiklejohn on the 

Alberta tour when we signed that memorandum a few years 

back, Mr. Minister. 

 

But my question is: the research that would be interchangeable 

. . . I know that we do some research for them and they do 

some research for us in different fields because there is areas of 

expertise that each of these research councils has.  What I'm 

wondering is, do you pay each other for that?  Is part of that 

industry 16 per cent in 1985-86, for example, would that have 

been some of that revenue from these other research councils 

that you have this memorandum of understanding with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, when we do work for other 

research councils, they would be charged for it on a contract 

basis; and if they do work for us, we'd expect them to charge us 

on a contract basis.  The amount that's included under the 

industry percentage of revenue would include work done for 

other research councils. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In 

1992-93 -- and I guess this is what I find the most exciting 

about this whole dialogue so far -- I notice that the industry 

component of revenue for the SRC was 48 per cent.  Now I 

thought it was 53 and that's why I mentioned 53 in my opening 

remarks.  But according to this, I must have been wrong or I 

got a different figure from a different time, I'm not quite sure.  

Maybe you could indicate that to me. 

But, Mr. Minister, I find that very exciting, and to me indicates 

that we're on the right road here, where the SRC now is getting 

almost half of its revenue through contract by private industry 

and perhaps other SRCs.  And I would like you to comment on 

that, perhaps from your perspective, perhaps from your 

officials' perspective. 

 

The trend is obvious, from 16 per cent in '85-86 to 48 per cent 

last year.  Now has that been a gradual trend, or was there a 

dramatic shift as there was in the provincial government's share 

as we discussed previously?  And if it is a trend, what do you 

anticipate for two, three, four, five years down the road? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well it depends I suppose on the . . . 

(inaudible) . . . but I view it as a gradual trend, whereby the 

Research Council have looked at other research councils across 

Canada, and some of the other research councils have not done 

very well, and I think partly because they relied too much on 

their government grant and didn't go out enough to the private 

sector.  That's my own analysis, and if it's inaccurate certainly 

don't blame the officials for that. 

 

But the year you use is '85-86, it was 16 per cent; the following 

year it was 18 per cent; the next year it was 25 per cent, then 34 

per cent, then 41 per cent, then 46 per cent, then 51 per cent.  

And there's a slight drop off of 3 per cent in '92-93 to 48 per 

cent. 

 

So I would call it a gradual increase, but remarkable, and I 

commend the Research Council and their officials and the 

employees for that, that it continued to increase without any 

fluctuation in it, and although you could say it fluctuated 

somewhat for '92-93, I view that as a very minor amount.  And 

we're hopeful that the Saskatchewan Research Council, because 

of their credibility, will continue to progress from a position of 

mostly government support to the position that they're in now, 

that that will in fact continue. 

 

(1600) 

 

I do though view it as very important that there's some 

component from the government, either federal or provincial, 

into research councils so that they're working with the people 

of the province to have that entity that represents the 

government and its people who live here. 

 

So I don't foresee a position whereby we would be taking away 

from the grant that's there.  My view is that the grant should 

hold about stable where it is, maybe some minor decreases in 

future years.  I can't project that, but certainly we encourage the 

Research Council to increase the amount of revenue that they 

draw from the private sector and from other research councils 

across the country. 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, give me some comfort level that 

indeed we have not reached the high peak and are on a 

downward trend.  You mentioned we were up to 51; now we're 

at 48.  That may be a blip on the horizon.  Could you give an 

indication to me why that occurred so that indeed I can have 

the comfort of knowing that it was probably only a one-year 

blip instead of a trend that was being started. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The officials are looking at whether or 

not there's an established reason for the drop of 3 per cent in 

industry funding.  But I predict that the trend will continue, so 

that in general at least there's an increase in the amount of 

revenues drawn from industry. 

 

I look here at a copy of the article in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, and just to quote the business editor, it says: 

 

As research councils in most of Canada disappear or are 

taken over by other agencies, Saskatchewan stands alone, 

a unique success story.  And much of that success can be 

attributed to the fact that it was given a mandate to find its 

own revenue stream by selling its services to private and 

public sector clients.  In effect, it was partially privatized 

with dwindling reliance on public funding. 

 

Now while I don't advocate the privatization of the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, I do in fact support the 

direction that the Saskatchewan Research Council has taken. 

 

In terms of the drop in revenue, we do view this as a bit of a 

blip because the projections right now for '93-94, which we 

don't have all the year end in as of yet, the Research Council 

will have greater than 51 per cent of its revenue from industry 

sources in that year 1993-94, the current fiscal year that we're 

in. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know really how 

much faith to put in your predictions.  I certainly hope that you 

are accurate, but I think time will tell on that. 

 

The fact that you're not advocating the privatization of the 

SRC -- I'm not going to get into that debate with you -- but I 

might suggest to you that maybe you're heading in that 

direction whether you know it or not.  Because all I have to do 

is take a look at the funding available for the SRC and I find 

out that indeed the provincial government is stepping back and 

saying, whoa, you fellows got too much money last year or you 

took too much in on your own; I'm not quite sure of the reason.  

But when I take a look at '93-94, it was $7.496 million that was 

allocated out of the Consolidated Fund for the SRC. 

 

This year the projected . . . the budget anticipated is $7.386 

million.  Now that is 110, I believe, $110,000 reduction coming 

out of funding from the Consolidated Fund.  Is that a trend or 

why would that have occurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The budget, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. 

member, is basically the same.  There was a one-time amount 

that was included in last year's budget -- it's not included in this 

year's budget -- for air quality work being done with 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  So if you 

take that amount out, the budgets are virtually exactly the same.  

It has not decreased or increased. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me, that what I see in 

the blue book here is not going to have any effect at all on the 

operation of the SRC. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well of course what you see in the blue 

book will affect the operation of the SRC because in the blue 

book for '93-94 there was an amount budgeted of $7.496 

million.  The budget for the year that we're going into is $7.386 

million.  There's a difference of $110,000 there.  The one-time 

amount that was put in was to do some special air quality work 

and the reduction is exactly $110,000.  So the amount will not 

. . . the appeared decrease in the amount would not affect the 

work of the Saskatchewan Research Council because this 

project will have been concluded at the end of the fiscal year 

and that funding was not required for an ongoing project. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well now you've got me confused because 

that's exactly what I said in my question.   Will it affect it?  

And you got up and said, no it won't.  Now you're saying at the 

end, yes it will.  So will it or won't it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I haven't said either.  I said that the 

amount of money to the Research Council will, in effect, be the 

same for their budgetary purposes.  Although there is a 

$110,000 difference between the two years, that's exactly the 

same amount that was provided for the air quality work, which 

was one specialized project that they were working on.  They 

drew that money from the Consolidated Fund.  The work is not 

required in that project any longer because the project will be 

completed as of the end of this fiscal year, so it won't be an 

enhancement and it won't be a reduction in budget. 

 

The amount of money for real projects, if they have to assign 

other money from the Consolidated Fund or their grant, will be 

the same as the previous year.  The Research Council and 

myself anticipate that having no effect, either plus or minus, on 

the Research Council's operations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well let's explore this a little bit further.  We 

have two categories here where the provincial government puts 

money into the SRC.  One is through the grant and that is out 

of the Consolidated Fund; that's the amount that has been 

reduced by $110,000. 

 

You're telling me that reduction of $110,000 is because there 

was a project specific -- you said some kind of engineering 

work being done on air quality.  Why would that have come out 

of the grant out of the 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

Consolidated Fund?  Why would a project specific then not 

have been funded by the Department of the Environment or 

what other department would have been responsible for 

accessing this kind of expertise? 

 

Because that would, according to the way I look at it, fall in 

under that provincial government of 8 per cent in '92-93.  Why 

would it not have been included in that column?  Why was it 

paid out direct out of a grant out of the Consolidated Fund for 

its project specific? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well as the member would know, 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 

which is the agency this work was done in concert with, was 

paid as part of their accommodation and service -- you'd 

certainly know the history of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation -- and it was done internally within 

their organization instead of SPMC getting someone else to do 

the work for the facilities that house the Saskatchewan 

Research Council; they did the work themselves internally. 

 

So if you look at a further breakdown, the operating grant to the 

Saskatchewan Research Council for 1993-94 is $3.963 million; 

in '94-95 it's exactly the same amount -- $3.963 million. But the 

amount to SPMC varies, and I point that out to the hon. 

member. 

 

The amount in '93-94 to SPMC was $3.533 million.  The year 

that we're going into for estimates now, '94-95, was $3.423 

million -- a difference of $110,000.  This has to do with their 

accommodation charge.  I would point that out to the hon. 

member.  I didn't mean to mislead him that they were doing a 

special program that was being paid for out of the Consolidated 

Fund.  That's not the case.  This is work they were doing 

internally for their landlord, so to speak. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What is the relationship between the SRC and 

the feed test lab on campus in Saskatchewan, University of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There is no direct relationship.  From 

time to time the Research Council will do analytical tests in 

their own research lab.  And in those cases it's done on a 

contract basis and they would be paid for the work that they do. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thought that would 

be the answer. 

 

Last year, Mr. Minister, I think that SaskPower provided a 

contract to someone in relation to wind power for generating 

electricity, and that the SRC bid, I am told at least, came in 

second on that project.  And I was wondering if you could tell 

me whether SRC has brought forward any proposals of ideas 

for co-generation projects, since you were already almost 

involved in that on your failed bid with SaskPower. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, the Saskatchewan Research Council 

has not done anything on co-generation in terms of a project.  

They've not done, it's my understanding, any work for any 

proponent of co-generation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I don't want to tell them how to do their 

work, but it seems to me that would almost beg the question, is 

there no interest in this area; is there no future in this area; is it 

beyond the scope of the SRC; does the SRC initiate any 

projects entirely of their own that would fall within this or is it 

that no proponent has come forward to make a contract with the 

SRC?  I'm just wondering, and I'm asking this from the 

perspective it just seems to me that this is a field that is just 

begging and asking for some research.  And what you just told 

me now, Mr. Minister, is that the SRC has nothing on the 

books at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well if you look at the growth of SRC 

over the years, the staff numbers have increased from 180 staff 

in 1983 to over 250 in 1994.  And usually what happens at the 

Saskatchewan Research Council is that as expertise is required 

by them because of requests from industry SRC will then 

acquire the expertise, and once they've acquired it they try and 

develop it if it's ongoing.  And in this case I don't believe that 

SRC has had any requests from proponents to co-generation 

and they would not acquire this expertise unless they had a 

request from industry to provide assistance or to provide 

research in this particular field. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Am I to conclude from that answer, Mr. 

Minister, that the SRC will not embark on projects unless they 

are requested by some outside source to make a contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well yes, the Research Council does 

initiate some projects on their own, but it's part of the condition 

of their grant actually -- the money they get from the 

Consolidated Fund -- is that they find partnerships or other 

people to do the work with or do the work for; and in this case 

in the particular example you've mentioned, that has not been 

the case at this particular time. 

 

But certainly there is extensive research done into energy 

because energy is something that we feel the Research Council 

is on the leading edge of, going back to such things as 

horizontal drilling in the province where the Research Council I 

think can take a great deal of the credit for the success story of 

horizontal drilling. 

 

I don't think that you can take that as the Research Council not 

being interested in a particular area; it's just that with the 

resources they have, they priorize the work that they do and 

they look at areas where they can joint venture, areas where 

they can find partnerships, areas where they can find industry 

participants to in fact in some cases do the work for it. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I fully understand that there are 

so many potential projects out in the world that the SRC could 

not possibly be expected to be on top of every one of them.  I'm 

not even casting aspersions on that aspect of it.  But I didn't 

even want 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

to get into this topic, but we're kind of falling into it. 

 

But it just seems to me that with the emphasis these days on 

co-generation and the fact that SaskPower a while back -- and I 

don't know whether it was a year and a half or whatever it 

was -- made a specific request for proposals to be brought 

forward for co-gen.  And I know that there were 10 projects 

that were initiated and were brought forward to SaskPower.  

And these folks paid $10,000 each to have SaskPower analyse 

the potential within that particular project. 

 

And I shouldn't say I know, but I've heard that some of these 

people have spent up to $250,000 just on research on these 

particular projects.  And I guess what surprises me is that none 

of these -- and some of these are small towns and so on, 

scattered throughout our province -- that none of them would 

have accessed the expertise of the SRC in coming up with their 

project.  And I guess I'm expressing more amazement that the 

SRC would not have been involved in some of these projects in 

one way or another.  And perhaps they were; I don't know.  

Would you mind telling me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well that's because -- I tried to explain it 

but maybe I wasn't clear enough -- is that currently the 

Saskatchewan Research Council does not have any 

considerable expertise on co-generation.  The type of expertise 

in terms of energy that the Saskatchewan Research Council 

does have is in advanced technology for demand-side 

management or conservation.  And they have a petroleum 

branch that looks more at the traditional energy source of 

hydrocarbons and technology, to be more efficient in extracting 

those hydrocarbons from the ground. 

 

So on the demand side management part and on the 

hydrocarbon petroleum developments, they have considerable 

expertise.  If a proponent would have come to the 

Saskatchewan Research Council and indicated a strong interest 

in participating and needing the technology on co-generation, 

then I'm sure that the Research Council would have paid due 

diligence to find that expertise or look at whether or not it was 

an economically viable thing for them to do, and that they 

could in fact be some benefit to the client who would come 

forward to them. 

 

In terms of alternate energy, I believe that's a third area where 

we do have some expertise at the Research Council.  I would 

point out to the hon. member though that any of the eight 

proponents that put forward the 10 projects for non 

_utility generation have considerable expertise in-house; 

otherwise, they would have not gone to the stage that they had 

actually gone to in presenting the proposals. 

 

So I would assume that they did not feel a desire . . . some of 

them were power companies, some of them were energy 

companies with a co-generation branch to their company -- that 

they felt they had considerable expertise in-house and felt not a 

need to go to some outside source to develop their expertise in 

co-generation. 

 

And I think that likely the second reason that proponents would 

not have gone to the Research Council is that they wanted to 

ensure that the information they had is very guarded and very 

confidential.  And the member would know that that would be 

the case when you're in a competitive situation with a number 

of other companies. 

 

And although I pride very closely the confidentiality in which 

the Saskatchewan Research Council deals, these companies 

that are dealing with very large projects I think have the 

expertise and would want to assure that only their company 

knew what the inside knowledge was about their proposal. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't know, but it just seems to me if I was 

involved in that, I would be kind of uneasy now that 

SaskPower has access to eight, you say, or 10 projects like this 

with all that expertise that has been in 

_house, as you put it, has now been funnelled into one 

computer, namely that of SaskPower. 

 

You talk about confidentiality.  I'd tend to be a little bit queasy 

about having all of that information at your fingertips at the 

expense of these other folks. 

 

There's another aspect of this, and that's the biotech.  And I 

thought our SRC was fairly high profile in that area.  I also 

have heard quite a few stories about the federal government 

and the NRC, the National Research Council, perhaps not the 

NRC as much as various departments within the federal 

government and research, R&D, that's carried on by the feds. 

 

Have you done any exploring, or has the SRC done any 

exploring in terms of being able to access some of that 

expertise and actually being able to pull in some of the biotech 

research that's going on in Ottawa and bringing it out on the 

prairies where we have the animals, where we have the grains, 

where we have a university that is already known for its 

expertise in terms of research, be it medical or be it in other 

fields? 

 

I'm just wondering, have you done any promotion to get some 

of the research capabilities that are at the federal level right 

now and bring them into Saskatchewan, bring them into the 

SRC and the University of Saskatchewan in particular? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's a couple of examples I can give 

you.  One is the Building Science Group in which the 

participation with the National Research Council is firmly 

centred in Saskatchewan; otherwise this project may not be in 

place. 

 

The Advance Technology House is an example of that whereby 

. . . I shouldn't say it's directly from the National Research 

Council, but in cooperation with Energy Mines & Resources 

Canada, of course a federal government department. 

 

The other is the Bovine Lab, the blood lab in Saskatoon which 

is a centre of excellence.  We also have IRAP (industrial 

research assistance program) which in '92-93 there were 3,160 

small/medium 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

businesses that were provided assistance in bringing in from 

one million to a million and a half each year of federal funding 

to Saskatchewan small businesses. 

 

So those are three examples of federal programs that the 

Saskatchewan Research Council moulds into a Saskatchewan 

perspective that I think are beneficial to all the people in the 

province. 

 

But in those particular cases -- the one is small business, the 

other has to do with the bovine blood lab -- it would have to do 

with the agricultural sector and the advanced technology for 

your home-owners in Saskatchewan, or those who rent 

dwellings, to make sure that they're as energy efficient as 

possible. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just 

one series of questions, or maybe only one question, depending 

on how you answer.  And that deals with a topic that we will be 

discussing at a future date when we make an amendment to the 

Act, the Saskatchewan Research Council Act, to accommodate 

concerns that the council has. 

 

And as a precursor to the discussion, I'd like you to answer the 

question, is the SRC now considered to be an independent 

body, semi-independent body, an agent of the Crown, or a 

Crown corporation?  What is the status of the SRC right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The Saskatchewan Research Council is 

recognized as an agent of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On whose say-so?  Who gives you that 

recommendation? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The legislation does it.  It's in the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The Department of Justice agrees with 

that opinion, the Research Council agrees with that opinion, 

and it may be debatable as to whether or not the Act actually is 

as explicit as what it should be.  So I think that myself, the 

SRC, the Department of Justice, recognize the Saskatchewan 

Research Council as an agent of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I'm glad that you do, Mr. Minister, but I 

have more of a reason for asking that question.  You say the 

Department of Justice.  Well the Department of Justice has an 

opinion that it is an agent of the Crown, but in a few days time 

or a few weeks time, there will be a Bill in this legislature and 

the Bill will be saying that we are going to amend the 

Saskatchewan Research Council Act to make it an agent of the 

Crown. 

 

That's one of the reasons given for making that amendment, to 

make it an agent of the Crown.  But you just told me now that 

you, the SRC, and the Department of Justice are already saying 

it is an agent of the Crown. 

 

And I'm not disagreeing with you.  All I'm trying to do is ferret 

out some of the information and take a look at the case that 

you're making, why we should have that amendment.  Who 

then does not accept the fact that it is an agent of the Crown 

that makes this necessary?  Is it the federal government, is it the 

Department of Treasury or Department of Internal Revenue in 

Ottawa?  What is the reason why we have to do this to make it 

explicit?  You have an opinion, they have an opinion, the 

Department of Justice has an opinion, but apparently that's 

what it is -- it's an opinion. 

 

So we're doing this, or going to be doing that.  And, Mr. 

Chairman, we're talking in anticipation of this Act, but I 

thought if we had this preliminary discussion here we would 

know better what we were going to be doing when that Act 

came forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The changes proposed in the Act that's 

before the legislature are to clarify that in fact the 

Saskatchewan Research Council is an agent of the Crown.  This 

is done especially for Revenue Canada, so that we can accept 

money like we did from Mr. Wahn who provided $500,000 to 

the Saskatchewan Research Council for an endowment fund, 

and we see other people who may want to contribute money as 

well.  And so it's mainly for the purposes of those who want to 

make the contributions in future years. 

 

And secondly for Revenue Canada, to make it very clear in the 

Act that the Saskatchewan Research Council is in fact an agent 

of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well that's what I thought, Mr. Minister, and 

that's why I wanted to bring it forward and put it on record 

what the problem seems to be here.  And I don't know if I'm 

particularly pleased that we in the province of Saskatchewan, in 

this legislature, have to react to something that Revenue 

Canada, in their wisdom, says it isn't, when our own 

Department of Justice is saying, yes it is an agent of the Crown 

and it's always been recognized as such. 

 

But if those are the machinations we have to go through to 

satisfy Revenue Canada, I guess that's what we have to do.  

And in anticipation of that Act, Mr. Chairman, you'll find that 

the opposition is not going to be in opposition to that. 

 

I believe the member from Regina North West has some 

questions, Mr. Chairman.  And at the conclusion of her 

remarks, I would recommend to the assistant House Leader that 

perhaps we would report progress and continue on, on Indian 

and Metis Affairs, I believe. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd 

like to express our welcome to the officials of the 

Saskatchewan Research Council and speak to you first about 

the mandate of the SRC which is, to quote:  to assist clients to 

develop a viable economy with quality jobs and lifestyle 

through research, development and transfer of scientific and 

technological solutions, applications and services. 

 

That's quite a mouthful, but a very meaningful and significant 

mandate where our future is concerned. 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

Can the minister outline what discussions have taken place at 

the ministerial level about setting the direction for how the 

activities of the Research Council are expected to fit with the 

economic development plan of the province? 

 

(1630) 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the Minister of Municipal Government 

on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- With leave, to introduce some guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce in the Speaker's gallery today three people who are 

visiting us from Newfoundland -- the minister of municipal 

government and housing from Newfoundland, Arthur Reid; and 

his officials with him, George Sweeney and Bob Noseworthy. 

 

I'd like the House to welcome them to Saskatchewan and wish 

them well on their return trip to Newfoundland. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the connection is the connection 

we hope that all people and all agencies in the province would 

have, and that is one to enhance as much as we possibly can the 

economy of the province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Research Council has developed a vision 

that supports the use of research and technology as the keys to 

creating wealth and prosperity.  Secondly, that the province has 

identified a central role for the Saskatchewan Research Council 

associated with the province's strategic industrial clusters.  And 

thirdly, that the SRC's programs are market driven by the needs 

of the private and public sector clients. 

 

So those are three reasons . . . or three things that dictate the 

direction of the Saskatchewan Research Council.  And in terms 

of the priority areas that the Research Council deals with, they 

deal with agriculture, biotechnology, mining, energy, forestry, 

and information service.  And if something fell outside of those 

areas, we'd have a very close look at it, but the priority is 

certainly in those six areas that I mentioned to you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, have you any method of 

measuring the value of the activities of the Research Council in 

terms of the number of jobs created through the activities 

outlined in the mandate statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I point out to the member that it is 

not the direct job of the Saskatchewan Research Council to 

track the number of jobs that are created by a project once 

they've done the research work and maybe transferred the 

technology on to a private sector client.  It's not their job then, 

once that leaves their office or their research labs, to determine 

how many jobs it creates.  It's not part of the mandate. 

 

I think there are ways of finding that out. You can deal with the 

statistics that are gathered through traditional methods within 

the province, and usually you have groups like StatsCanada 

who tell you whether you're increasing in your jobs or you're 

decreasing in the number of jobs that are there.  There is a 

project report that was done by Peat Marwick Stevenson & 

Kellogg that was done for the Saskatchewan Research Council 

in January of '92, but that deals more with the spin-off effect in 

certain sectors that the employment would be created.  In terms 

of exact numbers, it's not the role of the SRC to determine that; 

it would be another government department. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, there has been evidence in the 

amendments to the Act which established the Research Council 

as an agent of the Crown, that private sector donations have 

played an increasingly important role, and you were talking 

about it before with the member from Rosthern.  Perhaps you 

could just forgive me for being . . . not understanding 

completely, but what concerns me is the decrease in provincial 

government funding that has accompanied the increased 

support from the private sector. 

 

Can you tell me how the continually increasing expectations 

being placed on research as an economic generator are 

supported by the Government of Saskatchewan having 

decreased its funding by the 3 per cent you were talking about?  

How do you balance your commitment to research with your 

actions in cutting funding to the SRC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well because the bottom line is, is that 

we are likely the most successful research council anywhere in 

Canada.  And the proof, I guess, is in the pudding.  The success 

of the Saskatchewan Research Council stands for itself by the 

employees we have here and the employees that work out of 

the offices and are contracted by the Saskatchewan Research 

Council. 

 

And we found it was prudent not to follow the direction of 

other research councils elsewhere in Canada where in some 

cases their research councils have disappeared.  And what 

should happen at the Research Council, and has been 

happening for a number of years, is that the Research Council 

is driven by the need of the community it serves.  And 

primarily that's the community of Saskatchewan.  And because 

of doing that they've been able to transfer some of their 

technology and their expertise outside of our 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

borders. 

 

The Saskatchewan Research Council isn't in the role of 

providing humanitarian aid regardless of how worthy that 

should be.  Their role is to do the research, transfer the 

technology, do developments that bring money into their 

coffers; therefore, to a large extent it's market driven.  But we 

realize as a government we have a responsibility to ensure that 

research and development does happen in the province because 

it's so very important and will have an increasing importance 

into the future as we move into a highly technological age 

which we're likely in at the present time but will get even more 

competitive. 

 

If Saskatchewan is going to get onto the leading edge of 

anything, we have to have the research and development.  So 

what's happened over a number of years is that we've tried to 

balance the market driven, and therefore having the industry 

pay for the research that they get out of the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, to balance that with the work that's actually 

done because of the core grant that is given by the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And if you look at it in recent years, there isn't a dramatic 

change away from the amount of money that's given by the 

provincial government.  As I said earlier, in the answer to the 

member from Rosthern, if anything, we hope that it will stay 

flat, maybe reduce a little bit, but hopefully stay flat and that 

they'll continue to increase the amount, although there'll be 

some dips in the road to where they eventually end up, is that 

there will be a constant growth in the amount of money that the 

industrial sector, the private sector, puts into work that's being 

done by the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, can 

you give me a list of the various research projects that are 

under way in Saskatchewan, and what portions of their funding 

are sponsored by private sector donations or funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well if there's a purpose in that maybe 

the member could explain it to me.  But we run upwards of 

anywhere from 800 to 1,000 projects a year through the 

Research Council, a number range from confidential to highly 

confidential because of the competitive nature that the 

Saskatchewan Research Council does for industry. 

 

And I don't know if you want a list of the thousand or so 

projects that are . . . and some of them ongoing over a number 

of years -- I suppose we could.  But you let me know first the 

detail that you want on them and let's have a little dialogue 

about what it is you actually want because the people at the 

Research Council can do a valuable service in terms of the 

work they do rather than tracking this down.  If it's of value to 

you, then we're willing to provide you with some description of 

the projects. 

 

There may be some that we can provide you with no 

description of the project, but at least to let you know a project 

is there.  But keep in mind there's anywhere upwards of 800, 

1,000 projects that we participate in every year.  So maybe if 

you tell me a little clearer what you want. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I guess what I'm asking you is, are there 

sectors of that 800 to 1,000 projects that are more likely to be 

funded by the private sector and others that have much more of 

the public funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well, for example the petroleum 

division, since it's got such an important role in Saskatchewan, 

there is some of the core grant would go into the petroleum 

division.  There's some of the core grant, I guess, goes into 

each of those sectors that I had mentioned to you a bit earlier 

but the amount for any particular project, is done by a private 

sector client, is all charged back to the client on a contract 

basis.  This core grant is to provide the core body within those 

six different sectors of the Research Council. 

 

The officials here just pointed out to me that the Research 

Council consults with its clients on a continuous basis and SRC 

has some 5,800 clients, of which about 4,000 are small and 

medium-sized business.  The revenue in terms of activity, if 

you're interested in that, for '92-93 broken down by 

activity -- 41 per cent of the revenue comes from research and 

development; 26 per cent comes from technological transfer; 

and 34 per cent come from services provided by the Research 

Council. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- That's very helpful, Mr. Minister.  Can you 

provide a list of those products which have been developed by 

the SRC and are currently being marketed by private sector 

companies outside Saskatchewan?  And a list of those being 

marketed within the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well you ask questions that are a little 

tough to deliver on.  I don't have such a list that's here right 

now.  But one of the greatest success stories that's used 

extensively, not only in Saskatchewan, but throughout the 

world is the adaptation of horizontal drilling to the oil and gas 

industry. 

 

I think also of something you'll see advertised on television 

called E-ZEE WRAP 1,000.  This was an invention of a 

Saskatchewan entrepreneur who wanted the rough edges fixed 

up so it could be put into a North America or maybe a world 

market.  They came to the Saskatchewan Research Council.  

Saskatchewan Research Council did their work, did the 

marketing plan, did the business plan, and I think that's a 

success story.  And it's something that's very small but has a 

great impact on our Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Saskatchewan has a great number of inventors out there, local, 

little entrepreneurs.  Some people say it's because farmers in 

the wintertime sit around and think of how to fix these 

problems, and they're very inclined to do some of these things 

but don't have all the expertise at home in their shop, or on the 

farm to put the product from the idea that they have in their 

mind into the market-place. 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

The Saskatchewan Research Council has a great deal of 

expertise in that area and have helped a number of people who 

can brag about the success that they have that they wouldn't 

have had on their own.  They've got it because they worked in 

partnership with the Research Council, and of course, paid the 

Research Council to do that work for them. 

 

There's air sampling systems that have been developed by the 

Saskatchewan Research Council.  And if I'm not mistaken, the 

minitube air sampling system, the acronym MASS, I think is 

marketed internationally, not just in Saskatchewan or Canada. 

 

So if you want to have a list of these products and where 

they're marketed . . . I mean you ask a very difficult task unless 

there is an end purpose to it.  If you have some specific project 

you want to know what happened to it, we'd be happy to sit 

down and discuss those with you.  But it depends on the detail 

you want versus the work that these people have to do back at 

the Research Council.  We like to drive them as hard as they 

can.  They drive themselves as hard as they can and we get 

very good value out of the money we invest in the Research 

Council. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well in terms of the projects you mentioned, 

there's obviously very impressive work that the Research 

Council does.  But it would be very interesting to have a 

larger -- and I think useful for Saskatchewan people to have -- a 

larger view of the kinds and types of projects that end up being 

marketed internationally as well as in the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you provide a comparative budget of the 

Saskatchewan Research Council vis-a-vis the amount of per 

capita funding from the other provinces? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We don't have that information.  Some 

of the research councils . . . There's been dramatic changes over 

the years and some of the research councils as we know them 

in Saskatchewan are virtually non-existent in some of the other 

provinces.  And we wouldn't have the information as to the 

details of other research councils.  We can only provide you, in 

this forum, the information about Saskatchewan and what's 

happened here.  If you wanted to gather information, we'd be 

more than happy to provide you with at least addresses or 

telephone numbers of the other research councils that we know 

about. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Can you explain how much of 

the budget for research is devoted . . . you named six areas.  

What were those six areas again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The target client groups in terms of 

programs, agriculture and resources -- this is out of the core 

budget now, the grant comes from the province from the 

Consolidated Fund -- agriculture and resources would be 

$2,093,500; small manufacturing, $957,600; and then 

something they call diverse, it would range across the other 

areas, $639,600; then internal corporate development, 

$218,400 -- giving a total of $3,963,100 which would be the 

total core budget for '93-94. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you tell me what the internal 

corporate development is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Internal development, the human 

resources component, the administration internally, I guess, the 

accounting that has to be done to service the clients, and also to 

continue the professionalism of the employees who work 

within the corporation. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I guess I got a little bit off track here.  What 

I was asking was those areas where . . . your project areas.  You 

spoke of the project areas that the Research Council has, 

biotechnology, etc.  What were the other ones there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the branches that we have, there 

are six of them.  There's agriculture, biotechnology, mining, 

energy, forestry, and information service. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you speak of some of the specific 

projects, say in the energy area, specific current projects going 

on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There are some of the ones I mentioned 

a bit earlier.  In terms of energy, the breaking of water and oil 

emulsions in the field produced some results, and the project 

was funded by CANMET, Sceptre Resources, Norsen Energy, 

Saskoil, and Pan-Canadian. 

 

There was some field testing on the heavy oil-in-water 

emulsion pipeline was completed for a private sector client. 

 

We've done the first phase of a Chevy Sprint/Geo natural gas 

conversion vehicle, which proves very promising, and there are 

now various people in the province using natural gas vehicles 

and using natural gas as the fuel. 

 

There's some membrane technology, the production of sodium 

hydroxide. This is a major, major project and will affect energy 

if it goes ahead because of the demand side . . . or sorry, the 

supply side of electrical generation in the province. 

 

The petroleum, under the research branch there have been two 

enhanced oil recovery schemes incorporating horizontal wells 

and methane gas.  There's an initiative focused on the 

investigation of enhanced oil recovery using oil and water 

emulsions.  There's a scaled . . . physical models were 

constructed and tested to investigate the effectiveness of 

horizontal wells with steam injection. 

 

There's a high pressure physical model experiment has been 

performed to investigate carbon dioxide as an injection fluid for 

heavy oilfields in Saskatchewan.  There's a development of a 

unique method for 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

predicting in situ combustion in terms of the oil and gas 

industry. 

 

As I mentioned, there's some 800 to a thousand projects and I'd 

prefer not to have to read them all off to you in the Assembly 

here this afternoon. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- That's thoughtful of you, Mr. Minister.  On 

the area of information technology, is the Research Council 

doing projects in conjunction with SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well we've done that type of work in the 

past.  We've done contracts with SaskTel previously and my 

officials tell me in fact there's a project being negotiated right 

now with SaskTel.  And if my understanding is correct, we 

compete quite often, like any other private sector firm would 

compete, for that business. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you, in these six areas . . . could you 

explain how much of the budget would go to each of these six 

areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The only breakdown that we have here 

with me today is the breakdown I've already given you.  Under 

agriculture and resources, $2,093,500; small manufacturing, 

957,600; diverse number of areas, $693,600; and internal or 

corporate development, $218,400.  And I'm sorry, that's the 

only breakdown I could provide you with here today.  I can't 

provide you with each of those sectors. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Just back to the question before, can you tell 

me the value of that contract with SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- What I'd like to know is some possible 

explanation of what that project is for, or based on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well as I mentioned, the Saskatchewan 

Research Council quite often competes with other companies 

and I'm not about in the legislature to divulge to you what the 

project is while it's in a negotiating stage, or what the dollar 

amounts are.  I think it would be not prudent of me to do that 

because of the commercial interest and the commercial nature 

of the negotiations that would be ongoing. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for clarifying that for me, Mr. 

Minister.  I'd like to thank you for answering my questions this 

afternoon.  Thank you to your officials as well, and thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move we report progress in these 

estimates. 

 

Perhaps we might as well call it 5 o'clock.  It's only six minutes 

to.  It doesn't seem to make much sense to have the Energy and 

Mines people troop in; they're going to follow themselves by 

leaving again in a few seconds. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Chairman, we can call it 5 o'clock and we'll start 

with Energy and Mines then at 7. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


