






















































Hansard: February 14, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 137 
 February 14, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Martensville Trial 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is to the 
Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, as you are aware, the 
Martensville sexual abuse cases have been forefront in the 
newspapers for some time. All of the details surrounding this 
serious issue have yet to be explained. Some have said that the 
technique used by police in interviewing the children was 
wrong. Others have questioned why the Justice department did 
not hold preliminary hearings instead of using direct 
indictment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the parents feel the justice system has failed 
them, and has failed them completely. Mr. Minister, the 
questions are numerous but the only answer you have given 
them to date is the Justice department did what it believed was 
right. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to look into this matter? Will you 
indeed hold an inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for his question on this very important subject, and one 
that is of great concern to all of us. 
 
The Martensville trial was the longest criminal trial ever held in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It's my understanding that a 
great deal of the time in that trial was taken up by an 
examination of the techniques that had been used in developing 
the evidence of the children, in interviewing them, and in trying 
to ascertain exactly what their evidence was. 
 
A preliminary inquiry was not held in the case for a couple of 
reasons, which I consider to be very valid. It was a decision 
made, of course, by the prosecutions — it's their decision to 
make — the prosecutions unit. They felt that to put the children 
through the additional procedure would be just too hard on 
them. 
 
And secondly, it would have consumed another approximately 
one year of time, which would have yet delayed the trial and 
made the recall of events even more difficult for these children. 
So I think that that was the right decision. In those 
circumstances, considering all of the circumstances, I don't 
think a public inquiry is appropriate and I have said so publicly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
problem that we are facing today, and as you have alluded to, is 
the fact that a lot of people, people right across this province, 
and in my riding I run into it . . . I know that other members 
have run into the same question. I think what's basically 
cropping up is a fact that people in general are beginning to 
really question the whole judicial system. And it's not just a 

matter of the Martensville cases that has spurred this question, 
Mr. Minister. I think that people need to know that this justice 
system is working, and working on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not think that a public inquiry would be 
the best way to restore confidence in our judicial system, the 
best way to — once and for all — put an end to the 
accusations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the first thing that you 
would have to ask yourself is what is it that you would inquire 
into? And I'm just a little short of understanding what it is that 
ought to be the subject of the inquiry. 
 
Certainly the evidence of the children has been inquired into at 
great lengths. The files are full of transcripts of interviews of 
those children by various police officers: first of all the 
Martensville police and the officer that they had assisting them 
from Saskatoon and then re-interviews as the case was 
developed after the Department of Justice got involved. And 
then they spent weeks and weeks on the stands. From an 
evidentiary point of view, I think that the case provided that 
kind of an inquiry. 
 
And if it is the way in which the police conducted the 
interviews, I think that subject was examined at great length 
during the trial. The conduct of the prosecution, I think, is not 
being questioned by anyone. So I'm not sure what it is that we 
would inquire into. And I think we would have to know that 
very clearly before we could seriously think about holding an 
inquiry. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
direct my questions to the same minister on the same topic. 
 
Mr. Minister, by agreement with the mayor of Martensville, we 
both agreed that we would keep strictly out of it, as I think all 
politicians should have stayed out of this issue until it has been 
resolved. And I guess from your answer so far we are about as 
far along as we're going to get in the resolution of this. 
 
But I would say to you, Mr. Minister, from the perspective of 
the people of Martensville and surrounding areas where I have 
my office and so on, it is still an extremely contentious issue, 
and it's a very personal issue with those folks. And there are a 
lot of questions out there. 
 
What went wrong with the system? I have yet to speak to 
anyone in that area, Mr. Minister, who is satisfied with the 
judicial process. No one is satisfied. They all have questions. 
What went wrong with the system? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I don't think that you can simply duck 
behind the procedures that have been followed and say that's all 
we can do. I am asking you, let us 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

have a judicial public inquiry as to what went wrong with the 
system. I don't advocate getting the kids up or anything like 
that to give more pressure on them. That's not what I'm asking. 
 
I'm asking let's draw back, and have from a provincial 
perspective . . . to see what went wrong, to assure, sir, that 
something like this can never happen again. That's why I would 
lend my support to our critic of Justice and say, let's have a 
look at this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 
intervention of the member. There is no question that in a 
situation like this people are troubled and people ask the 
difficult questions which includes the question: what went 
wrong? 
 
We are, of course, in the Department of Justice, reviewing this 
as we would review any other major case, to try and do that. 
And I know that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
are doing the same, going through the same process. Now the 
member indicates that something more than that is required and 
I have not accepted that suggestion, because frankly I don't 
know what it is that we would inquire into. I don't know what it 
is that we would inquire into. The machinery of the state is set 
up to deal with alleged crimes and evidence is placed before a 
jury of ordinary people who determine whether or not a crime 
has been committed. And it has been determined by a jury, in 
this case, that in the case of Mr. and Mrs. Sterling Sr., no crime 
has been committed. 
 
Beyond that the state doesn't have any machinery to find out 
what happened. That's not the function of the criminal law 
system. Now as to what went wrong, the interviewing 
techniques have undergone great examination during the trial, 
which was a public process although it couldn't be reported. 
But that part of the case was reported in great detail so we 
know a great deal about how the investigation was conducted. 
The fact that the jury found the Sterlings not guilty, that of 
course can't be the subject of inquiry. That is the end of that 
matter. And so far as the conduct of the Crown is concerned, 
the prosecutors, I don't think that has been the subject of any 
criticism. So I don't know what it is that we would inquire 
about. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, what we would inquire about is 
what went wrong with the system. Where was the Crown 
prosecutor; where was the Department of Justice involved? 
Where did they go wrong? Mr. Minister, one of the bigger 
concerns, a big concern that I have as well in this issue, is that 
we have three — and I'm sure for you as well — and that is that 
we have three police forces that are being tainted right now and 
the people are asking themselves: do we have confidence in our 
police forces? 
 
We have the Martensville police force, we have the Saskatoon 
city police force, we have the RCMP involved. That cloud is 
still hanging over their heads. That has not been resolved. And 
simply by staying it and saying we are going to wait for a year 
and see how this whole thing develops, without a clarification 
of the process, in the public's mind . . . You can have all the 
reviews that you want in the Department of Justice. That is not 

going to allay the concerns that the public has and I think this 
should be a public inquiry so everything can come out in the 
wash, and that's why I'm asking you that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, that's what I tried to 
answer directly to the member before. I don't think anyone is 
suggesting that the case was improperly prosecuted. I think that 
there is no criticism of the way in which the department or the 
prosecutors functioned. So far as the way in which the matter 
was investigated by the police, I just say again, Mr. Speaker, 
that that question was examined in great detail in the trial. 
Indeed it was the theory of the defence that it was the 
investigation that was wrong and that that led to all of the 
difficulty that led to the charges. So that has been examined at 
great length. And we will all have to review that situation to 
determine what we learn from it. But I don't see what it is that 
would be gained by going through some kind of public inquiry 
to rehash what was already heard at the trial. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, because I think this is a 
very important line of questioning. We must learn what we can 
from the whole experience surrounding this trial, and we must 
all work very hard and very diligently to learn what we can and 
to take whatever steps are available to us to ensure that if there 
were mistakes made — and I think there were — not to repeat 
those mistakes, not to have to go through that again because 
little children have to be protected. 
 

Casino Gambling Expansion 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for gaming. Mr. Minister, on Friday last I 
asked questions of you with respect to the proposed profit 
sharing for the two $25 million casinos to be built in Regina 
and Saskatoon. Mr. Minister, have you received a proposal 
from any American investors to finance the casino 
construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
question from the member from Greystone, we have met with 
people involved in the gaming industry from the United States, 
people who have requested a meeting with the Gaming 
Authority and with myself. We have met with them. They have 
put forth, in general terms, the kind of operations that they run 
in the United States and how their gaming operations work in 
the areas where they're doing business. And I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think that's a responsible approach to take. 
 
We have had proposals put forth by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, by community groups from one 
end of this province to the other. Some of these proposals dealt 
with revenue sharing; some dealt with involvement of 
community groups; some dealt with the size that they propose 
for their casinos 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

and the locations. 
 
We put all of these into the mix, Mr. Speaker, and based on the 
information that we were able to gather from people who have 
done studies with us and for us, we put together a proposal for 
casino expansion that the member is well aware of. And I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member from Greystone, that I think 
we have done a very diligent job in taking a go-slow approach 
to this. And I want to say, in quoting from the federal Minister 
of Indian Affairs from the Leader-Post . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you tell us, 
Mr. Minister, as the result of the meeting held at the Hotel 
Saskatchewan between representatives of the American Promus 
Corporation, the meeting with the Premier, the ministers of 
Finance, Justice, and yourself, can you tell us what agreement 
was proposed, who will put up the capital to build the casinos, 
and what percentage of profits is expected in return? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member from Greystone, we've met with a number of different 
companies and different people who have been associated and 
involved with casino development in other areas. And I'll be 
tabling today a list of the meetings that we've had over the past 
months. One of the meetings, I would say to the member from 
Greystone, was with Promus Corporation who operate casino 
operations in the United States. 
 
They brought to us, in general terms, the types of casinos that 
they're operating, how they work, and I want to say they 
showed us a video that we found very enlightening in terms of 
the development of the venues that they have in the United 
States. There were no details discussed. It was a straight 
presentation in terms of what they're doing, what their 
corporate enterprise is doing in the United States. There was no 
discussion of revenue sharing or any of the things of that 
nature. 
 
But let me say to the member, as I read the quotes that she is 
attributed to in the Leader-Post of February 12 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, when will you table the 
anticipated revenue projections for the proposed casino 
operations so that we can investigate the impact that this is 
going to have on our society in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say to the member that 
we have developed the principles of a casino expansion policy 
which include the exhibition associations, aboriginal people, 
and the Government of Saskatchewan. In terms of the details, I 
want to say that none of the details in terms of revenue sharing 
have been negotiated. That's a process that we're putting in 
place. I want to say that there has been a lot of speculation, and 
the member from Greystone has clearly been quite part of it. 
 
As I look at the quotes from the Leader-Post of February 12, 
and I find with interest that she has a revenue breakdown of 
some $60 million: 40 million to an American investor, 12 
million to the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations), and the remaining 8 million split between exhibitions 
and Metis. 
 
I notice in her proposed breakdown that there's no revenue 
from the Government of Saskatchewan, so let me say to the 
member from Greystone, fine to speculate, but I say to you 
today that no discussions have taken place in the details of 
revenue sharing. That's a process that we're putting in place and 
will be discussing with the Metis, with the federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian and other Indian bands, with the 
exhibitions associations. And I'm hopeful that we will come 
before the people of Saskatchewan with a proposal that the 
federal Minister of Indian Affairs indicates we probably will, 
and it'll be acceptable to all, Indian and non-Indian. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying, 
Mr. Minister, that you have met with American investors, you 
have met with exhibition boards and the FSIN, but you have 
not yet estimated the revenues, the profits, or the betting 
volume the American investors and your casino partners 
expect? Or are you telling us that the public has no business 
knowing this information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member, and I want to quote from the federal Minister of 
Indian Affairs who says: 
 

I'm quite satisfied that there are excellent discussions going 
on between the FSIN and Saskatchewan and I think what 
comes out the other end is probably going to be satisfactory 
to the native community and the non-native community 
(alike). 

 
And I want to say to the member from Greystone that I agree 
with her Liberal colleague from Ottawa in that we will come up 
with a proposal that will satisfy Indian and non-Indian alike. 
 
I want to say that this government supports job opportunities 
for aboriginal people. We support a capital pool for economic 
development that can create some jobs in communities like 
Fond-du-Lac and Stony Rapids where unemployment rages — 
90, 95 per cent. And I ask the member for Greystone if she 
supports that process. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I could not help but 
pick up on the exchange that has been going on over the last 
few moments and I would like to direct some questions to the 
same minister, Mr. Speaker, and at the outset would like to 
acknowledge and thank the minister for sending over to me five 
minutes ago the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
Social 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

Impacts of Gaming. And I will be looking through that 
document with a great deal of interest, Mr. Minister. 
 
However, you have yet failed to deliver upon your promise to 
give us the economic studies that you have based your 
gambling strategy on. Mr. Speaker, last sitting the Leader of the 
Third Party claimed that an increase of $350 million in betting 
would have to be placed in order to meet a $50 million profit 
projection. Mr. Speaker, as well she claimed that the American 
investor in the casinos would claim 80 per cent of that profit. 
And my question to the minister of gaming is this. Have you 
had an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to review the claims of the 
third party leader, and specifically, what kind of projections of 
your own you would have to counter what appears to be a very, 
very significant number? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in answer 
to the member's question, let me say that I haven't had an 
opportunity to analyse, in any detail, the numbers put forth by 
the member from Greystone. As a matter of fact, I'm not quite 
sure where she may have gotten her information. I understand 
that her party has talked to a number of gaming experts and 
she's confident that the government's new partnership will 
include American investors, Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indians, and various associations including the Metis Society. 
 
I want to say this. No final decision has been made with respect 
to whether, whether or not, we would involve outside 
management. If in fact we do, I would want to say to the 
member from Rosthern and to the member from Greystone that 
it would be our priority to see what kind of expertise we have 
firstly within this province. I think secondly we would look to 
see what kind of expertise there is in our country. And the third 
option, and the last option, if we were to include outside 
management, would be management from outside of this 
country. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it's 
become quite clear that the federal government has taken an 
interest in what we're doing in Saskatchewan in terms of 
involving aboriginal people, first nations people. And they 
agree that in fact we're on the right track. So I ask the member 
of the opposition, and I ask the member from Greystone, do 
you support the economic initiatives that we're taking? Do you 
support the jobs for first nations people? You can't have it both 
ways. On which side are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
don't think it's very significant of what . . . whether we support 
or not. What is important is what do the people think. And 
quite frankly, Mr. Minister, the people don't know what to 
think because they've got nothing to base their opinions on. 
That's why it's of such paramount importance to get this study 
out, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have a copy, Mr. Minister, of a study done in 1993 for the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and by . . . done by 
Harrah's Casino Hotels. And that study suggests that the 
member from the third party must have been picking some 

figures out of thin air, because this study suggests that in order 
to generate that $50 million in profit, gaming revenue in this 
province would have to be $150 million, which is about some 
$200 million less than the third party leader has indicated. And 
furthermore, Mr. Minister, it suggests that the cut for the 
American investor would be 33 per cent rather than the 80 per 
cent of profits as suggested earlier. Mr. Minister, the point is 
very simply this: we cannot have a meaningful debate on this 
issue unless you are willing to divulge all of the information 
regarding your decision on operating casino gambling. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: will you table 
all of your studies as you have done with this study, and I 
recognize that. But will you table all of your economic studies 
that have been done in association with expanding gambling in 
Saskatchewan? Will you do that now, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member from Rosthern and to the member from Greystone that 
it's not my intention to get in between them into a dispute as to 
how much money would go to who today. I don't think that it's 
my place to get involved in a family feud that they might be 
having over there. 
 
So let me say, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to be entering 
into negotiations with aboriginal people in this province, with 
the exhibition associations, to determine the most fair and 
equitable way of revenue splitting on the expanded casinos. 
And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that of the thousand 
people that we contacted through the study that I passed on to 
the member from Greystone and to the opposition, that it 
became quite clear that 86 per cent of Saskatchewan residents 
gamble. It also became clear that 12 per cent of Saskatchewan 
people leave this province every year to spend gaming dollars 
in other areas of the world. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it's our position we're going 
to sit down and negotiate with the people who I have 
mentioned to come up with a partnership arrangement that's 
going to keep money in Saskatchewan, that's going to create 
aboriginal jobs in this province, and that's going to stem the 
outflow of dollars from Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Availability of Taxol 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Associate Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 
it's not often that the official opposition compliments the 
government in question period, but 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

I'd like to take the opportunity to thank you on behalf of the 
Hartsook family for your efforts on Friday. 
 
The Hartsooks and many other Saskatchewan families who 
have a family member suffering from cancer are waiting for a 
decision on the drug, Taxol. And I'd like to commend the 
Associate Minister of Finance for immediately meeting with 
the Hartsooks to discuss this important issue on Friday. For the 
families requesting information, I would request today that you 
give us a brief update on Friday's meeting and to tell us what 
the families could expect. Could you do that for us, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, while we're in the mood of 
complimenting each other, I want to compliment the member 
of the opposition for the fashion in which he raised the question 
on Friday, giving us a few minutes advance notice of the 
questions that he was going to raise and indicating that we 
would like to deal with this in a non-partisan kind of approach. 
I appreciate that, and I hope we may continue to do that. 
 
We did meet, as the member indicates, the Hartsooks and I, 
following the House on Friday. We had a good meeting. We 
had with us at that time an official from the Department of 
Health who clarified the exact process of approval. 
 
In this case, the drug, Taxol, has received federal approval for 
use for cancers associated with breast cancer and cancers 
resulting from breast cancer. To date it has only been approved 
for ovarian cancers. With that new approval, the process then is 
that the Canadian cancer foundation and its own committee 
here in the province looks at the use of that drug, setting up of 
the protocols and so on. 
 
As a result of the meeting on Friday, we have been in touch 
with the foundation, and they give us their assurance that at the 
earliest possible opportunity the committee will be drawn 
together to review the protocols for this drug. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to have leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and members of the Assembly a former 
member of the Prince Albert Council, Grethyll Adams, as well 
as Dr. Teo, who are with us here today in the government 
gallery. They are here, as I understand, Grethyll, not as now a 
person working with the city of Prince Albert but working with 
the Canadian Polytechnic College. Their job is to work with 
residents of Saskatchewan in teaching languages that will go 
towards helping our business people and residents of 
Saskatchewan work in international trade and other areas. 
 
And at meetings this morning with staff of our department, I 
think we had a good, solid exchange. I want to welcome you 

here to the Assembly and look forward to meeting with you in 
the future. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, with 
leave, for a brief statement on the Saskatchewan Winter Games 
now being held in Kindersley. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1430) 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise 
today to speak about the Saskatchewan Winter Games that 
officially opened yesterday in Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be some 1,700 athletes from all over 
Saskatchewan competing in these games, which I understand is 
more than are competing in Lillehammer, Norway currently, 
Mr. Speaker. There are also 1,400 volunteers working hard to 
ensure the games will be a success. I think this is a tremendous 
testimony to the volunteer spirit that Kindersley is famous for. 
Kindersley is also the smallest community in Saskatchewan to 
ever hold the Saskatchewan Winter Games, again showing the 
community pride that Kindersley exhibits. 
 
Last night's official opening was a tremendous combination of 
entertainment, enthusiasm, and good sportsmanship. The 
evening was coordinated by Susan Spier of Brock, 
Saskatchewan, a small community neighbouring Kindersley. I'd 
like to commend Susan and all her support volunteers for a job 
well done. 
 
Entertainment came from across the province, including the 
Saskatchewan Express, a cheer-leading group from the Luther 
College of Regina, diverse local talent including the Hansen 
School of Dance, the Cathy Mylrea School of Dance of 
Kindersley and the K.C.S. Band of Kindersley. To all those 
involved — athletes, coaches, families and volunteers — hats 
off to you, and may you enjoy a week of fine sportsmanship 
and competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with tremendous pride and honour that I am 
entrusted to represent the fine people of Kindersley and report 
to you and all members of the legislature about the 
Saskatchewan Winter Games that are ongoing in Kindersley 
this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add my 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

comments to those of the member opposite. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I also would like to 
compliment the town of Kindersley and the people of that 
community on the wonderful opening ceremonies that were 
organized last night. 
 
The Saskatchewan games, both the winter and summer games, 
serve to showcase the amateur sport in Saskatchewan and serve 
also as a training background for Canada Winter Games to be 
held in Alberta in 1996. These games build characters, build 
healthy bodies, and they build communities. Over 1,700 
athletes participating in 15 venues will be competing in 
Kindersley, as the member opposite said. The facilities for 
these events are located mainly in Kindersley through 
municipal facilities that were upgraded with tremendous local 
support and as well through an agreement with local school 
boards and churches. 
 
A unique feature of these games is also the intercommunity 
cooperation that Kindersley has with Rosetown and Stranraer 
for their use in the gymnasium and ski facilities. I want to add 
my words of congratulations to these communities and to the 
organizing committee and chairs of Mr. and Mrs. Berard and to 
the Mayor Dorsett and to her town council for the wonderful 
enthusiasm and dedication that they have shown in staging 
these games. 
 
As I said last night, these 1994 winter games are the largest 
ever held in Saskatchewan in the smallest community ever to 
host them. If it were possible, the people of the town of 
Kindersley should receive the first gold medal for this 
wonderful achievement. These games are a marvellous success 
because of the spirit and the dedication of the people of 
Saskatchewan. It exemplifies the tremendous pride the 
Saskatchewan people have in our young people and in our 
communities. I want to recognize also the significant support of 
these games from the Saskatchewan Lotteries, the 
Saskatchewan Games Council and Saskatchewan Sport. 
Congratulations to all those involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add my 
congratulations to one of the facilities in our community. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add my 
congratulations with the members who have already expressed 
them to the town of Kindersley and the district for the 
tremendous effort they've made in organizing yet one more 
games event. They've been a host of a number of successful 
sports events in the past and they've done an excellent job. 
 
One of the very special efforts that was made to work with 
Kindersley was made by the very small community of Stranraer 
who have . . . where I had the privilege of opening their 
renovated ski facility which they've been working on for the 
last 20 years. There has been a major community effort 
between Stranraer and the municipalities around them to 

establish a ski facility, not quite like the one in Lillehammer 
but as close as you're going to get in Saskatchewan. And I want 
to add my congratulations to Stranraer and all those who have 
worked to establish this wonderful facility that's going to be a 
treat for everyone to ski on for a long time to come. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
leave to make a statement concerning Teacher/Staff 
Appreciation Week. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Teacher/Staff Appreciation Week 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure 
to rise in recognition of Teacher/Staff Appreciation Week in 
Saskatchewan which I understand coincides with the national 
Teacher/Staff Appreciation Week. 
 
Teachers' roles have changed throughout the years. They have 
gone from the one-room classroom teaching grades 1 to 10, to 
state-of-the-art institutions using modern technologies. 
However not all teachers and students are fortunate enough to 
have the most modern of benefits. Teachers in some 
jurisdictions of our province are struggling with fewer 
resources, a shortage of staff, and at times, deteriorating 
facilities. All told, in some cases, a crumbling infrastructure. 
 
Although many teachers, school boards, and administrators are 
facing such challenges, our children continue to receive an 
excellent education. Saskatchewan residents have risen to great 
heights over the years. Former prime ministers, the current 
Governor General, and our very own Lieutenant Governor, all 
born, raised, and educated in this province. Accomplished 
individuals whose success can, in part, be attributed to 
Saskatchewan's top-notch educational system. 
 
It is important to recognize the talents of our teachers and to 
thank them for their efforts. On behalf of the opposition caucus 
I thank all teachers and other staff members for their 
commitment to our children's education and future. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, with leave, to also add 
our appreciation to the teachers and staff in Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to also ask the House to 
give appreciation to the teachers and staff in Saskatchewan 
with the significance of a week that's 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

set aside for them from February 13 to 19. This week has been 
designated provincially at the request of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Home and School Associations in appreciation of 
the work that teachers and staff do, day in and day out, in the 
education of kindergarten to post-secondary students. 
 
As we all know, the role of the school system and those who 
work in it is more demanding and critical than ever before. 
Teachers and school staff are challenged each day in preparing 
students for future careers. In addition to providing students 
with the modern-day scientific and technological knowledge 
and skills they need, they also have to respond to factors such 
as family instability and violence, hunger, poverty, teen 
pregnancy, substance abuse, and behaviour problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by highlighting this week it is one way to give 
recognition and thanks to teachers and school staff for their 
professional and personal contribution to the future and 
well-being of their students. During this week, it is an 
opportunity for all of us to acknowledge their contribution to 
our children, our schools, and our communities. 
 
I would ask at this time that all members join me in expressing 
a heartfelt thank you to all the teachers and school staff in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — . . . Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to 
make a brief statement on Ramadan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Ramadan 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I noticed the 
puzzled looks that passed on the faces of many members. I 
would like to point out that this past weekend, Mr. Speaker, the 
Muslims of the world started the lunar month of Ramadan — a 
month of fasting between dawn and dusk. 
 
Fasting is the second of the Five Pillars of Islam. It is a time of 
spiritual renewal and contemplation. It is a time of 
self-reflection and personal growth, learning and sacrifice. It is 
a time to achieve empathy with those less fortunate, to 
recognize those suffering from hunger, disease, and oppression. 
Ramadan is a time to transcend differences, difficulties and 
diversity. 
 
Over one billion Muslims in the world observe this month of 
fasting, over half a million Muslims in Canada and over 1,000 
Muslims in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Muslims have 
been in Saskatchewan since the early 1900s. These celebrants 
in Saskatchewan aren't just Muslims, Mr. Speaker; they are 
Canadians — originally from Pakistan and Egypt, from East 
Asia to the Caribbean, from the European and the north and 
west African regions of the world. These people are involved in 
various professions and occupations: retail, farming and civil 
service, public and private sectors, university teaching, and 
research. 
 
Ramadan is an important time for Muslims in Saskatchewan 
and elsewhere. It is particularly important in 

Bosnia-Herzegovina, where over half the population are 
Muslims. Bosnia-Herzegovina is a war-torn country, locked in 
desperate strife, indeed, some would say genocide. How ironic 
at the start of the Olympics in Lillehammer that the people in 
Sarajevo, the sight of the '84 Olympics, face the tragedy of war. 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the beleaguered Muslims there take the 
time to observe a month-long fast, to recognize others less 
fortunate. This is the point of Ramadan — the spirit of 
self-sacrifice, caring and renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of this House join me in 
wishing the Muslim people of the world a joyous Ramadan 
leading to peace in the world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Yes, with leave to make comments on 
Teacher and Staff Week. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Teacher and Staff Appreciation Week 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, just a few short 
words on behalf of the Liberal Party and the Liberal caucus to 
give support to the teachers and staff throughout the province 
of Saskatchewan. There is nothing more important than the 
well-being of our children. And I've spoken with many many 
teachers as of late. Indeed we'll be meeting with two more 
groups of them this morning, because they are feeling under a 
great — tomorrow morning — under a great deal of stress. 
Why? Because they are dealing with increased multigrades; 
they are dealing with increased enrolments; they are dealing 
with increased numbers of children with special needs; and 
increased demands of all kinds, many of which have little to do 
with education. While they are doing this, of course, they are 
dealing with decreased levels of respect and support from the 
public. 
 
So we, on behalf of our party, would like them to know that 
they receive our support and our good wishes in this time of 
recognition for them this week. 
 
The Speaker: — May I at this time inform the House that the 
Speaker was so eager to get into orders of the day that he forgot 
a few items on the routine proceedings. Could we revert back 
to ministerial statements? 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Consultation with Youth Concerning Health Issues 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to inform the Assembly today of a planned new initiative 
of interest to all Saskatchewan youth and their parents, 
families, and communities. 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

In keeping with the spirit of health reform, later this month we 
will begin an extensive process of consultation with 
Saskatchewan's young people to seek out their views on public 
health issues. Their opinions will be sought to help us find 
solutions to problems such as smoking, tobacco use, drinking 
and driving. We also hope to discuss a number of options that 
would reduce the accident rate among new drivers. 
 
We know that Saskatchewan young people have a great deal to 
share on matters such as these and we intend to give them that 
opportunity. Although consultation has already taken place on 
these issues over the past two years, this is the first time that 
the process will focus specifically on youth. 
 
At least 500 young people between the ages of 12 and 19 will 
be contacted by way of school meetings and questionnaires. It 
will be a fully representative sample that includes urban, rural, 
northern, and aboriginal young people. There will be an 
educational component as well, providing youth with the kind 
of information they need to make responsible choices. 
 
This will be a joint undertaking involving not just 
Saskatchewan Health but also the Department of Justice, along 
with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
Saskatchewan Education, Training and Employment will also 
be involved in helping to coordinate the school meetings. The 
final results will be presented to the ministers of Health this 
spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once the results have been reviewed there will be 
proposed changes to The Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle 
Administration Act, The Driver Licensing Regulations, and 
The Minors Tobacco Act. We expect that legislation will be 
ready for tabling during the current session, but I should 
emphasize that no changes to legislation will be made until 
we've heard the views of young people and taken them into 
account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's been said many times that an ounce of 
prevention is worth a pound of cure, and nowhere is this more 
true than in the field of health care. Mr. Speaker, as we speak to 
Saskatchewan young people we know that these are formative 
years. Habits and tendencies acquired in youth often endure 
through adulthood and so we want to do everything we can to 
help Saskatchewan youth make responsible choices. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to hear what they have to say on these and 
other issues so that we're working with them as partners. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this initiative will play a valuable role in helping 
us to define and address health issues for Saskatchewan's 
young people. And for this reason I am sure it will be of 
interest to all members and we'll enjoy their support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
setting an unusual precedent for myself, I'd like to join with the 
minister in congratulating him about the process and 
undertaking that his department and other departments are 
embarking on. We all agree that healthy lifestyles are the key, 
Mr. Minister. The education process of promoting responsible 

use of alcohol and the health risks associated with smoking are 
initiatives that the official opposition can support. The 
consultation process with young people across the province is 
good and we look forward to the discussion and the good 
suggestions that I'm sure will come out of the consultation 
process. 
 
We all know of families, Mr. Speaker, that have suffered 
tragedies with young people across our province, so we 
recognize the importance of the initiative, of joining with the 
youth throughout Saskatchewan to hear what their views are on 
these important issues. We look forward to good legislation to 
help protect our young people in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too in the 
Liberal Party applaud any efforts to promote the participation 
of our citizens in the democratic process. And this proposed 
involvement of youth is of even greater significance, primarily 
because what we would like to see is young people having 
some understanding, not only that their views count, but that 
they can be included in whatever takes place in the democratic 
process. 
 
Several organizations in our province, even some citizens, have 
expressed some frustration when they have discovered that 
government publications are already in print when 
consultations with them are taking place. I do hope that this is 
not the case in this particular circumstance, that you already 
have in mind what the legislation will read, but that you will 
meet with them with a very open mind. 
 
This is an extraordinary opportunity to give young people 
direct input into issues of concern to them, and I hope that this 
undertaking proves most worthwhile and that their comments 
and points of view are truly heard. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act (Four Year Term) 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act (Four Year Term) be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to establish The Tourism Authority 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
establish a Tourism Authority be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
questions 22 and 23, I table the following answers. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers have been tabled for questions 22 
and 23. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 
Whitmore. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to respond 
today to the Speech from the Throne even though we feel, Mr. 
Speaker, that this throne speech was lacking in some cases. 
 
I'd like to also take this opportunity to congratulate the member 
from Regina North West on her election. I understand that it 
was a very difficult by-election, temperature-wise, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I too participated in knocking on doors, and I can attest to the 
fact that when it's 30-below out, not many people want you 
standing on their doorstep. But there was one good point about 
it, Mr. Speaker, is that the people did invite you in to speak to 
them in their homes rather than on the doorstep. 
 
I'll keep my remarks brief, Mr. Speaker, because we feel that a 
throne speech debate should have some meaning. And in some 
throne speeches there are new initiatives that are worthy of 
debate, Mr. Speaker. But this particular throne speech is 
lacking in anything substantial to be worthy of debate. 
 
And what this is doing, Mr. Speaker, is costing us $35,000 a 
day for really no purpose. This is simply an unnecessary 
expense, Mr. Speaker, and we should be getting down to the 
business of the House. We should be dealing with the Bills that 
have been presented to this House. 
 
Being the opposition member responsible for Education, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to comment on some of the matters that 
the Speech from the Throne did raise dealing with education. 
 
One of the items that was mentioned in there was the electronic 
highway. Now, Mr. Speaker, when you make this kind of a 
statement you're talking in buzz-words. Most people do not 
really understand what is meant by the term electronic 
highway. Now it can be a worthwhile effort when the speech 

talks about Canadian network for the advancement of research, 
industry and education. Well that sounds very good, Mr. 
Speaker, but again what does it really mean? When you talk 
about the electronic highway what are you talking about? 
You're talking about the transfer of information from point A to 
point B. But what forms does that information take? Mr. 
Speaker, it can be video. It can be documents or data, any of 
those types of information that you would transmit 
electronically. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a system already in Saskatchewan 
that performs some of those duties, some of that capability. It's 
called SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network 
Corporation), so why would the government not include SCN 
into this electronic highway rather than looking at cutting 
funding for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem that the only reason the 
government is looking at cutting funding to SCN is because it 
was a Tory initiative. Mr. Speaker, SCN provides for video 
conferencing between universities and SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) programs 
throughout this province in the regional college system. It's an 
excellent method for educating people away from the centres, 
away from Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
A professor in university in Regina can be teaching a class and 
somebody in Redvers can be receiving that class. That is what 
the electronic highway can do, Mr. Speaker, and we already 
have that capability here. Now the term electronic highway 
would expand on that but we should at least keep that portions 
that we already have and build on that, Mr. Speaker. If the 
government does not maintain this, university courses and 
SIAST courses would not be accessible to a good many 
communities in this province, and in particular, in my own area 
under the Southeast Regional College. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there would only be two communities that could 
reasonably sustain university courses in them and that would be 
Estevan and Weyburn in the Southeast Regional College area. 
The other communities such as Glen Ewen, Redvers, Carlyle, 
Assiniboia, would not have that capability. But with SCN in 
place and maintained, Mr. Speaker, they would be able to do 
so. 
 
And when you look at the Southeast Regional College, Estevan 
and Weyburn comprise only 20 per cent of that geographic 
area. Mr. Speaker, without SCN in place, a second year of 
university courses and a good many of the Southeast Regional 
College facilities would not be possible. And a second year of 
university classes in those communities benefits the 
community. It benefits the students because they can remain 
within their communities. They can continue to live at home. 
They can live, perhaps even can carry on working in their 
communities to enhance their education and maintain some 
income. 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

Consider the ramifications. In 1991 universities delivered 140 
first class and second class year courses in the regional 
colleges. There were 76 traditional face-to-face courses 
provided for an enrolment of 895, and 64 SCN courses with an 
enrolment of 713. This is for a total of more than 1,600 people, 
Mr. Speaker, and SCN played a major part in that. 
 
One of the other areas that the Speech from the Throne talked 
about was the social environment in our schools for the 
students. Now that's a very important component, Mr. Speaker, 
that children must have the proper social settings within the 
schools to be able to be educated. If a child is hungry when 
they come to school their learning capabilities are decreased. 
 
But there are other things within the school system, Mr. 
Speaker, that we also need, that must be addressed, and that is 
teachers. Without teachers in the school system we don't have 
much of a school system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need the proper resource materials within the school. We 
need proper school facilities for children to attend. And 
throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, there are a good many of 
the school facilities which are deteriorating and which need 
immediate attention. 
 
When we look at the social problems within our schools, Mr. 
Speaker, it's my belief that those remedies that we can provide 
through the education system should not be funded directly 
through Education but rather they should be funded in 
conjunction with Social Services. We should not be taking 
funds away from the education of children to provide for the 
social context; that should come from another department. It 
can be funnelled in through the Department of Education, but it 
should have separate funding. 
 
I mentioned the schools, Mr. Speaker, the school facilities are 
deteriorating because of the lack of capital funding. Now 
schools are not just physical buildings, but we do need some 
physical structures across this province to provide that 
education. And when schools are receiving cuts year after year 
— 1992, 2 per cent; in 1993 a 2 per cent cut; in 1994 the 
government is projecting a 4 per cent cut — when you add that 
all together you're looking at almost a 10 per cent cut over the 
last three years. And that is a very significant drop, Mr. 
Speaker, because not only has the money decreased but costs 
continue to increase. In a lot of school boards it amounts to a 
lot more, Mr. Speaker, than 10 per cent. 
 
I have a projected preliminary estimate of the cuts to the school 
boards and they range anywhere from a cut of 91 per cent to 
increases in some cases because of increased enrolments. But 
most school boards across this province are facing serious cuts, 
Mr. Speaker, and it will have a detrimental effect on the 
education available for our children. 
 
There are many other educational and environmental issues, 
Mr. Speaker, which need to be discussed. However they can be 
better discussed with the budget speech and with estimates. Mr. 
Speaker, we in the official opposition believe that time and the 
use of talents of members and of staff could be more efficiently 
used in dealing with the real needs and the wishes of the people 
of this province. 
 

Because we feel that the taxpayer should be getting a better 
value for their dollars, for that $35,000 a day, the PCs 
(Progressive Conservative) voted in support of a motion to 
move from debating the Speech from the Throne to debating 
one of the Bills. Now, I know that the Government House 
Leader and the Premier were suggesting that was closure, Mr. 
Speaker. Closure is a move by government to limit the debating 
opportunities of the opposition. 
 
In this particular case, Mr. Speaker, there is no closure. The 
official opposition is volunteering to no longer debate the 
Speech from the Throne and to move on to the Bills of the 
House. Mr. Speaker, every member of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) voted against it. All the members of the PCs 
voted for it and, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals were not here to 
vote. If members do not want to work on the Bills that we have 
submitted to the House, we are prepared to deal with 
government orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the member 
from Moosomin: 
 

That the House do now proceed to Bill No. 2, An Act to 
amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 
1993. 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Before I begin my comments, I'd like to 
welcome another guest today. In the gallery there is the 
president of Regina North West constituency, Mr. Doug 
Deegan. I'd ask the Assembly to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to address 
this Assembly in reply to the Speech from the Throne. I would 
first like to say how proud I am to represent the people of 
Regina North West who recently elected me to this Chamber in 
a campaign in which the weather alone was a formidable foe, 
not to mention the plethora of viruses and other debilitating 
infections which laid low not only campaign workers but a 
large number of people I found at home in pyjamas and 
mustard plasters. 
 
In the past year and a half I have come to know my constituents 
and their concerns in some depth. The people of Regina North 
West are part of the growing edge of north Regina. More than a 
thousand of my constituents are health care workers. A larger 
number are employees of the Crown corporations, in various 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

government departments. My constituents are police officers, 
teachers, clerks, mechanics, carpenters, students, caretakers, 
sales people, labourers, technicians, fire-fighters, 
small-business people, steelworkers, mail carriers. Among my 
constituents are many aboriginal families, both treaty Indians 
and many Metis, a growing Sikh community, and many other 
immigrants whose hard work and commitment to community 
are contributing to the growth of the Regina North West. 
 
Many of my constituents are home-makers because this is a 
constituency with many children. The concerns of the people of 
Regina North West are focused on their children. I am very 
committed to protecting the interests of their children and of 
the families of the North West through my work to influence 
public policy in this Assembly. The family is the source of 
good citizens, and we must make sure that we provide the best 
possible environment for families to flourish. 
 
In the time that I have spent getting to know my constituents, 
they have had a lot to say about how they are governed. The 
people of the North West agree that the deficit has to be 
addressed. They agree that the Conservatives have lost all 
credibility on this and most other matters. They look to the 
government to cut the deficit, but they look for fairness. They 
look for accountability. They look for the government to 
consult with the people of Saskatchewan. But they also look for 
compassion from their government in its decision making. 
 
The people of Regina North West know that deficit reduction 
has to be balanced with economic development. They are still 
waiting for the government to create a climate conducive to 
economic activity and growth. When this government was 
elected, it was based on a promise of no new taxes and 
assurances that job creation and economic development would 
be priorities. All they heard from this government is a listing of 
goals, but where's the meat? 
 
Many Regina North West voters are students who don't know if 
there will be a job for them when they graduate. Some have 
already graduated and returned for further classes because there 
are no jobs, and their student loan debt keeps growing. 
 
Hope is the one thing many of our young people are losing. As 
a result, we see many of them leaving the province in search of 
something better. They take with them not only the knowledge 
they have gained through our educational system, but they also 
take with them the promise that each of them show in different 
fields of study. 
 
The future of our province depends on these young people. 
Where is the economic plan that will keep them here? 
Saskatchewan may have the lowest unemployment rate, but 
that statistic excludes not only those who have stopped looking 
for a job, but also those who are looking for the first time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was a student and looked forward to 
starting my first job, it was with a sense of anticipation. 
Students today are more often racked with a sense of 
trepidation or despair. Will the government act to realize its 
responsibility to build an economic climate which will keep our 
young people in the province? 
 
The future of the province is also very much contingent on the 

future of aboriginal families, the only part of our population 
which is steadily growing. The throne speech barely mentions 
the word aboriginal, much less addresses any of their concerns. 
When will the government respond with a plan made in true 
consultation with the aboriginal peoples? 
 
Small-business people in Regina North West have been 
decimated by high taxation policies. When taxes are too high, 
people are unable to dine out or buy locally and keep their local 
establishments open. When local North West businesses are 
forced to cut back, it means that young people lose their 
part-time jobs. When will the government respond with a plan 
to encourage small business? 
 
During the Regina North West by-election, a common issue 
was raised in almost all of my visits to people's homes or 
during telephone conversations. At issue was jobs. 
Unfortunately, many of my constituents are unemployed, and 
many of those that are working are concerned about how safe 
their jobs are. 
 
On one block alone, one-third of the people are unemployed. 
Where is the economic plan to get these people back to work? 
Where is a vision that will provide these people with some 
hope that there is light at the end of the tunnel? These people 
only want the dignity of being able to collect a pay cheque for a 
job well done. 
 
As I stated earlier, Regina North West is home to many health 
care workers who have told me that the wellness plan, as 
declared unilaterally by this government, has resulted in more 
nurses than there are construction workers on compensation as 
a result of stress-related illness. Surely the wellness model, 
which has not yet been defined, cannot be achieved at the cost 
of the health of health care workers. Nurses have told me they 
cannot provide adequate, much less good care, because of 
increased patient loads. 
 
What health care workers say is that no one in government is 
listening to them. They need to know that if changes are being 
proposed to the system that they will be involved in the 
decision-making process. 
 
What these people do not need is to find out — after the fact — 
that changes have been made, changes which make their jobs 
much more difficult to carry out effectively. These are the 
people that know the health care system best, Mr. Speaker; they 
deal with it every day. They must be involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the people of Regina North 
West as I campaigned, I found some people who were 
disappointed — profoundly disappointed 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

— and some who were angry. Both felt betrayed by a 
government which refused to listen to the democratically 
expressed will of the people, whether expressed through the 
1991 plebiscite votes or through government-initiated 
consultations. Some were so angry they refused to be 
enumerated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people want to be heard. While the 
government says it is committed to the power of community 
and cooperation, it appears to many of my constituents that 
they are excluded from that community. The member for 
Regina Wascana Plains points out that the government has a 
plan for the people of Saskatchewan. The government takes 
great pride in its plan. The only problem is that this government 
has also demonstrated that if people have concerns about that 
plan, these concerns are not listened to, much less considered. 
 
When the Premier said at the outset of the recent by-election 
that whether his party won or lost the seat it would be business 
as usual for the government, many people of Regina North 
West were deeply offended. To them it was another sign that 
the government doesn't care what they think and is in no way 
accountable to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only speak for myself, and on behalf of the 
people of Regina North West, on the issue of pay raises to 
ministerial and Executive Council staff. What the people of 
Regina North West are upset about is not the number of 
political appointees who received their raises — 2 of them, or 
10 of them, or 18 of them — to them it is only a matter of 
degree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people of Regina North West are upset 
about is not that this government hid the actual figures about 
the media . . . from the media and from the people of 
Saskatchewan. What the people of Regina North West are 
upset about is not the size or the percentage of the raises — 
whether they were 4 per cent, 8 per cent, twelve and a half per 
cent, or 35 per cent. 
 
The member for Regina Albert North has said the government 
couldn't pay its political appointees what it felt they deserved in 
1991 because the province was on the verge of bankruptcy. The 
member for Regina Albert North continued: in 1993 the 
province has barely stepped back from the precipice of 
bankruptcy. And yet the very first thing they did was to make 
sure their political employees were given raises. Is this an 
example of a government with its priorities in place? 
 
What the people are upset about is that this government is 
totally insensitive to the plight of Saskatchewan people. Many 
people have lost their jobs, had their work hours reduced, or 
have had their pay frozen. These people can't understand how a 
government would tend to the needs of its political employees 
when so many ordinary people without political connections 
are hurting. The people are upset by the government's double 
standard at a time when its members say the province is still 
close to the precipice of bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina North West are hurting 
because the Federated Co-op's warehouse has left town. They 
are hurting because of lay-offs at IPSCO and the Royal Bank, 
because Dominion Bridge, Massey Ferguson, Westank, 

Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola, and many others, have shut down. 
It seems to the people of Regina North West that the 
government can't fathom their anxieties. It seems that the 
government lives in another world. 
 
In order for a government to govern well, it must work in 
consultation with the people and have the consent of the 
people. Regina North West residents have asked the 
government to roll back the pay raises as an example to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I expect the government would get a 
lot more cooperation in this belt-tightening time if they set an 
example with their political staff. 
 
In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, the government states the 
case well. In restoring sound financial management to the 
province, the government attaches even more importance to the 
way in which it is being accomplished by sharing the burden 
equably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina North West and the people 
of Saskatchewan are calling on the government to live up to its 
own words. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I am surprised by the 
constant partisan attacks which appear to be looking for 
someone to blame rather than working together on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan to find solutions to the problems of 
indebtedness, joblessness, and lack of hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I came to this Assembly with certain 
expectations. I had expectations that the members of this 
Assembly would demonstrate through their actions a devotion 
to making Saskatchewan a better place for the people who elect 
us. Barely two days into this experience, I have been 
thoroughly disappointed at what seems to be a propensity on 
the part of the NDP back-benchers to waste what little 
opportunity they have to participate, a penchant to level 
personal attacks on other members of the Assembly and even 
private citizens 
 
I have to ask myself, Mr. Speaker, where is the vision of these 
individuals? Surely they have a message to convey to the rest 
of us in this Assembly — a message that would increase our 
understanding of the viewpoints of their constituents, a 
message that would deepen our sensitivity to the concerns of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1515) 
 
But what I have seen is the darker side of politics — a side 
which is responsible for the cynicism and bitterness held by 
ordinary people towards this place. Mr. Speaker, I have seen 
elected members make accusations against guests in your 
gallery. Those guests, some of whom I know, are appalled that 
any member of this Assembly should have the right to attack a 
member of the public without that individual 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

having the opportunity to defend him or herself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is these kinds of vindictive attacks that have 
made people afraid to be identified within the political process 
in our province. Afraid, Mr. Speaker, to be affiliated with any 
other than the governing party in power. And, Mr. Speaker, any 
person in public office who must rely on tactics of fear and 
intimidation to secure their power, to enhance their sense of 
control over the people they are elected to serve, any person 
who stoops to such tactics, should be fully ashamed of using 
valuable time in this Assembly to engage in such behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have received many calls from people around 
the province who are appalled by the actions of government 
back-benchers. And I want to be certain that those members are 
aware of that reaction to their performances. 
 
If we hope to attract quality people to serve in this Assembly 
we must raise the standards of debate, elevate the level of 
dialogue that goes on here, or we risk the continual erosion of 
respect for this institution. Mr. Speaker, it is not up to the 
public to become more trusting of us as politicians; it is up to 
us as politicians to become more worthy of trust and respect. 
 
I am deeply concerned about the attempts by members of 
government to mix apples and oranges for purposes of political 
gain. I refer, Mr. Speaker, to the continual challenges by the 
government members with respect to grants to the Liberal 
caucus. It is not the Liberal Party who set the structure of grants 
available. When our leader was elected she petitioned the 
legislature for financial assistance to enable her to do the 
research that would allow her to fulfil her responsibilities as 
leader of a provincial party. She did not ask for personal 
remuneration, although she was obligated to perform the duties 
for which other party leaders were provided an additional 
remuneration. 
 
It was made clear to the member from Saskatoon Greystone on 
numerous occasions in this Assembly that two sitting members 
was the criterion for any party to attain party status. I am 
certain the New Democrats are now well acquainted with what 
is required to qualify for party status as they've had to deal with 
this on a national level. My point, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Liberal caucus has not accepted one dime more than the rules 
permit. In fact the Liberal leader, as Leader of the Third Party, 
has waived the salary increments to which she would have been 
entitled should she have chosen to accept them. 
 
Furthermore, the chair of the Liberal caucus has waived 
remuneration for his duties as party whip. I would also like to 
underline for those members of the Assembly representing 
Regina constituencies, that I am the only Regina MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) who has waived claim 
to per diem expenses until such time as an independent 
commission recommends what is fair compensation in terms of 
salary and expenses. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find it unacceptable for the members 
opposite to attempt to defend what is an indefensible action on 
the part of their government by taking the third party to task for 
accepting what are the standard grants available through the 
budget of the Legislative Assembly, voted on by the Board of 
Internal Economy, to the third party to fulfil its obligations in 

this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if members opposite have concerns 
with the size and disbursement of caucus grants in general, then 
they should take initiative to deal with those concerns across 
the board in a fair and dignified manner befitting of elected 
representatives. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is no place in 
this Assembly for personal attacks and the undermining of the 
reputations of our colleagues without serious cause and 
justification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are part of a government 
which condones hiring political staff without open competition, 
creating positions without job descriptions, reclassifying those 
positions without public scrutiny, and then unilaterally raising 
the pay of some of those people within those positions. From 
all aspects — budgetary process and fiscal responsibility — 
from all aspects, Mr. Speaker, the actions of this government 
with respect to the recent pay raises and reclassifications were 
wrong. 
 
The government should not hide behind attacks on the 
legitimate disbursements and remunerations of the third party 
in order to deflect criticism for its own indefensible actions in 
raising the pay of ministerial assistants while other workers in 
both private and public sectors hold the line. Mr. Speaker, I can 
only hope that the personal attacks I have witnessed during my 
brief initiation to this Assembly are not an accurate picture of 
what I can expect from the days and months to come. 
 
As the Liberal caucus, we are working to better represent not 
only our own constituencies but all the people of 
Saskatchewan. At this point of its mandate the people of 
Regina North West and all the people of our province are not 
convinced that the government truly listens to their concerns 
but continues with business as usual. For that reason I will not 
be supporting the motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud, on 
behalf of my constituency, to respond to the Speech from the 
Throne. I would like to congratulate my colleagues from 
Regina Lake Centre and Biggar who both moved and seconded 
the Speech from the Throne and did, what I might add, a very 
good job. 
 
I would also like to take the opportunity to congratulate the 
new MLA, the new member for Regina North West, in her 
success in winning the by-election and taking her seat in the 
House, and I'm quite confident she'll do a good job. I just want 
to 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

make one comment on her first speech in the House when she 
talked about executive assistants or ministerial assistant salary 
increases. I know that the member knows that that's not 
accurate and I just want to know what the new Liberal politics 
is. Are we going to have honesty or are we not going to have 
honesty? 
 
I'm going to talk about a few comments, a few subjects that 
were talked about in the Speech from the Throne and also some 
activities and some events that have been going on and are 
going on in the Melville constituency. 
 
With respect to the throne speech, as you know, 50 years ago 
Tommy Douglas took power and for the first time there was a 
government of the people and for the people. Like my 
colleague from Moose Jaw Palliser mentioned about getting rid 
of a government of cats, or according to Douglas's parable of 
Mouseland, the mice finally saw through the charade of 
electing either white cats or black cats and elected their own 
instead. And we realized at that point in time that cats are cats. 
 
But this did not mean that the cats were out of the picture. Once 
banished from government the cats retrenched in other areas of 
power. From there they renewed their assault against the mice. 
Mouseland was under siege. 
 
Over time these cats have become bigger and bigger and better 
organized than ever before. We have cats who think it is their 
God-given right to move across borders to wherever they want 
so as they can be better able to steal and live off the natural 
resources and labour of the mice living there. They negotiate 
agreements such as GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade), NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) 
which open up local markets so that they can sell their 
ill-gotten goods. 
 
We have tom-cats who specialize in pitting working mice 
against farming mice. We have fat cats who don't pay their 
taxes, run up huge bills and deficits and then expect the mice to 
pay for their excesses by forfeiting their social institutions and 
safety nets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the cat metaphor was useful in 
Tommy Douglas's day and it is still useful today. We see these 
cats operating on a daily basis in our society and interfering 
with our ability to govern ourselves and to determine our 
future. For instance, the throne speech talked about an 
agri-food equity fund to establish and encourage new value 
added agricultural businesses in Saskatchewan. The potential 
here could be far-reaching and it's something that we in this 
province of Saskatchewan have to take seriously, is value 
adding as many products as we can to the fullest extent that we 
can. 
 
However, agreements such as the Canada-U.S. (United States) 
Free Trade Agreement, NAFTA, and the GATT will very likely 
interfere with the success of this initiative. But we must try and 
try hard and be careful. They create a climate where these 
businesses have to deal with international market conditions 
over which they have no control. The bottom line is that these 
agreements remove government's capacity to implement 
policies in the best interests of their constituents. But with new 
ideas and new ways I know we can. 

 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, is the beef industry 
development fund, also announced in the Speech from the 
Throne. The beef industry requested that such a fund be 
established to improve products and enhance markets for the 
beef industry. Although the grain industry in Saskatchewan has 
long been the largest component in the farm sector, cattle has 
also been a very important part of our agricultural base. 
 
The world cattle population has been on the decline over the 
last few years, so it would seem that there would be room for 
cattle expansion and products related to the beef industry. 
However the beef sector — as with the value added sector — I 
believe that with NAFTA, CUSTA (Canada-U.S. Trade 
Agreement) and the GATT, it'll jeopardize our government's 
capacity to encourage and protect and enhance the beef 
industry when it comes under attack from the cats wanting to 
sell into our markets. I think we can still do it. We've got to be 
dedicated, got to be careful, but it can be done; but it won't be 
easy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also mentioned in the throne speech was a new 
transportation policy council. The council is developing a 
comprehensive transportation policy which is to ensure 
competitive market access for Saskatchewan exports and to 
provide links to move products in and out of Saskatchewan. 
Our province has always been vulnerable when it comes to 
transportation. We are the farthest from the east and the west 
coast ports; however we are relatively close to Churchill. 
Churchill has always been under-utilized. All kinds of excuses 
has existed as to why it can't be used to a greater extent. 
 
I believe that to expand and enhance the use of Churchill would 
be in our best interest, but once again — because of NAFTA, 
the Canada-U.S. Trade Agreement — we are going to find it 
very difficult to enhance the Port of Churchill, since the 
national flow is developing in a north-south stream instead of 
east-west. If more and more products flow out of this province 
north-south, it will put an economic hit on this province that we 
have never seen before. It would be like a family farm or 
business having the staff to do all the work but choosing to 
contract out to another business to do a portion of their work. 
 
We have a transportation network in this country that could be 
enhanced, and have our products moved, and provide 
employment to our own people. I believe that at the time of the 
Canada-U.S. Trade Agreement talks — that if implemented — 
our transportation system would eventually shift from east to 
west . . . shift from east to west and north to south. I did not 
expect it to happen so quickly though. CUSTA and NAFTA 
again have tied us into a system where more and more products 
will move south, causing loss of jobs and high unemployment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let's consider how we got these 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

three agreements. It was the federal Tories that gave us 
Canada-U.S. Trade Agreement — signed, sealed and delivered. 
With NAFTA and GATT it was the Liberal government that 
delivered it. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it has been mentioned before — 
the black cats and the white cats. They've been at it again and 
the bottom line is, cats are cats. 
 
Another area heavily affected by the cats has been taxation. As 
we all know, the taxation landscape has changed in the last 20 
years so that individuals, farmers, workers, small businesses — 
in short you and I — make up 80 per cent of the federal 
government's income. While this goes on the fat cats and large 
corporations and banks are having a heyday. I might add that 
banks have been showing record profits in the last few years, as 
individuals are finding it harder and harder to survive. The 
rules by which the shift took place were set in place by the 
Liberal and Tory governments. You see, Mr. Speaker, the cats 
were at it again. Black and white. There's no doubt about it, 
cats are cats. 
 
(1530) 
 
Last fall we saw a federal government elected. Shortly after, 
the federal Minister of Finance announced that the deficit for 
'93-94 would be $45 billion, $10 billion higher than previously 
thought. 
 
The Saskatchewan government faced the same problem in the 
fall of 1991. Lower credit ratings, higher interest payments, and 
limited borrowing capacity forced us to make drastic changes. 
This is nothing new. In Saskatchewan Tommy Douglas had to 
do the same thing in 1944. 
 
However, up until now no federal government has ever made 
an attempt to address the federal deficit. I believe it would be 
totally irresponsible if the federal government does not take 
measures and come out with a plan that would have a balanced 
budget in the foreseeable future. To have a sound economic 
plan is the base for success; however, the very economic plan 
that the government might implement must not attack the basis 
of our society. But not to address the financial situation would 
jeopardize our health care system, our social programs, and our 
education system. And within the health care system I look at 
the drug patent legislation and I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
new federal government could do something in that area that 
would alleviate a fair bit of hardship to individuals who are 
using drugs to a high extent. And I think that it's a tremendous 
economic drain of our communities, what the drug companies 
have a stranglehold on in their patent protection. 
 
I think for the federal government to do nothing would 
probably drive up interest rates and in turn inflation, which in 
turn would add the cost to our daily existence as individuals. So 
I call on this federal government to come out with a plan 
whereby sectors that are not now contributing be asked to pay 
their fair share and not simply ask those who are contributing to 
pay more and more. 
 
So now that we know who are the cats and how they operate, 
what do we do? Today, just as years ago when Tommy 
Douglas formed government in Saskatchewan, we must 
understand and remain vigilant against the cats — the cat that is 
ever ready to pounce on its prey in order to satisfy its voracious 

appetite. As mice, we must build the structures that will protect 
us from the onslaught of the cats. All that we envision for 
ourselves and for our natural resources will be for naught if we 
do not protect ourselves from the cats. 
 
While we speak of economic growth in this province, without 
defences we will be at risk. I believe that the protection of and 
the respect for the working men and women of this province 
will be the foundation on which we will grow in Saskatchewan. 
 
In this session of the legislature we will introduce amendments 
to The Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards Act. These 
amendments will clearly indicate the standards by which we 
operate in Saskatchewan. We encourage and we even welcome 
economic growth in Saskatchewan but we will set the standard 
by which economic activity will operate. 
 
The former administration led by the member from Estevan 
indicated to the world that Saskatchewan was "open for 
business," that Saskatchewan was a province of cheap land and 
cheap labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe Saskatchewan can function in today's 
economy in a strong and vibrant manner. We can offer our 
strengths to the world without selling ourselves short. Our 
labour legislation will tell the world that business with 
Saskatchewan will be conducted using the highest standards 
that we can achieve, just as last year we renegotiated a deal 
with Federated Co-operatives to send a message to the world 
that business in Saskatchewan is to be conducted in a fair and 
equitable manner. No more give-aways, no more sweetheart 
deals. 
 
The labour amendments that we will legislate this session will 
clearly define the high expectations that we hold for ourselves 
and demand for others when they come to do business. I 
believe that our labour legislation needs to respect the integrity 
of the workforce and create a climate for fairness. We have just 
witnessed a labour dispute at the west coast between grain 
handlers and terminal managers where a localized strike 
escalated into a full-scale walk-out initiated by management 
where the workers were prepared to load our grain and load 
perishable goods. The essence of this dispute was that the 
labour standards were to be driven down in order to weaken the 
union and strengthen management. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we expect that all participants in the 
workforce are valued and protected. Amendments to our labour 
legislation are the foundations of which we will build our 
economic renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few minutes now talking 
about some of the things that are happening and been going on 
in the Melville constituency. I think 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

that these examples of activities in the constituency show the 
kind of energy and strength that exists in our rural 
communities. 
 
Last year a group of people started a welfare rights group in 
Melville. The group's stated purpose is support and advocacy 
and education with and for low income people. There has been 
a tremendous number of people participating in these activities 
which brings them together. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the Star Blanket Band, an Indian band 
within my constituency, reached an agreement with the town of 
Fort Qu'Appelle regarding an urban reserve. This agreement is 
an historic one for the people of Saskatchewan and a new 
milestone in regards to aboriginal self-government. 
 
Also the North Valley Health District was formed. The health 
care district encompasses the major centres of Esterhazy, 
Melville, and Ituna, and the surrounding rural areas. The Board 
has hired a chief executive officer and together with the Board 
and CEO (chief executive officer) are conducting needs 
assessments for the district. 
 
I want to say a few words about education, and in particular the 
unique governance that we have in the Melville area. For over 
20 years the Deer Park School Division, which is the rural area 
around Melville including Ituna, Hubbard, Fenwood, Goodeve, 
Killaly, and Grayson; and the Melville Public School Division 
108 which is the public school system within the city of 
Melville; and St. Henry's, which is the separate school division 
within the city of Melville, have shared services. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, for over 20 years the three school divisions 
have shared a director of education, one secretary-treasurer, 
and sort of one whole school board office. In addition to the 
cost saving and the sharing of services, there has been no 
unnecessary duplication of services and I believe a better sort 
of handle on the education needs of the community. 
 
The Lebret Eagles hockey team has become the newest 
member of the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League and 
commenced play this past fall. So along with the Melville 
Millionaires, the Yorkton Terriers, the Weyburn Redwings, and 
the Estevan Bruins, we have our own little regional hockey 
rivalry. And I have, I believe, the honour — and probably the 
only one, only MLA — to have two SJHL (Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League) franchises in my constituency, the 
Melville Millionaires and the Lebret Eagles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organized labour is a vibrant force in Melville 
constituency. The regional labour committee has been gaining 
strength since its inception about five years ago. The committee 
has representation from unions in the private and public sector 
and from unions affected by federal and provincial 
jurisdictions. The diversity of the representation gives rise to 
issues such as transportation — there's people working on the 
railroad involved in the committee — retail/wholesale trade, 
insurance, telecommunication. There's also farmers on it 
through the workplace and some representatives from the local 
National Farmers Union, library services, public services, 
health care, and social justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many members of the farming community in my 

area have indicated their support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
and the orderly marketing system as it presently exists. The 
ravages of the open market are so apparent that farmers 
acknowledge the benefits of this marketing system. The 
Canadian Wheat Board is known to have an incredibly 
competent staff and board working on behalf of the farming 
community. I mention these activities and accomplishments as 
they demonstrate the motivation and drive of people committed 
to their communities. All of these achievements were the result 
of hard work, dedication, and determination. These are the 
qualities that have stood us in good stead in the past and I 
believe they are qualities that move us towards our stated 
vision. 
 
I want to close with a quote, and it's a quote of Tommy 
Douglas: 
 

What our ancestors began, we will continue. Because times 
change and people change. We need new ideas to meet new 
situations. But the principles of organizing society for the 
benefit of all people, not for the privileged few . . . that is 
still there. And that is the principle to which we adhere. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be supporting the motion and 
not the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to stand up today on behalf of my constituents, the 
Shellbrook-Torch River constituency, and bring some of their 
concerns to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first I want to thank the member from Regina 
Lake Centre for moving the Speech from the Throne, and the 
member from Biggar for seconding. They both brought very 
important issues. The Shellbrook-Torch River constituency is 
basically made up of forestry, tourism, and agriculture. There 
are a number of tree nurseries in my constituency. The Prince 
Albert tree nursery is located near Spruce Home. There are also 
a number of private nurseries as well. The tree nurseries have 
had some tough growing seasons, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
weather conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the environment and resource committee toured 
the forest area. We toured some of the reforestation area north 
of Smeaton, also the East Trout and Candle Lake area. One 
thing that has become a real concern in the forest is dwarf 
mistletoe. It's a fungus that stunts the growth of jack pine. The 
only way you can solve this problem is to harvest the wood and 
burn the part of the tree that is not salvageable. Then they could 
go back in and reforest 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

these areas. North of Prince Albert this is being done now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of small contractors that are 
harvesting the wood in this forest. These people employ 
two- and three-man jobs. These contractors are made up of 
post-treatment plants, saw mills, shakes and shingles. Those 
operators too are having problems with wood allocation, Mr. 
Speaker. Hopefully a co-management program will help to 
overcome this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a partnership agreement between P.A. 
(Prince Albert) pulp and paper and the government for $128 
million — environment performance enhancement program. 
The mill will be in full compliance with the government 
environment legislation by the year 2003, maybe even sooner. 
 
Tourism has also become a big industry in Shellbrook-Torch 
River. We have fishing, big game, and game birds. The 
national park is in my constituency. People not only from 
Saskatchewan and across Canada but also from different 
countries around the world come to share beautiful Waskesiu. 
At Waskesiu there is fishing in a number of lakes, also big 
game animals, plus natural scenery, Mr. Speaker. There is three 
provincial parks, lower fishing lakes, Emma Lake, Candle Lake 
as well. There's much to enjoy in our parks. 
 
There is also outfitting. There has been an ongoing increase in 
outfitting. From the 1990s, the number of outfitting has 
increased to approximately 1,800. There are some concerns 
facing outfitters, but these are problems that we are dealing 
with through a co-management agreement. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about agriculture. 
I would like to refer to the Ag 2000 strategy, paving the road to 
recovery. Changes don't happen overnight, but I can see the 
changes already in my area. Mr. Speaker, a farmer a couple of 
miles to the west of me feeds approximately 2,000 head of 
feeders. A farmer to the right has a cow-calf operation of 200 to 
300 animals. 
 
There are also a number of big game farmers in my 
constituency. They raise elk, buffalo, ostriches, and llamas. 
Farmers are diversifying, Mr. Speaker, also specialty crops 
such as canola, canary seed, peas, hay. Agriculture is changing 
in the '90s. Where they seeded wheat and barley, they are now 
seeding speciality crops. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to help educate farmers and 
organizations about the options facing them, sharing 
information, looking for alternatives to the challenges facing us 
in the global market, looking for other alternatives at home to 
create local provincial marketing strategy that would allow us 
to compete on the world market. Mr. Speaker, agriculture is a 
major resource in my constituency. The farmers have done a lot 
in diversifying. A lot more has to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the GATT, the federal Liberals was the one that 
agreed in principle a number of what I call give-aways. 
Agriculture is the main industry in Saskatchewan that will be 
affected. Marketing boards for domestic eggs, poultry products, 
will not be allowed. Extensive grain subsidies will be phased 

out. Tariffs on pulp and wood have been eliminated. 
 
Health and safety regulations cannot be used to interfere with 
trade. Services are now included as part of the trade agreement. 
Financial services, legal services, telecommunication services, 
tourism, and transportation, that is just to name a few of the 
services that will be affected. 
 
The agreement has the potential to include provincial 
governments. Governments are required to protect property 
rights like Bill C-91, drug and chemical patent protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could remember when I was out holding 
meetings around the province for Focus on Inputs because the 
chemicals were so costly to the farmers. At that time 
glyphosate or Roundup was $24 a litre. The company, Focus on 
Inputs, said we could manufacture the chemical for $6 a litre 
and still make a profit. That is a saving of approximately $15 a 
litre. 
 
The Bill C-91 protects the chemical companies and the drug 
companies. The Liberals are protecting the multinational 
companies just like the previous administration. They're cats. 
We must wait for the specifics of the deal but at first chance, 
however, it is clear that the decisions were very one-sided with 
large corporations coming out as the biggest, maybe the only 
winners. 
 
Nowhere is there any priorities given to employment issues or 
human rights, labour standards, or to patent, or to protection of 
quality of life. Our national government has not only denied 
local communities a say, but they have given up some of our 
ability to make economic and social policy decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many challenges facing people and 
politicians after the last administration. 
 
We have a school in Paddockwood area, Mr. Speaker, that was 
built for political reasons. Now it's closed. The people in the 
area are hoping to see this building in use because this is a new 
facility. The people are working hard in the area to see if there 
isn't some solutions or alternatives for the use of this building, 
and I am working closely with them. 
 
The REDA (regional economic development authorities) 
initiative launched on June 29, 1993 encouraged coordination 
of community economic development, an organization within 
trading regions for the purpose of insuring long-term and 
effective community based economic development and 
services. 
 
The Prince Albert area was the first to form a REDA. The 
announcement was made December 16, and 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

another seven REDAs are expected to form by March 31, 1994, 
with seventeen more anticipated by March 31, 1995. 
 
Health services. Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak about 
health services in my constituency. The P.A. Health District 
has been formed. The Prince Albert Health District is in part of 
my constituency — like Waskesiu to the north, Birch Hills to 
the south, Weirdale to the east, Spruce Home or Sturgeon Lake 
to the west. There is a first respond team in this district. This is 
Christopher Lake, Emma Lake and Anglin Lake areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this area for the two months of the summer has 
the same population as Prince Albert. Of course, Mr. Speaker, 
they use all the resources in that area that is available to them. 
The first respond team is made up of doctors, nurses, people 
with first aid. Fire respond team in the area as well. Most of 
these people have cabins there or live there year round, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The North-East Health District also has been formed. I share 
that with my colleague from Nipawin. The area in that 
north-east district is Choiceland and Smeaton. Mr. Speaker, the 
Smeaton hospital has been fire condemned for over two years 
now. The district health board is working very close with the 
Smeaton district to come up with the needs assessment in that 
area. Changes to the funding of acute care and long-term care 
were not taken very lightly by the Smeaton district. But, Mr. 
Speaker, working with the health district they are starting to 
feel the changes in the health services. These changes are 
starting to provide better services but more needs to be done. 
 
Parkland district board is also up and running. I shared that too, 
Mr. Speaker, with the member from Redberry and the member 
from Turtleford. The Parkland district area that is in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, is Canwood and Shellbrook. Mr. 
Speaker, Canwood has a community clinic which they are very 
proud of. This community clinic has been there for a number of 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, home care's administrated in the Parkland district 
out of Canwood. There are a number of hard workers in 
Canwood that need to be congratulated for their hard work. Mr. 
Speaker, there is also a home, a seniors' home in Canwood 
which I had the opportunity to visit last year. The town and 
area should be congratulated for the hard work they have done 
over the years to maintain the level of service they have in 
Canwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shellbrook and the Parkland Health District 
Board are doing their needs assessment for Shellbrook. There is 
a hospital in Shellbrook and also a seniors' home. 
 
In wrapping up, Mr. Speaker, our natural resources are 
working. We must build on our natural resources, which we 
are. Added value food processing, tourism, mining, forestry — 
we don't have to depend on outsiders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don't need the megaprojects. We need to 
develop our own resources with common sense. That is using 
our resources wisely. We must leave something for our 
children to build on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the throne speech and am 

pleased to hear the budget will come down on February 17. 
This gives local governments a chance to budget for the year. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, a lot has been done by my 
government, but a lot has to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's enjoyable for 
me, Mr. Speaker, to rise today to discuss the Speech from the 
Throne which was so beautifully delivered the other day in this 
very Assembly. As always, the Lieutenant Governor has done a 
remarkably good job and we commend her for that, and we 
hope that she has a long and prosperous life. 
 
We want to speak, Mr. Speaker, about this address, mostly 
because it has become a tradition to do so. And that tradition, 
of course, is based upon the premise that this Assembly is an 
Assembly of words, and the use of a lot of words is always 
necessary. And yet there are times when the reality of why we 
use a lot of words is sort of lost. 
 
We use a lot of words, Mr. Speaker, because we debate issues. 
And the process of democracy has evolved that we debate 
issues quite frankly because we need to get both pro and con of 
all of the concepts that go with whatever the debate is going to 
be about, expressed fully and completely and sometimes over 
and over, in order to make sure that nothing is missed so that 
the government of the day can serve the democratic needs of 
the people in a much better fashion. But there comes a time, 
Mr. Speaker, when too many words simply become a waste of 
time as well. And there needs to be some balance. 
 
So in keeping with the official opposition's decision to cut the 
throne speech debate short and getting through it as quickly as 
possible so that we can spend time on more pressing issues, I'm 
going to make my remarks rather brief today. And some might 
question what brief might mean in my case, but I'll definitely 
work on it as I go. 
 
As far as I'm concerned the throne speech, in most cases, Mr. 
Speaker, is important. The process, I think, is important. But 
we are at the present time in the middle of a government's 
tenure of office, a time when most people are looking for the 
government to take some action. And this is not a time for a lot 
of pomp and ceremony, and we need to get down to business. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan feel that we've got far too many 
dollars being spent with far too few results coming to the 
people. We've got people who say that we're spending 
$280,000 of taxpayers' money in the 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

course of a week to debate issues that are very vague to say the 
least. And I believe, sir, that most people in the present mood 
that our electorate is in would say that that's too much money to 
spend on a week when we have so many pressing issues that 
need to be addressed. 
 
(1600) 
 
The member from Rosthern mentioned the other day that in 
Alberta the Speech from the Throne was replaced with a 
Premier's address. And while I'm sure that they will have 
speeches from the throne there in the future in order to serve 
the needs of the political process and the democratic process, 
this year, because economics are very difficult throughout our 
nation and surely throughout the world, they have seen this as a 
solution in part to beginning to solve the problems of a 
necessary roll-back of costs. 
 
It costs us, they tell me, $35,000 a day to debate the throne 
speech. I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, if that figure is exactly 
correct or if it's a few dollars up or a few dollars down. But 
irregardless, if it's anywheres in the ballpark, it's a lot of 
money. And most likely a lot of taxpayers would say today that 
sure, $35,000 isn't a lot of money in the scheme of things when 
you're spending 5 billion. But you have to start some place, and 
I think that's what the electorate is telling us. 
 
They're telling us we should deal with issues like taxation. 
They want us to talk about the union-only contracting. Folks 
have been coming into our offices, and I'm sure into the offices 
of members of the government, to tell them that these kinds of 
directions are too extreme and too one-sided to allow for a 
uniform development of our province in the future. 
 
They want us to talk about utility rates and the need for 
legislative committees to oversee them so that they are fair and 
equitable rather than becoming tools of taxation to serve the 
needs of a very hungry government. 
 
We have increasing welfare cases in our province. This is an 
extremely distressing area of concern, Mr. Speaker, for all of 
us. Because what it means is that our system is failing our 
people. We have people first on unemployment insurance and 
then as a last resort, it becomes a welfare thing. And this is the 
point in life where many of our citizens find themselves today. 
 
And there is only one solution, Mr. Speaker, and that has to be 
the creation of more work for people to be able to do, more 
realistic jobs for people to work at. The solution has to be a 
broadening of the base of opportunities. And we need to reform 
all of this Legislative Assembly and the way it works, Mr. 
Speaker, because we are getting out of tune with the times. We 
have been living in the past far too long, and a good indication 
of that has been the very substance of the speeches that we 
have listened to over the past days. 
 
I have no objection to honouring the memory of a very great 
statesman and a very great Saskatchewan person in the name of 
Tommy Douglas. Certainly he did a lot for our province. But 
we have listened to the black cat, white cat story more than a 
few times. And while I enjoy listening to the story — and it 
probably has some truth to it — it is always shortened by not 
completing the fact that in reality if there are these 

metaphorical black cats and white cats, there most certainly is 
at least 55 hungry cats in this very Assembly. 
 
My tour through the constituency before I was elected, Mr. 
Speaker, related to discussing the waste and mismanagement of 
government and who in fact is the beneficiary of many of the 
dollars that are spent in places where people seriously wonder 
whether or not those dollars should go there. 
 
One of my constituents made an observation, not so much to 
cats but the same theory, the same principle. And what he said 
was that what you do when you change governments is that you 
put a bunch of fat cats out of the pen and put a bunch of hungry 
cats into the pen. And he says all they do is spend all of their 
time trying to get back up to the trough. 
 
I think that's an over-cynical way to put things, Mr. Speaker; 
however my constituent made the point that if we change 
governments, we simply would be costing ourselves many 
millions of dollars fattening up a new bunch of cats. And I 
suspect, by the way things are going, he may be right. 
 
So let's get to work. Let's talk about the problems of our 
province. Let's talk about agriculture, the biggest industry still 
in our province. Those of us who are involved in it like to think 
it's the most important, but I'm sure that those who are not 
involved in agriculture will say that they have just as great of 
an importance to society. And in reality they will be right, 
because all of our industries are important. 
 
The world is a big circle, and we go around in that circle 
whether we like it or not. And everybody's job is an intricate 
part of making that circle work. And so we need to work on all 
of the problems collectively throughout our society, our 
economic situation, and the many, many other pressing issues 
of our Saskatchewan families and the struggles that are going 
on within our society. 
 
We don't need, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, to have the 
members opposite telling our electorate that the train has left 
the station, or that we're on the right track. We don't need to do 
that for another three days, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly 
the people of Saskatchewan are tired of being dictated to. They 
want somebody that will sit down and listen to them, to confer 
with them. I know for a fact that there are at least a few stock 
growers in this province that are ready to tear up part of that 
track, and derail that train. 
 
I think we've heard enough of the drivel, as it was portrayed to 
being here the other day — enough of that to last us for a 
lifetime perhaps, but at least enough to last us for this week. 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

So I would like to join with my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, in 
asking the government that we would bring forward the 
concerns of our constituents through the important Bills and the 
important issues that we have outlined through the beginnings 
of this week, while we have presented the Bills to restructure 
the province and to rebuild and reconstruct the workings of this 
very Assembly. 
 
My constituency, Mr. Speaker, has rural hospitals that are 
reeling from the government's funding cuts — absolute horror 
and disgust in the minds of people at what has happened. And it 
appears that rural health facilities will face even further 
reductions. And those, Mr. Speaker, are the kind of things that 
we need to address fully and squarely here in this Assembly, 
because the health of our people is the most dear and near 
things to their hearts always, even ahead of their own personal 
economies, their own personal jobs, and the things that they d  
in their lives. Because no one can live if they're sick without 
some fear and a lot of needs to be taken care of. 

o 

 
We have other issues in our area, Mr. Speaker. We have the 
9-1-1 issue of emergency dispatch service. We have problems 
with not being able to get that service into place, although 
we've heard some positive signs in the last few days, and I'm 
hopeful that we can get this project under way now. Certainly 
it's been waiting far, far too long; far, far too much quibbling 
between a Crown corporation and the people that it serves. 
 
We have seniors being shipped all over this province, from one 
care centre to another, simply because the government has an 
arbitrary rule that you can only stay in a facility for so many 
weeks. 
 
This is the kind of thing, Mr. Speaker, that has to be talked 
about, has to be worked on through legislation, and has to be 
taken care of very quickly. It's all well and good to say that we 
have to work for a period of time to allow a new system to get 
started. But if we're the individual, the one person who has to 
suffer as a result of this process, then it doesn't look like such a 
wise thing to be taking time over. If it were your mother or 
your father that's being shipped all around the province and you 
have to phone all over the province to try to find out which 
facility they're in this week, then it becomes very real and very 
personal and certainly cannot be tolerated. 
 
I believe with some planning and some intelligent thought here, 
Mr. Speaker, that we can make life much easier and much 
better for many of our senior people. I know that we can do it. 
We have the ability in this province to do a better job than 
we're doing, and I think we ought to do it. 
 
We have a government, Mr. Speaker, in this province that is 
willing to squeeze small businesses that are not unionized in 
favour of unions. And then these people claim that they have 
the concerns of the people foremost in their hearts and in their 
minds while they drive business out of the province, run our 
seniors from home to home, ignore the needs and the wishes as 
basic things as interprovincial trade being ignored, simple 
things like they need to have cattle brands allowed to be done 
in Alberta that would qualify for Saskatchewan. Those kinds of 
things not being allowed to happen because our Minister of 
Agriculture doesn't have the time to go to Alberta to negotiate 
an interprovincial agreement. There are a lot of little things that 

could make life so much easier that are simply not being done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, and I say to the members of 
this Assembly through you, that we must get on with business. 
There are many pressing matters that need to be taken care of. 
And for me to talk about them all day today won't help. We 
need to get into the legislation that needs to be changed in order 
for things to be done right. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would say that it is time for me to 
follow my colleagues and move: 
 

That this Assembly now proceed to Bill No. 2, An Act to 
amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 
1993. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seconded by the member from 
Wilkie. 
 
The Speaker: — Let me just ask the member. I believe I heard 
him correctly, say that the House do now proceed to Bill No. 2. 
Your motion reads Bill No. 1 . . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well if the member meant Bill No. 1, then the motion is in 
order. But if he meant Bill No. 2, it's out of order . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay just so we . . . 
 
It's moved by the member from Maple Creek, seconded by the 
member from Wilkie: 
 

That the House do now proceed to Bill No. 1, An Act to 
amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
(Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, unlike the previous speaker I intend to take a little 
time today. The throne speech and the tradition of the throne 
speech, as the member well knows, is to put forward the 
position of the members of the legislature, to discuss the 
accomplishments or lack thereof of the government, and to deal 
with the issues that their constituents have raised with them 
over the past while. Mr. Speaker, I intend to try to deal with 
some of those topics today in dealing with that. 
 
Unlike the members of the Conservative caucus, I don't believe 
that it's a waste of time or a waste of taxpayers' money to raise 
concerns that taxpayers have raised with me as their 
representative in the legislature. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to be able to stand here and raise the concerns of the 
people of Regina Rosemont, the people who want me to speak 
out and to speak out forcefully, to put forward the case that 
they are making to the government and to all 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

members of the legislature. 
 
(1615) 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is not a waste of taxpayers' money. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is the essence of the democratic process, 
something that the members of the Conservative caucus have in 
fact deigned to look with some disapproval upon since the time 
that they came to power in 1982. And again it shows in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, their lack of respect for the ability of people to 
speak out and put forward their position. And I say shame on 
the members of the Conservatives. 
 
I say . . . not only me say that, Mr. Speaker. I say that in the last 
provincial by-election held in the constituency of Regina North 
West, the people of Regina North West said shame on them as 
well, honouring their candidate, Mr. Schmidt, with 138 votes. 
And if that isn't shame, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what is. I 
don't know what is. The people of . . . in fact, people of that 
constituency have passed judgement on the Conservative 
caucus as have the people of this province in the last provincial 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, before I begin to talk about more 
substantive issues, congratulate the newly elected member from 
Regina North West. I listened with some careful attention to 
her speech and while I want to say that I agree with some of the 
things she said, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I found that 
what she said for the most part wasn't totally true — that what 
she said was in fact less than honest. And what she said, in fact, 
was carefully crafted by her speech writers to leave an 
impression which is not in fact the case, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
refer to a couple of passages from her speech and how she 
carefully crafted it. 
 
First of all one of the things she raised, Mr. Speaker, was the 
fact — or tried to leave the impression — that the Leader of the 
Third Party did not accept any additional remuneration upon 
becoming Leader of the Third Party. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
challenge the newly elected member from Regina North West 
at this point in time to find out whether in fact that is the fact. 
Because it's my information that the day after she became the 
Leader of the Third Party and it gained official status, that she 
went up and took that $17,000 in additional pay that she was 
entitled to as a member of the third party, as Leader of the 
Third Party. 
 
Yet the newly elected member from Regina North West 
attempts to leave us with the impression that she did not do 
that. Now if that's the new kind of politics, Mr. Speaker, it 
seems to me it's a lot like that old kind of Lib-Lab Tory politics 
that we've had for too long in this Assembly. And one other 
example, Mr. Speaker, of the white cats talking with the black 
cats' tongue. Or, Mr. Speaker, I listen to the member saying I'm 
going to not take my $94 per day per diem until the report of 
the independent commission that was set up to look into MLAs 
remuneration and benefits reports. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Isn't that thoughtful? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now that's very thoughtful and very carefully 
crafted, Mr. Speaker. She didn't say that she was going to turn 
it down; or turn over the $94 a day to the food bank; or she 

didn't say that she was going to give it to charity; she didn't say 
that she was going to return it down . . . turn it down in 
perpetuity. No, what she said was I'm going to turn it down 
until the commission comes back to report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to find out now, from some point in the future on, 
whether in fact the member means that she's not going to take 
it, or means that she's not going to take it for this little while so 
that she can grandstand to the public. She can take the same 
position as that Tory who got 138 votes in the constituency of 
Regina North West. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, knowing Liberals, and knowing 
Tories, and knowing how they craft the truth, and how they 
twist and turn in the wind, that in fact I bet you that that 
member from Regina North West does indeed take that $94 
when the commission reports back, and she can claim to her 
constituents: well I didn't take it right away. I didn't take it right 
away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there's another issue. There's another issue in that, that the 
member from Regina North West raised in her speech — and I 
don't want to be overly critical because it's the member's 
maiden speech and I thought in fact she did a very good job in 
delivering. I thought she did a very good job in delivering that 
speech but there are a certain lack of truthfulness in that 
speech. 
 
And the third item was when she talked about ministerial 
salaries and the whole kerfuffle around the raises given to 
ministerial assistants and the implementation of the new grid. 
Well what the member didn't . . . what the new member didn't 
say, Mr. Speaker, or tell the House was that her colleague — 
the member from Shaunavon — when this issue was raised in 
the caucus of the New Democratic Party when he sat there, that 
he in fact voted in favour and he did not object to the 
implementation of that new grid and salary. She didn't happen 
to mention that, Mr. Speaker, to this House and probably a 
convenient lapse of memory. Who knows, right? 
 
She also — she also failed — she also failed to mention that 
during the election campaign, when she tried to claim in her 
election literature that there was a 12 per cent across the board 
raise for ministerial assistants, and when she was challenged on 
that in public, she has yet to say, gee I was wrong. Gee it wasn't 
12 per cent across the board. Gee I must have been mistaken or 
maybe my researchers in the Liberal party were mistaken. Gee 
I didn't know. No, Mr. Speaker, she didn't admit that that in fact 
was not the case, and when she was challenged, and proven to 
be wrong, she didn't back down. No she didn't do that. She still 
tried to leave the impression for her narrow partisan political 
purposes that the 12 per cent increase was across the board and 
applied to everybody and the fact is, Mr. Speaker, she knew 
better. She knew better, but tried to leave an opposite 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

interpretation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I raise those three minor little discrepancies 
in the impression that the hon. member wants to leave to this 
House because she tries to, as does her leader of her party 
masquerade, that somehow there's a new politics, that somehow 
that they represent a new breed, and a new openness, and a new 
honesty right in the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I've 
presented three little incidences — three little incidences to 
show that, in fact, that what seems to be said is not necessarily, 
Mr. Speaker, the facts of the matter. Now I'm not accusing the 
hon. member of dissimulating directly, but I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that what we see is what we get and it's not what they 
say; it's what they have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And speaking of which, if I can refer to today's edition of the 
Regina Leader-Post, Saturday, February . . . pardon me, the 
Saturday, February 12 — Goodale and look at the headline: 
"Goodale rents from friend. Office space rented from his 
campaign manager." 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Third Party and the hon. 
member from Regina Wascana, the member of parliament, the 
Minister of Agriculture, right? Our bosom buddy so to speak, 
politically speaking each have supported the other, right? Each 
of them have tried to claim that they represent the new politics. 
Each of them tries to say that, gee, we're different from the rest 
of those grubby old politicians rolling around out there in the 
real world. And then I look and see the Leader-Post headline, 
"Goodale rents from friend. Office space rented from his 
campaign manager." Five thousand square feet of prime 
downtown Regina office space taken from Bob Peterson, 
well-known bagman of the Liberal Party, head of Denro 
Holdings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly, we know there is no 
difference between the Liberals and the Conservatives. We 
know that historically one right-wing party, when out of power, 
tries to pretend that it's somehow different from its kissing 
cousin — the other right-wing party. But the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have well been politicized enough 
to know that when you scratch one, you're scratching the other 
and they both bleed together. And, Mr. Speaker, not only 
Tweedledee and Tweedledum, right, twins, kissing cousins — 
the Siamese twins of Saskatchewan politics. 
 
Now the member and it's nice to see her here, Mr. Speaker; she 
won the election fair and square. But I'd like to respond to the 
member from Regina North West, I'd like to perhaps caution 
her on not getting too comfortable in her seat in this legislature. 
After all, Mr. Speaker, she won by a vote total which was less 
than that received by the Liberal Party in the 1991 general 
election. 
 
In fact she won, Mr. Speaker, by a sum which was less than 
that received by other members of this Assembly in terms of 
plurality, majorities over the Liberals, so I wouldn't want to get 
too carried away and read too much into the Liberal victory. In 
fact, I think it's pretty small solace for the Liberal Party. I think 
it's pretty small solace for the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, when 
they're only able to eke out a small victory, only able to eke out 
a small electoral victory in an election in which we have seen 
the smallest turnout in at least 25 years, and probably more, in 

this province. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is basically where I want to lead my 
remarks today. I want to talk a little bit today about the context 
of politics in Saskatchewan, or the politics in Saskatchewan, 
the performance of the government in the context of the 
by-election results and what it represented. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, it's not coming like Mark Antony to either praise nor 
bury the government, it's more like Cassandra to perhaps give a 
few words of advice to the government and a few words of 
caution because the by-election . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
by-election was a very interesting and very informative process 
that we've just gone through. I think it was characterized, Mr. 
Speaker, first of all by its incredibly low turnout, as I've said 
before. Some people will try to say that the low turnout was 
because of the cold or the low turnout was because of voter 
disinterest. That may well be the case, and I want to deal with 
that in a few minutes. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think that there was another message 
to be read in that voter turnout, and that is the message — and 
the Premier has alluded to that in his previous remarks, remarks 
made previously in this House and outside this House — is that 
the people of Saskatchewan have suffered in the last two years. 
They have sacrificed, they have tightened their belts until they 
can tighten no more, right. They've dug down, hunkered down, 
tried to get through a situation which, quite frankly, was not of 
their making but in fact was the making of the former 
Conservative government. But now, Mr. Speaker, they're 
saying, enough is enough; we're not going to sacrifice any 
more; we don't feel that it was our fault or a situation of our 
doing and we therefore are not willing to go much further in 
granting the government patience. 
 
I think the low turnout . . . in fact, Mr. Speaker, I know the low 
turnout . . . because I happen to live in that constituency, in the 
poll 33, the southernmost poll of the Regina North West 
constituency, and my friends and neighbours who explained to 
me why they didn't vote in the election said they want to send 
everybody a message. And the message they wanted to send 
was this — and the member from Saskatoon University has 
previously alluded to it — that there has got to be a new air of 
hope developed in this province, and that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has got to be the agent of, the carrier of, that 
hope. The Government of Saskatchewan has got to put forward 
an alternative to the present situation and then to the present 
system which is leading to despair, some anguish, and hurt 
among the citizens of this province. 
 
That's the fundamental, underlying message, and they did it 
two ways. One — the member from Regina North West 
pointed it out — they didn't vote; they didn't register, and they 
expressed their anger at what was happening to the province. 
But they did not blame the government for all the ills. The fact 
that they stayed home and did not vote against the government 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

is prima facie evidence, Mr. Speaker, is prima facie evidence 
that in fact they, while dissatisfied, were not going to go back 
to the Liberals and Tories to look for solutions. That record low 
turnout should not give any consolation to the Leader of the 
Third Party, and it certainly doesn't give any consolation to 
whoever is going to be the Leader of the Official Opposition. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talked to my friends and neighbours in the 
area — and they talk politics — there's three themes that they 
seem to bring forward, that they want the government to 
respond to. And I call them the three i's. There's imagination, 
innovation, and involvement. Mr. Speaker, they want to see a 
greater imagination by the government, and some of that I must 
say, Mr. Speaker, was reflected in the throne speech, but they 
want to see the government use the imaginations not only of the 
members of the legislature but all of its citizens in responding 
to the problems that we all recognize and that we all know that 
we face here in Saskatchewan. 
 
They feel that the system does not provide for an outlet for 
their creativity and imagination. Whether they're a teacher that 
is stifled by the present school structure at the school level as 
well as at the board level; whether they're a health worker that 
feel that they don't have the input necessary in delivering health 
care reform which they support, Mr. Speaker, which they 
support — and the member from Regina North West knows 
that to be true — that they support health care reform but they 
want to see more imagination so that their creativity can be 
used; whether in fact that they are the steelworker or the 
policeman or the person who is a domestic worker, they want 
to feel that their creativity can somehow find an outlet as we go 
from a period of austerity and belt tightening to turning the 
corner towards a new dawn in this province. 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker, of something that's 
come up recently in that regard. I want to talk . . . The teachers 
of the city of Regina, through the Regina Public School 
Teachers' Association, have unanimously passed a concept 
called the deferred salary plan. Now it's a plan, Mr. Speaker, 
which is in existence in every other province in Canada except 
Saskatchewan. In fact it was introduced in 1983 in Nova Scotia 
as a response to budgetary cut-backs and to tightening of the 
belt in that province. 
 
And basically the plan says, look, I am willing to defer part of 
my salary for two years or three years or four years or five 
years based on a percentage. And I'll take a year off three or 
four or five years down the road, right, using that part of the 
deferred salary. And you can hire a young teacher which will 
save the board money, which will allow me to overcome 
teacher burn-out — and we all very well know that in the 
teaching profession burn-out is becoming a more and more 
critical problem particularly in times of financial restraint — 
that we will go ahead and do this provided the government does 
certain things. 
 
It doesn't necessarily cost any money. That is, that basically the 
government's got to change the superannuation Act, The 
Teachers' Superannuation Act, to allow for contributions in that 
year of sabbatical to be deferred and to be paid out so that 
superannuation benefits as well as disability and health care 

and dental benefits are applicable in that year. And that requires 
a change in The Education Act and the superannuation Act, 
right. Now that does not take, that does not take a great change. 
But it's the kind of thing that the teachers themselves are 
looking for. 
 
And surprisingly enough, it's not just the teachers themselves 
who are looking for it. For example, I'm told that the Prince 
Albert Rural Board now wishes to be able to enter into the 
negotiations over a deferred salary plan. They're waiting for an 
initiative by the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation). 
They're waiting for initiative by the teachers. But they 
themselves, they themselves realize the value of that kind of 
plan. 
 
Now it may not seem as a great big thing, Mr. Speaker. It may 
not seem as a major reform. But it's already in place in the 
provincial civil service. The public service agreement provides 
for that deferred salary plan. The teachers themselves are 
asking for it. 
 
And it seems to me that the government, it's incumbent upon 
the government to respond as quickly as possible to that kind of 
thing, where they can deal with redundancies, that boards can 
deal with the question of redundancies, the question of teacher 
burn-out, and develop a different way of looking at the working 
world. So, Mr. Speaker, I raise that because it seems to me it's 
one aspect of imagination put forward by the people of this 
province that the government can very well respond to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second aspect of that is innovation, of how we 
do things. You know in society and particularly in the 
government and the government bureaucracy there is, Mr. 
Speaker, there is an inertia, a built-in inertia which, it's the big 
"i", that in fact acts as the block in imagination, innovation and 
involvement. And it's called inertia. 
 
Because things were done that way time after time after time in 
the past, there is a built-in response that, gee, that wasn't the 
way we've done things before; are you sure we should do 
things different in the future? 
 
Well we've seen some inertia overcome in health care reform, 
Mr. Speaker. We've seen resistance put forward, a lot of it 
organized by the members from the Progressive Conservative 
caucus, some organized by the members of the Liberal caucus. 
We've seen that kind of inertia overcome, in fact, by people of 
this province who understand that there was a need for change. 
 
And there was a mobilization and there is a mobilization going 
on around health care reform. And sure there's problems with 
it. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, there are problems with it and 
some of those problems, I'm glad to say, were identified 
recently by 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

the Health Services Utilization Commission. But inertia is 
endemic to society because it's much easier to do things the 
way they were in the past than to look into the future and try to 
become innovative on how we do things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to see that the government recognizes 
that there is a need for change in at least some areas of our 
daily life, some areas of life which affects everybody in the 
province. That is in The Trade Union Act and The Labour 
Standards Act, and the government's promised to upgrade and 
to bring into the '90s, legislation in those two areas. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, one should not dare to be bold in those 
areas because between the 1944 Trade Union Act and the 
working world of today there's a great gulf. Or between the last 
revision of The Labour Standards Act and the working world of 
today there has been a tremendous change. 
 
Now the buzz-words of globalization or competitiveness, or all 
the buzz-words of the right wing, are not the kind of change I'm 
referring to. I'm referring to a change in attitude towards work 
and towards the way in which one spends their working lives, 
by the great majority of people. 
 
No longer, no longer, Mr. Speaker, are individual workers in 
this province content to remain on the same job, year after year 
after year. No longer are people content to be stuck in a rut, to 
look solely for security in a single job as their raison d'être for 
existence, hoping to work until they get to 65 to be able to 
retire, right, and then to die. 
 
And part of that is just the changing nature of the ability to 
communicate. People see the world; the world is brought into 
their living room. They're able to see different lifestyles, 
different ways of living, different ways of being, and they have 
developed different ways of seeing what life constitutes, what 
life is all about. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is incredibly important understanding to 
have when dealing with changes to The Labour Standards Act. 
Because what has got to be built into The Labour Standards Act 
changes is a recognition that, on the one hand, there is the need 
for security in terms of living standards. At the same time there 
is a need for flexibility in terms of the ability to change jobs. 
And what that implies of course, it means the ability to 
portability of pension, portability of dental, portability of health 
care plans. That means the development of an infrastructure of 
security, a safety net that people can in fact move from job to 
job. 
 
But equally as important, equally important is the notion that 
individuals who want to work in this society have a right to a 
job and that their right to a job and the notion of what 
constitutes a job must be extended beyond that which has been 
traditional, a traditional employer/employee relationship. 
 
Community service has to be recognized, I would submit, as a 
valid form of work that may not produce profit for an employer 
or may not produce surplus value for some large corporation 
but produces good for a community, produces something 
tangible, produces something real for the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make, for example, I want to make a 

reference to initiative from the Minister of Municipal 
Government and the Minister of Education who got together 
and who responded to a request by people in the community in 
Regina for the development of a inner-city youth sports project. 
 
People came to the ministers, said, look we've got an idea. We 
want to implement this at least as a pilot project. We think that 
it's better to have young people in the inner cities of Regina 
playing basketball in the gyms than it is to be out knocking old 
ladies over the head, right, breaking and entering. We think that 
it's better to have those people, to have the young people 
involved in an activity in which social skills, notions of 
responsibility and a future and a vision of the future can be at 
least dealt with them, than it is to have them out on the street 
sniffing glue and developing . . . running into B and E's (break 
and enter). 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I'm proud to say, I'm proud to say that in 
terms of innovation, right, that those two ministers have 
responded well to that. And quite frankly, the program as it 
now stands is growing like Topsy and in fact has probably 
reached the capacity of growth at the present moment. But the 
uptake, to use the bureaucratic term, but the uptake in that 
program has been overwhelming because it meets the needs of 
the community, and there was a flexibility and a willingness to 
innovate on behalf of those ministers that in fact has developed 
what we think will probably end up to be a model program not 
only for Saskatchewan, but in Canada, for helping inner-city 
youth, keeping them off the street and getting them in to a 
school context and in to a socialization context that will 
provide nothing but benefits for them and for the society down 
the long run. 
 
And that leaves me, Mr. Speaker, to my third "i", which is the 
"i" involving involvement. There is a sense, Mr. Speaker, of 
frustration at the system that's not directed towards any 
government per se, or any political party per se, but there is a 
sense of frustration out there that says the system has got to 
change to allow us to be involved in making decisions which 
affect our lives. There is a sense of frustration out there that 
says, all this change which is going on around us has not 
benefited us, has only benefit very few — the rich, the 
powerful, those who run large corporations, those who are the 
major financial backers of the Liberal and Tory parties; that 
what change that has occurred has not been directed from us for 
our benefit but has been imposed on us by those who have no 
accountability to the process whatsoever. 
 
And you can see that, Mr. Speaker, when IPSCO for example 
says, well we are going to open up a rolling mill down in Iowa 
somewhere and it may or may not result in the loss of jobs in 
Regina. The people who were the steel workers in the 
constituency of Regina Rosemont as well as those in the 
constituency of 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

Regina North West, have no input as to the decision which 
affects their lives. And more and more as the people are 
educated, and more and more as people understand the nature 
of the global realities around them, the frustration level arises. 
 
The frustration level continues to grow because the gap 
between the rhetoric of democracy on the one hand, and the 
reality of the lack of democratic involvement on the other, 
grates more and more on people in such a manner that they are 
grumpier than heck. 
 
We saw a couple of examples of that. We saw it in the general 
election of 1991 in which the Tory Party was decimated, 
reduced to nothing. We saw it around the Charlottetown accord 
when, despite the best efforts of the political and economic and 
cultural elites of this country to say, this is what is good for you 
folks out there, those folks out there says, it may well be but 
you're not imposing it because we didn't design it and we didn't 
come to grips with it and we don't think it's in our best interest. 
 
Now without taking a position one way or the other on that, 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say that it was pretty clear that the vote 
for the Reform Party . . . and I heard some pretty, pretty nutty 
explanations of why people are voting for the Reform Party. 
Well let me say this, right. That protest vote out there is an 
example of the kind of frustration that people are feeling, that 
there is a breeding ground of despair out there. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we've seen that emerge in a violent manner in the state 
of Chiapas, right, in response to the Free Trade Agreement 
imposed on the people of Mexico without their consent. 
 
(1645) 
 
Well let me say this, Mr. Speaker, that Chiapas is not too far 
away. One only has to go to the communities of La Loche and 
to other northern communities to see the level of despair, to see 
the level of hopelessness, to see the level of unemployment, to 
look at the level of lack of progress in trying to meet some 
basic, basic needs to realize that that kind of frustration can 
very quickly burst out here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I make a special plea, Mr. Speaker, because I have a sense that 
the government in changing direction in beginning to develop 
its broader horizons in this new agenda. I want to make a 
special plea for the people of northern Saskatchewan, that they 
be included in that development, in that involvement. I think 
it's incumbent upon us in southern Saskatchewan to recognize 
that there are special needs and that there are special responses 
need to be designed for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want to make that despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that La 
Loche is a long way removed from the constituency of Regina 
Rosemont, that we're all brothers and sisters here in this 
province trying to struggle through, and that the government of 
this province . . . and I know it will, because there's a 
compassionate nature, there's a compassionate nature in the 
hearts of people sitting on this side of the House, and yes over 
on that side of the House, that that compassion will show 
through in the kind of innovative, imaginative, and involving 
responses. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to end off talking about the question 
raised by the member from Regina North West about where's 

the vision and where is the plan. I think those are two of the 
rhetorical question that she asks. 
 
Well, the vision, Mr. Speaker, is not contained here. The vision 
is not contained within these four walls. As bright and as lively 
and as imaginative — as bright and lively and imaginative and 
as nice as we all are as individuals, the vision of what this 
province can become is contained out there. 
 
It's contained in the minds and in the hearts of those people 
who worked the land; those people who work in the cities and 
the towns; those people who have built this province; those 
people who continue to build this province; and those people 
who know that there's an alternative, there is an alternative to 
the present system. 
 
We don't often talk about that, Mr. Speaker, about that the 
vision has got to be a vision not of this minor reform or that 
minor reform, but that the vision has got to be a different world 
— a different reality, a different global system, a different way 
in which we relate to one another not only as individuals in a 
social context, but the way in which we relate to one another 
whether it be through trade, through commerce, through the 
production of goods and services, through the entertainment 
and culture, but that what we have now is not good enough. 
 
And when you scratch and when you talk to and when you 
listen to the people of this province, they provide you with that 
vision. And sometimes it takes a little extra listening and 
sometimes it takes a little prodding and sometimes it takes 
clarification, and sometimes it takes more than consulting — it 
actually takes involvement. But that when that process is gone 
through, there is a recognition that first of all, the present 
system is not working. People know that. 
 
They can see it in Bosnia and Herzegovina; they can see it in 
Latin America; they can see it in Asia. They can see it when 
three-quarters of the world's kids go to, you know, go to sleep 
hungry; when 30,000 of them a day — 30,000 kids a day die 
because there's a lack of proper medicine and a lack of proper 
water and a lack of proper eating facilities. 
 
And they look around and they see that those very few who 
control so very much aren't worrying about that, that they're 
living out the fantasy lives of the lifestyles of the rich and 
famous. But that the reality which is brought into their 
living-room every day is the real reality. It's the faces of the 
kids, whether it's World Vision Canada or CARE (Co-operative 
for American Relief Everywhere, Inc.) or Plan International or 
whatever charity is trying to get through to the consciousness 
of people, that in fact there is a reality 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

out there that has to be changed. 
 
And the people of this province, because they are political 
people and because they have a tradition and a history of 
change, understand that the system itself must be changed, Mr. 
Speaker, because they know the system is not producing for 
human need; it is only producing for human greed — the greed 
of the very few; the greed of the lifestyles of the rich and of the 
famous. Mr. Speaker, people know that and they know it 
intuitively and it is well lodged in their consciousness. 
 
Now you will find — and I guess this comes back full circle to 
where I started off — you will find that there are different 
responses to that understanding. And those responses are 
political responses and those responses are the program of the 
various groups and classes in society which says, this is our 
answer; this is how we think the system has got to be changed 
or done away with so that we can build a better world. 
 
The Liberals, the Conservatives — there's no difference. 
They'll both tell you that the answer is through increased 
competitiveness, the increased creation of a competitive 
climate. That it's through globalization; that it's through getting 
everything free enterprise; that it's through the kind of capital 
investment and foreign investment, and open for business and 
open for dog-eat-dog kind of world. They'll both tell you that, 
Mr. Speaker. And when you scratch them, you'll find there's no 
difference between the member from Kindersley and the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
There they are. Ask them what their vision is, and what do they 
say? Let's build a nuclear reactor on every street corner; let's 
have a nuclear reactor here and we'll put Saskatchewan on the 
map. It may glow, Mr. Speaker, it may glow, but it will be on 
the map. Right. Both of them acting as mouthpieces of Atomic 
Energy of Canada Ltd.; both working hand in glove and 
wanting to . . . that's their vision. That's their vision — open for 
business. Let them come in, let them take, let them rob, let 
them pillage, let them despoil. 
 
That's their vision of how you change the system. More of what 
we've got. Let's have more of what we've got to change what 
we have. That's the logic of what they're trying to say, Mr. 
Speaker. Let's have more free enterprise. 
 
I mean, free enterprise has done such a wonderful job of 
creating this planet. Free enterprise has done such a wonderful 
job of feeding the children of the Third World, of feeding the 
children of La Loche, of feeding the hungry kids of Regina. 
Free enterprise does such a good job of maintaining the 
environment. Free enterprise has done such a wonderful job, 
wonderful job of making sure that the education and the health 
care system and all those kinds of social safety nets are kept in 
place. 
 
If free enterprise has done such a wonderful job of creating 
such a wonderful world, let's have more of it. That's the logic. 
Let's have more greed so that we can fulfil human need. And it 
goes back to a basic philosophical difference between this side 
of the House and that side of the House — a basic 
philosophical difference. 
 
Their side says — and it doesn't matter whether it's a Liberal or 

a Tory — they say, you go out, enrich yourself, and let 
everybody enrich themselves and that will solve all the 
problems. That's the philosophy of Adam Smith. That's the 
philosophy of the member from Kindersley. That's the 
philosophy of the member from Greystone. That's the 
philosophy of the old-line capitalist party sitting over there. 
Gee, that sounds like an old, kind of out of place expression, 
old-line capitalist parties. 
 
But there's no difference. There was no difference when 
Tommy Douglas talked about the black cats and the white cats 
and the spotted cats. They were cats, Mr. Speaker. And let me 
tell you, cats today were cats yesterday, and they're going to be 
cats tomorrow unless there's some kind of genetic mutation 
provided by the atomic fallout from the member's from 
Greystone's reactor on every street corner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the difference. It's in the political response. 
And the member from Regina North West can pretend. The 
member from Regina can pretend that she's not political and 
that the member from Greystone isn't political and that the 
member from Shaunavon isn't political. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, we in this House know it's 
precisely the kind of know-nothing politics, the know-nothing 
politics of the Liberals and the Tories which have resulted in 
this kind of mess that we have here in Saskatchewan today — 
the $16 billion debt, the loss of hope, the loss of confidence, the 
shaking of confidence that we can in fact build a better world 
starting here in Saskatchewan and extending beyond our 
borders throughout our nation, throughout our continent, in fact 
around the globe. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that's what it comes down to. Now the 
member from Greystone may laugh at it. She may try to say, 
well we're all pragmatists here together. The fact of the matter 
is she's right. Some of us are pragmatists all here together — 
right? — but there is a zeal. There is an idealism, and there is a 
vision which is contained on the members of this side of the 
House that will be utterly foreign to you, has been foreign to 
you, and will for ever be foreign to you, sealed with the "Book 
of Seven Seals," locked away, locked away because it's based 
on the book of compassion, something that is not based on 
greed, saying that there is a world that we can build out there 
that doesn't revolve around the almighty dollar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity today to listen to one of my 
favourite singers, a guy called Billy Bragg, and he's a singer 
from Britain. And he was singing an old song, and I don't know 
if the members opposite are familiar with the words, but I'm 
going to acquaint them with it if they're not. And it starts off: 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

And did those feet in ancient times walk upon these green 
and pleasant hills, 
And did those Holy Lamb of God walk among this dark 
satanic mills? 
Bring me my bow of burning gold; 
Bring me my arrows of desire; 
Bring to me oh clouds unfold; 
Bring to me my chariots of fire, 
For I shall not cease from mental fight nor shall this sword 
rest in my hand 
Till we have built Jerusalem upon this planet's green and 
pleasant land. 

 
I've abridged it; I've changed the word England to planet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of vision, that's the kind of vision which 
has motivated the people of this province, the people of this 
province and the representatives of this party since the early 
1930s, for 50 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's why we're going to be celebrating the 50-year election of 
the Douglas government, and that's why, Mr. Speaker, that's 
why the torch, the zeal, and the fire of a new society still burns 
in our hearts. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


