






















































Hansard: February 17, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 239 
 February 17, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 
is to the Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, later today you 
will be presenting your budget.  The Saskatchewan people will 
be looking for a signal that some jobs will finally start to be 
created in this province. 
 
Young people who are just completing their education will be 
looking for a reason to stay in this province, Madam Minister, 
rather than moving elsewhere to work.  Other Saskatchewan 
residents, many of whom are concerned about losing their jobs, 
for the first time in their lives will be looking for a signal that 
their employment future is secure in this province. 
 
Madam Minister, last year you said in your budget you would 
have 2,000 new jobs in 1993.  But even that very modest goal 
was not met, Madam Minister.  There was zero growth in jobs 
in Saskatchewan.  Madam Minister, have you set a specific job 
target in this year's budget?  And what assurances do we have 
that these targets will be met? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to 
answer the question to the hon. member from Morse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will remember back to the early days of 1992 
and during that year meetings that were held with business and 
labour and the development of the Partnership for Renewal 
plan in the province of Saskatchewan that dealt very directly 
with the issues that you raised here today. 
 
I am pleased to announce that as a result of the cooperation that 
there has been in this province between business and working 
people and the government along with co-operatives, 
Saskatchewan continues to have the lowest unemployment rate 
in Canada bar none.  I say that, Mr. Speaker, because in the 
past 12 months the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan has 
dropped a full percentage point while the average 
unemployment rate in the country has stayed very, very stable 
at a very high level. 
 
In the notes that you'll be seeing today we want to say clearly 
that manufacturing shipments in the past year have rose by 6 
per cent.  The retail sales are up by 5.7 per cent and wholesale 
trade has increased by 10.4 per cent. 
 
Now obviously we have to do better.  It's true we need more 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, but when compared to 
other jurisdictions I think the record stands for itself that 
business, along with their partners in the trade union movement 
and working people along with the government, are doing an 
excellent job in trying to create the needed jobs for the 
province. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, in January the number of people 
working in Saskatchewan dropped to 423,000 -- the lowest 
figure in 10 years.  The number of people working in 
Saskatchewan dropped by 9,000 in your first year in office and 
there has been no growth in 1993.  There are almost 20,000 
more people on welfare than the day your government took 
office. 
 
Mr. Minister, your economic policies have been a disaster in 
terms of putting Saskatchewan people back to work.  And in 
recent weeks you have promised that today's budget will 
contain more of the same.  That's a disaster, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, will today's budget contain more of those 
destructive policies that have ground our economy to a halt 
over the past two years, or will you admit that you have been 
on the wrong track and start to give Saskatchewan people some 
hope for the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
hon. member that when looking at the optimism in the province 
by the chamber of commerce in their recent surveys that 
indicate that approximately 80 per cent of the members 
surveyed indicate that they will see growth or stability in their 
businesses, it's hard to believe where the member opposite is 
coming from. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that on the issue of welfare 
numbers, he will know that the increase in welfare numbers in 
the province of Saskatchewan resulted from two main reasons 
directly related to that member's colleagues in Ottawa, i.e., 
shifting responsibility for Indians off reserve to the back of the 
provincial government in terms of welfare, and changes to the 
unemployment insurance program. 
 
Those two items alone amount to the increase in a general way 
in the number of people on welfare.  You know that fully, sir, 
and I say to you that it is not morally right for you to try to 
indicate that this is a result of programs at the provincial level 
when they result very clearly from actions by the previous 
federal government -- the Mulroney government in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, no government in history has 
ever taxed its way into prosperity.  I heard the Premier say that, 
Mr. Minister, earlier in his political history -- no government in 
history has taxed its way into prosperity. 
 
Since your government took office in 1991 there have 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard February 17, 1994 

been two steady trends in this province: more, more taxes and 
fewer, fewer taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  Mr. 
Minister, since you came to office there has been an increase in 
sales tax, income tax, gas tax, resource tax, liquor tax, 
SaskPower rates, SaskTel rates, SaskEnergy rates, drivers' 
licence, vehicle registration, STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) rates, tuition fees, livestock fees, 
brand fees, incorporation fees, business registration fees, 
pasture fees, crop insurance premiums.  And, Mr. Minister, 
here is a list, here is a list of all of those fee increases. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's the reason why people in this province are 
leaving.  They're leaving because they cannot withstand the tax 
burden that you are placing on them.  How many jobs will you 
create as a result of this year's budget, Mr. Minister?  How 
many jobs are you going to create with this burden of taxes that 
you're placing on the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 
member for the question, but I must say, in the recitation of the 
purported tax increases which he attributes to our 
administration, I thought for a while -- and do think -- that he 
must have picked up by accident an old former taxation list of 
his colleague, the member from Estevan, and the former PC 
(Progressive Conservative) administration.  And you forgot, of 
course, to mention the used car tax and the lottery tax and a few 
others that you added on. 
 
The reality is that for a family of four earning $25,000, our tax 
load makes Saskatchewan the third least expensive, taxed 
province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- For 50,000 income, family of four, we 
are the fourth lowest; and for 75,000, we are the seventh 
lowest.  These are before the Minister of Finance delivers the 
budget address here in a few moments. 
 
And I might add that that says perhaps taxes are too low . . . too 
high.  But in terms of the rest of the country, we are every bit as 
good -- in fact we are better -- than most of the other provinces, 
and a heck of a lot better by a long way of any of the Liberal 
provinces, which in each category are at the top of the tax list 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Co-generation Projects 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Last 
Friday, Mr. Minister, I submitted a written question.  This past 
week that question was deferred to motions for returns 
(debatable) and we all know where those questions end up -- on 
the back burner. 

Mr. Minister, SaskPower put out proposals for co-generation 
projects.  And in the spring of 1993, SaskPower said that there 
would be a decision made by the summer.  In July of 1993 they 
again said, no this decision has to be deferred and the proposals 
will be accepted and a decision made by late fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of communities and RDCs, 
rural development corporations, that are actually endeavouring 
to bring jobs and create jobs in this province.  Some of them 
happen to hinge on whether or not SaskPower is going to 
continue or look very aggressively into the co-generation 
projects. 
 
The RDC in Moosomin, the Gateway RDC, is waiting for an 
announcement because they not only are looking at a co-gen 
project, Mr. Minister, they also have a greenhouse project tied 
to it, and they want to know where they sit because they don't 
want to lose both.  If they won't be getting the one, they want to 
be able to work at another option at maintaining of the 
greenhouse project. 
 
Can you give us an answer today as to where SaskPower sits 
regarding the co-generation projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 
hon. member for his question.  I'll be making a ministerial 
statement in the House next week on co-generation.  And 
certainly if your party allows you to, you'll be able to respond 
to that ministerial statement next week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Acute Care Funding 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, last year you announced 
that funding cuts of 2.68 per cent would be levelled at acute 
care budgets this year.  Last week an oil rig worker was taken 
to Weyburn with a broken back.  When calls were made to see 
which hospital in Regina could provide this individual with a 
bed, they were told to keep him in Weyburn because there were 
no beds.  The man waited four days with a broken back before 
being transferred to Regina for surgery. 
 
Madam Minister, experiences like this are being brought to our 
attention with frightening regularity and your 2.68 per cent cuts 
have not even been implemented yet.  How can you assure us 
that this acute care crisis will not worsen? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 
very pleased to be able to answer this question and indicate to 
the member opposite that, first of all, there is not an acute care 
crisis in Saskatchewan, that we have had someone taking a look 
at waiting-lists and how matters can be improved with respect 
to accessibility of beds.  It's a problem that exists in every 
jurisdiction in Canada.  It's very much to be expected. 
 
Now with respect to the particular incident that the member has 
raised in the House, I want to suggest to 



February 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

her that when something of that nature comes to her attention, 
if it is as urgent as she says it is and if it is of the concern to her 
that she says it is, she should get in touch with our office and 
with the Department of Health immediately so that it can be 
dealt with in an immediate fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, I pride 
myself in having regular contact with your department and am 
very prompt in getting in contact with your department, which 
is more than I can say that you do in return. 
 
Recently patients have been kept waiting in the hallways, since 
you consider this to be a non-crisis, on stretchers in the Regina 
General Hospital for three to four days -- in the hallways, 
Madam Minister.  Patients with serious bladder bleeds have 
been kept sitting upright for as long as 18 hours with no place 
to lie down.  No crisis, you say. 
 
Madam Minister, if we are aware of these situations, then 
surely you must tell me that you have been informed as well. 
 
What dialogue are you having, and with whom, to correct these 
problems? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  The 
member opposite knows full well that there has been a review 
ongoing in the hospital situation to make sure that the matters 
that the member opposite . . . for example, aren't affecting 
patients' safety and the Department of Health has been assured 
that they aren't. 
 
Now I once again urge the member opposite, if she has such a 
long list of cases, to make arrangements . . . I will sit down and 
meet with her, go through the individual cases, and deal with 
them.  Because what happens is when we get an individual 
complaint of that nature, we often find that when we've looked 
into it, it's not how the members opposite have projected it. 
 
And with respect to consultation, I think the example that the 
member on this side of the House had raised yesterday is an 
indication of how the member fails to consult when the door is 
open for her to consult with people on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 
Minister, I pose to you this question. 
 
What dialogue are you, as the Minister of Health, having with 
the public or was that just window dressing to get things 
rolling?  How many telephone calls and letters has your 
department responded to in the past month and how many 
people are employed to deal with the concerns of the citizens of 
this province about their complaints? 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has had an 
enormous dialogue with the people of this province on health 
care.  We have been in constant discussions with health boards, 
with local communities, with health care professionals, with 
people throughout Saskatchewan who are affected by or who 
are participating in the health care system.  And the member 
opposite knows that that dialogue is ongoing and is extensive 
and has been of an unprecedented nature in this province. 
 
And as a result of the ongoing consultation and the 
cooperation -- unlike the confrontory approach of the member 
opposite -- as a result of the cooperation that's taking place, we 
have arrived at a lot of understanding with people in urban and 
rural communities about where we're heading and what 
measures will be put in place to make sure that we have a high 
quality system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 
Minister, we're talking about people with real problems and 
real concerns and real fears in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Surely you can articulate the particular process that you have in 
place to evaluate the impact and the effects of your particular 
initiatives in health care reform, and I talk specifically about at 
the institutional level. 
 
How are you measuring progress in health reform in terms of 
health care quality?  Or is it simply a bottom line budget figure 
to your department?  What is the evaluative mechanism?  
That's what people want to know because they're falling 
through the cracks and people are hurting. 
 
The information we get, Madam Minister, has been from 
doctors and nurses, all health care employees, and people who 
are sick in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
With respect to the member opposite and her concern about an 
evaluative mechanism, I had indicated earlier that we have had 
an ongoing review of the acute care system in Saskatchewan 
and how the health reforms and the moving to more 
community-based services is working.  There has been an 
ongoing review.  The member opposite is aware of that because 
I believe that she has been informed of that in the past. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, I only hope that her concern, as she 
expresses it today, will be there and as genuine when we will 
be looking at federal EPF (established programs financing) 
transfers, perhaps in the next year or two, with respect to health 
care funding.  I hope then that she will stand up and say 
something with respect to that. 
 
I also want to point out that in 1991, September of 1991, the 
Liberal Party policy platform was to freeze the provincial 
health care budget.  And I wonder how she reconciles that with 
her concern that is being 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard February 17, 1994 

expressed today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Tendering Policy 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 
Speaker, today is to the Deputy Premier, and it has to do with 
the way we could be saving money and creating a better 
climate for job creation at the same time. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week we asked you why you had extended 
SaskTel's union preference tendering policy to the new SaskTel 
building in Moose Jaw when your stated policy was that union 
preference tendering was only to apply to Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
At the time you stated that SaskTel and all other government 
Crowns and departments would be undertaking a complete 
review of tendering policies and releasing this policy shortly. 
 
Mr. Minister, the deadline for bids on the Moose Jaw SaskTel 
contract is February 24.  Now that's just one week from today, 
Mr. Minister, and the crunch is here. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, given that this deadline is fast approaching, 
could you tell the House: has the review of the government 
tendering policy been completed and could you release the 
results here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to reply to the 
hon. member from Maple Creek to the question which he has 
raised previously and raises again today.  And I want to make it 
very clear, as I did the other day, that it is the policy of this 
government to make sure, or at least try to make sure, that 
unionized and non-unionized contractors get a fair share of the 
work that is provided by Crown corporations and by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is the policy that is being applied in this case in 
Moose Jaw, as it has been applied in other situations as well.  
That's different than was the case under the former 
administration of which he was a member, in which there was a 
preference given to non-unionized contractors. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the policy isn't working perfectly, but I 
want to report to the House that in the case of SaskTel, for the 
whole year of 1993 up to December 31, there was a total of 113 
contracts that were let.  Non-union contracts let were 109, and 
union contracts that were let were four.  It seems to me that the 
policy isn't accomplishing a full balance, but to say that 
somehow there is a preference to one sector, which is the union 
sector, as opposed to other in an unbalanced way, is incorrect 
on the part of the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all,  

Minister, I want to correct you. I wasn't a member of the past 
administration -- not that I would be ashamed to have been. 
 
Secondly, I did ask you for the results of a review that you 
promised in this Assembly, and I'd like you to come forward 
with that review.  That's what I asked you for. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week when you were answering questions 
about this issue, you gave some figures about the extent of 
union preference contracting at SaskTel.  You said that only 
$860,000 in SaskTel contracts were let to unionized contractors 
in 1993. 
 
Mr. Minister, I subsequently learned that there were two union 
preference tenders awarded in Regina in November.  And these 
two contracts alone totalled $1.8 million, about $142,000 more 
than the lowest non-union bid.  Mr. Minister, given that the 
facts you gave this House last week were incorrect, would you 
today table a complete list of all SaskTel construction contracts 
let in 1993 and the value of each contract; and whether each of 
the tender calls contained a union preference clause? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to respond 
to the member opposite and clarify once again and ask him to 
listen with care what the policy is.  The policy is to try as best 
as we can to make sure that all contractors in Saskatchewan, 
unionized and non-unionized, have a fair distribution of the 
work that is provided through the Crown corporations.  I gave 
him the most recent numbers for the full calendar year of how 
that has transpired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This policy is under continuous review because we want to 
make sure that the objective which we have established is 
achieved as best as we can and as closely as we can achieve it.  
So the policy will continue to be reviewed with that in mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the member to say that there is a preference 
one way or the other is incorrect.  If he listened to my answer, 
he will know what the policy is.  And it is true that in some 
large contracts which involve a large amount of money, there 
may be a consideration given to union preference.  But first and 
foremost will be the business considerations of the corporation 
in mind and the protection of the taxpayer and a good and 
equitable distribution among all contractors in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 
think the people will judge your words for me.  First of all, list 
of the contracts -- that's what we ask for.  Table the 
study -- that's what we ask for. 
 
Mr. Minister, your union preference tendering policy speaks to 
the kind of negative business climate your government is 
creating in this province, and why no new jobs are being 
created in this province.  The 



February 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

Saskatchewan Construction Association has asked you time 
and time again to adopt a policy of giving contracts to the 
lowest qualified bidder, union or non-union, fair ball, no 
special considerations.  Many municipalities have written to 
your government asking you to adopt this same policy.  I have 
copies of many of the letters. 
 
Mr. Minister, given your government's dismal job creation 
record, why do you refuse to listen to the people who create the 
jobs in this province?  Why don't you simply do what they are 
asking, which would be to save the governments millions of 
dollars and to create a level playing-field for the contractors at 
the same time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm pleased to hear, Mr. Speaker, 
that the member finally agrees with me that we're trying to 
create a fair distribution of the work that is available to all 
contractors, be they union or non-union. 
 
Now I want to respond directly to the member's earlier 
question, which I did not answer and I must admit to that.  I 
will provide, as this government has been providing since 
1991 -- something which was never done in the 1980s -- all the 
information about contracts, who got them, in the Crown 
Corporations Committee when SaskTel is considered by that 
Crown Corporations Committee.  That has been done in the last 
two years; it will be done once more. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to correct for the benefit of the 
legislature and the media some numbers that the member 
opposite uses which are absolutely incorrect.  He says that the 
two contracts let in Regina were something like 200-and-some 
thousand dollars difference between the tender that was given 
and the others. 
 
I want to say that in both cases the amount of the contract was 
about . . . close to a million dollars; in one the difference was 
$15,000, and in the other the difference was $27,000.  And I 
would simply ask the members opposite not to use information 
that is incorrect because that doesn't benefit anyone and does 
discredit to themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Utility Rates Review 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  
Mr. Premier, I have received a few questions from 
Saskatchewan residents that we would like to ask you today, 
and one of them relates to the Minister of Finance. 
 
The first one is from Mr. and Mrs. Froyman from Vanguard, 
Saskatchewan.  They list several concerns with your 
government, but here is one of them that is on the minds of a 
lot of people these days.  Mr. and Mrs. Froyman say utility 
rates are a tax grab.  We would like to see an independent 
watchdog on utility  

rate increases. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you establish a utility rate watchdog for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I welcome the hon. 
member's question.  I want to preface my answer by pointing 
out the following: that it was the former administration of 
which this member, unlike the member from Maple Creek, 
cannot disassociate himself from, that did establish a Public 
Utilities Review Commission and disbanded it. 
 
Now you should ask yourself and perhaps tell the legislature 
why you did that.  Why did you disband the Public Utilities 
Review Commission? 
 
I'll tell you why you did.  Because you know at the end of the 
day what you do is you set up an extremely expensive 
bureaucracy of millions of dollars, which can only match the 
rate increases which the Crown corporations seek by lawyers 
and accountants on the other side that the ordinary consumer 
has a great deal of difficulty in being able to manage.  Point 
number one. 
 
But point number two, as the substance of the question, it is 
factually wrong to suggest, as the members do opposite, on 
utility rates . . . If you take into consideration power, telephone, 
home heating, and electricity, total charges, Saskatchewan is 
the eighth lowest . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We should be -- we've got all the 
advantages, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The member opposite said we got 
them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, I agree with 
the hon. member.  You got them, all of the advantages.  That's 
why they're this low and that's why we don't need a Public 
Utilities Review Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a message from 
Her Excellency the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard February 17, 1994 

province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1995, and 
supplementary estimates of certain sums required for the 
service of the province for 12 months ending March 31, 
1994, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the hon. member from Riversdale: 
 

That Her Honour's message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I know there are many special guests in the legislature 
today.  There are four whom I would like to mention 
specifically.  First, my husband, Peter, who is the dean of law 
at the University of Saskatchewan; my son Alan, who is a 
student in grade 9; my son William, who is a grade 6 student; 
and my long-time neighbour and friend, Bill Kinloch, who is 
also a veteran of the Second World War. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to present 
through this Assembly, to the people of Saskatchewan, a 
budget that delivers the promise -- the promise to meet our 
deficit reduction targets, the promise of no major program cuts, 
and the promise of no new taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Last year our government presented 
a balanced budget plan; a plan which contained all the major 
revenue and expense measures needed to balance the budget by 
1996-97.  A plan which is achievable because it's based on 
realistic economic and financial forecasts, and a plan which is 
on track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Today I'm pleased to report that the 
1993-94 budget deficit is $294 million -- $2 million less than 
forecast in our balanced budget plan, 50 per cent less than last 
year.  Saskatchewan now has the lowest per capita deficit in all 
of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I'm also pleased to report that the 
budget deficit for 1994-95 is $189 million, another 36 per cent 
reduction.  This is the lowest budget deficit in Saskatchewan 
since 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Our success rests with the 

 people of this province who understood the need, realized that 
difficult choices were required, and were determined to make 
the sacrifices necessary to ensure the province's financial 
future. 
 
Deficit reduction is not easy.  I understand that.  But as I've 
travelled around this province and listened to Saskatchewan 
people, I've been impressed with their spirit, their willingness 
to pull together and keep their eye on the long-term benefits of 
difficult choices.  This budget shows that as we gradually turn 
this province around, Saskatchewan people can begin to see the 
benefits of their choices. 
 
Meeting our targets means freedom -- the freedom to invest 
more in jobs.  I understand why the number one concern of 
Saskatchewan people today is jobs.  This budget shows that 
jobs are also our number one priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Together we have made tremendous 
gains.  When this government came to office we inherited the 
largest per capita debt of any province in Canada -- $60,000 for 
a family of four.  We faced a projected deficit of $1.3 billion.  
Three years later our deficit is $189 million.  That's a 
turnaround of more than a billion dollars.  No other government 
in Canada has achieved such a turnaround. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- With the support of Saskatchewan 
people we took three basic steps that involved reducing the cost 
of government administration at every turn; renegotiating the 
previous government's megaprojects; and making the 
expenditure of public funds more open and accountable to 
ensure that no government will ever be able to mismanage tax 
dollars again. 
 
First let me talk about cutting the cost of government.  Mr. 
Speaker, this government led by example.  Since coming to 
office we have reduced cabinet ministers' salaries by 5 per cent; 
cut MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
communication allowances; and introduced legislation to cut 
the number of MLAs in this legislature by more than 12 per 
cent. 
 
Last year almost $18 million was saved by making common 
sense changes to the day-to-day operations of government.  For 
example, instead of sending out brand-new health cards to all 
Saskatchewan residents, we sent a sticker so that people could 
keep using the cards they already had.  This simple measure 
saved taxpayers $200,000.  This is the kind of practical change 
we are making every day throughout this government. 
 
By cutting the cost of administering government, we can 
redirect those savings to higher priority areas like jobs.  Again 
this year we've worked hard at every level to reduce 
administrative costs.  For example, simply using highway signs 
two years longer before we 



February 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

replace them has led to savings of $400,000 a year. 
 
By making common sense changes like this we will spend $12 
million less this year on administering the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At the national level, we're prepared to work with the new 
federal government and all provinces to reduce the cost of 
delivering public services while protecting the quality of those 
services.  In short, we're working on every front to cut the cost 
of government. 
 
Our commitment to streamlining our administration is ongoing 
and we will continue to consult with you, the people of this 
province, about ways to do this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, that's also why we 
have renegotiated so many of the previous government's 
megaprojects.  During the 1980s one and a half billion dollars 
were committed in the form of equity, loans, and loan 
guarantees to such projects. 
 
We came to office on the promise to renegotiate these deals 
wherever possible, to restore the public interest.  We have 
delivered that promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- So far, we've reduced taxpayers 
exposure by over $400 million and we will continue to search 
for more ways to reduce these financial risks. 
 
We also promised to make government more open and 
accountable to the people we were elected to serve.  We have 
opened the meetings of the Board of Internal Economy to the 
public and will appoint an independent commission to review 
the salaries and benefits paid to MLAs. 
 
We provide the public with audited financial reports for each 
and every Crown corporation, agency, board, and commission.  
We provide the public with a mid-year financial update to tell 
them whether or not we're meeting our budget targets.  We 
provide the public with summary financial statements to give 
taxpayers the complete picture of our financial position. 
 
The auditor in his annual report said this: 
 

 The Government moved from providing what the Financial 
Management Review Commission viewed as the weakest and 
least useful financial statements to providing one of the most 
useful financial statements issued by a senior government in 
Canada. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We are delivering our promise of 
more open and accountable government and we will keep 
delivering that promise. 

Reducing the cost of government, renegotiating the 
megaprojects, making government more open and accountable, 
are the steps we have taken which have helped turn our 
province's finances around. 
 
Although we've made significant progress, there are still risks: 
one, a legacy of the past; the other, an uncertainty about the 
future. 
 
While we have reduced taxpayers' exposure for the previous 
government's megaprojects, there is still the potential for 
problems.  Additional write-downs may be required so that our 
accounts continue to reflect the true value of these assets.  But 
these will be one-time problems which will not prevent us from 
delivering our promise of a balanced budget by 1996-97. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The other major risk rests with the 
federal government and the potential for further offloading.  To 
date we have had some success with the new federal 
government in our efforts to convince them that offloading 
simply doesn't work to solve the Canadian debt problem.  For 
example, a revised equalization formula has been agreed to for 
the next five years.  The formula is more fair to Saskatchewan 
and will provide our province with a more secure source of 
revenue. 
 
While this provides some stability in one of our major transfer 
payments, I have to say that offloading remains the biggest 
single risk we face in our effort to balance the budget.  For 
example, a 5 per cent reduction in federal funding for health 
and post-secondary education alone would cost $37 million a 
year.  That's the equivalent of a 3 cent per litre increase to the 
provincial gas tax and more than all of our funding in any one 
year for student aid. 
 
There are risks.  But despite these risks, we are determined to 
maintain the integrity of our balanced budget plan.  And we'll 
do it the way we've been doing it from day one -- by 
controlling government spending, by managing better, and by 
setting the right priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Today in Saskatchewan that means 
jobs.  Our priority is jobs.  Our plan is to act on all fronts to 
promote the economic recovery which is occurring in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most recent report from the Conference Board 
of Canada estimated that our economy grew at a faster rate in 
1993 than the national economy.  In the first 11 months of last 
year, manufacturing shipments rose by 6 per cent, retail sales 
went up by 5.7 per cent, and wholesale trade increased by 10.4 
per cent.  The forecasts for the future are also positive.  
External agencies have projected that there will be consistent, 
steady growth in our economy. 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard February 17, 1994 

But in spite of this growth, the number of new job opportunities 
has not been as great as either the government or Saskatchewan 
people had hoped.  Now is the time to strengthen our 
investment in jobs.  Now is the time to act to help the economic 
recovery take hold. 
 
In this budget there are small, targeted increases in spending 
designed to support our strategy for economic development and 
jobs. 
 
Our economic development plan, Partnership for Renewal, 
involves focusing on our proven strengths through a revised 
royalty structure for the oil and gas industry to encourage new 
investment; a north-west forest renewal partnership plan with 
funding of $226,000 in '94-95 and $104,000 in '95-96, to 
support reforestation in north-west Saskatchewan; the 
elimination of the tax on direct agents to promote processing 
and manufacturing; the continuation of the planned reduction in 
the small business income tax rate.  Mr. Speaker, over four 
years we will have reduced the small business tax rate by 20 
per cent.  We have done this because co-ops and small 
businesses create most of the jobs in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, jobs are also the reason 
we're participating in the federal-provincial infrastructure 
program.  By redirecting or accelerating funding, we can 
undertake projects sooner than previously planned and at less 
cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers.  More than $173 million will 
be spent by the three levels of government, federal, provincial 
and local, over the next two years to renew our infrastructure 
and to create jobs. 
 
I'm pleased to announce that Crown corporations and the 
government will spend over $700 million on needed capital 
projects in 1994-95.  This is almost $140 million more than 
was spent last year. 
 
While this will help to create jobs for the short term, our 
economic development plan means jobs and opportunities for 
the long term.  It means exporting more Saskatchewan products 
and services to the world market-place.  This budget will help 
to do that with total funding of $6 million this year for the new 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The corporation will provide equity 
financing, loans, and guarantees to Saskatchewan businesses 
that are geared to the export market.  It is designed not only to 
promote Saskatchewan business, but also to protect 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- There will be strict due 

diligence and a 25 per cent loan loss provision to ensure that 
there are no unexpected drains on our future tax dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is a region which deserves 
special attention for jobs and economic development.  Despite 
its rich resource base, this region has high levels of 
unemployment, and experiences the many social problems 
which unemployment creates.  Restoring hope to Northerners 
will take many years. I understand this. But we are determined 
to make progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to announce that this budget redirects 
over $4 million to a strategy for economic renewal in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- This strategy will focus on the 
unique strengths of the North by creating jobs and opportunities 
through the following measures:  assisting local people to 
process and market products grown or produced in northern 
Saskatchewan; helping local businesses to supply northern 
mines with the goods and services they require; providing 
training programs for northern people so that they can take 
advantage of these new opportunities. 
 
Northern people will be directly involved in the planning and 
priority setting.  This investment in northern Saskatchewan 
means jobs for Northerners today and hope for Northerners 
tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Any strategy to create long-term 
jobs in this province means making an investment today in 
agriculture.  We have recently released Agriculture 2000, a 
strategy which emphasizes stability, growth, and diversification 
in our most important industry. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers have already made major efforts to 
diversify.  For example, in the last crop year there was nearly a 
70 per cent increase in specialty crops grown.  Our strategy 
aims to foster diversification and to enhance opportunities to 
add value to Saskatchewan's primary products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to announce this budget provides 
funding for the new agri-food equity fund.  Over the next four 
years $20 million will be invested in value added projects to 
strengthen rural Saskatchewan by providing new markets for 
the products of Saskatchewan farmers, new exports for the 
Saskatchewan economy, and new jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I'm also pleased to announce the 
introduction of a program to help promote Saskatchewan's beef 
industry.  The beef industry development fund is being 
established in cooperation with the federal government.  This 
year 



February 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

we will invest $1.4 million to improve products and to enhance 
markets for the beef industry. 
 
We're also working with Saskatchewan farmers and the federal 
government to develop a new whole-farm safety net program.  
The Saskatchewan Farm Support Review Committee has 
recently released a report on safety net design.  This report will 
be the basis for discussions with other provinces and the federal 
government over the coming months. 
 
While these discussion are under way, we need to act now 
within our limited financial resources to enhance farmer 
security.  Accordingly crop insurance, a key program for 
farmers, is being improved.  Spot loss hail coverage will be 
introduced. 
 
I'm pleased to announce that for the first time farmers will be 
able to purchase whole-farm crop insurance.  Rather than 
purchasing insurance for each crop separately, farmers can now 
insure all their crop production in one package and as a result 
pay less for their insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We are also introducing a special 
diversification option for minor crops currently not covered by 
crop insurance.  This option will contribute directly to the 
diversification efforts of Saskatchewan farmers.  Agriculture 
2000 is a strategy that provides the stability Saskatchewan farm 
families need now as it helps them build for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, self-reliant families are fundamental to our 
quality of life.  The 1994-95 budget provides over $4.4 million 
through Saskatchewan's action plan for children for measures 
to support children, families, and communities. 
 
Consultation for this action plan began in 1992.  Since then 
more than 1,200 people and organizations have been involved 
in its development.  Community forums have been held around 
the province with school divisions, health boards, municipal 
governments, and service organizations to assess local needs 
and resources. 
 
The plan brings communities and government together to 
improve the well-being of children by strengthening their 
families and the communities in which they live.  The guiding 
principles of the plan are prevention and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by taking preventative action now to avoid 
problems before they occur, we not only better protect our 
children, we also reduce the need for higher cost services later. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- For this reason, we've established 
pre-schools in Prince Albert and La Loche for children who we 
know are at risk of developing social, education, or health 
problems.  We are establishing a children's advocate in the 
Office of the 

provincial Ombudsman to ensure that children's interests are 
protected and their voices heard. 
 
We're also enhancing crime prevention programs at the 
community level.  And for the third year in a row, we are 
providing more infant care services for teenage parents 
attending high school.  Evidence has shown that young parents 
with access to infant care services remain in school longer, 
thereby increasing their opportunities for economic 
independence in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, while prevention is a 
key element in building stronger families and maintaining our 
quality of life, we must also support families facing crisis and 
breakdown. 
 
Family violence is a growing problem in our society.  Far too 
many women are the victims of violence and many simply have 
nowhere to turn.  We are providing small, targeted funding 
increases to support services for women who have been the 
victims of violence, to help them begin to rebuild their lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, in this, the 
International Year of the Family, it is appropriate that we 
respond to the broad range of challenges facing Saskatchewan 
families.  More needs to be done, I understand this.  However, 
despite our financial constraints, we have taken small but 
significant steps to show our commitment to supporting and 
maintaining strong, stable families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We are doing it by working with 
communities to plan and provide for both prevention and 
support that will help our children when they need it.  
Community-based decisions and community action must be the 
foundation of the social programs of the 1990s, whether in 
family support services or in health services.  Our wellness 
reforms are based on the concept of community decision 
making.  Local people are the best ones equipped to make 
decisions for their communities. 
 
This year marks an important landmark in community decision 
making.  For the first time, funding will be paid directly to 
district health boards in the province.  These district health 
boards will be able to plan and deliver health services that meet 
local needs and they will be able to offer a broader range of 
services than was available in the past.  In this area, as in 
others, we can begin to see some benefits from our progress to 
date. 
 
Some of the savings from decreasing our dependence on 
institutions can now be redirected to health services in rural 
Saskatchewan. I'm pleased to announce the introduction of a 
$10 million rural health initiatives fund to provide for the 
expansion of community-based services in rural Saskatchewan. 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard February 17, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Health boards are now in the process 
of assessing the health needs of the people in their districts.  
This fund will help ensure that rural health boards meet these 
locally determined needs through such measures as enhanced 
emergency services, home-based palliative care, or disease and 
accident prevention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health reforms are based on wellness.  They 
shift the emphasis from merely treating illness to preventing it.  
Cancer devastates many families and part of the hope in 
dealing with this disease lies in prevention.  Breast cancer 
strikes one woman in eleven and mammography is a vital 
preventative procedure.  I am pleased to announce that the 
breast cancer screening program will be now available on a 
province-wide basis for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- These enhancements in health care 
are some of the benefits of the difficult choices Saskatchewan 
people have made in the past two years. 
 
These choices mean a stable financial situation and a growing 
economy.  Our economy is showing signs of positive growth 
and government revenue for this year will be $4.8 billion, an 
increase of over 3.2 per cent.  The increased revenue will be 
realized without any increase in taxes.  No increase in the gas 
tax, no increase in personal income tax, no increase in the sales 
tax, and no base broadening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Total provincial government 
expenses for this year will be $5 billion, a modest increase of 
less than 1 per cent.  The increase is less than the forecasted 
growth in the Saskatchewan economy and less than the 
estimated growth in our revenue for this year.  It should also be 
emphasized that this increased spending is due largely to our 
commitment to jobs. 
 
Because we are on target with our balanced budget plan, I can 
confirm today the previously announced third-party funding for 
1994-95.  Barring any unforeseen circumstances, this will be 
the last year the third parties will have to make do with less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Third parties, I know, have been our 
partners in deficit reduction.  They too have had to make 
difficult choices and I want to sincerely thank them for their 
cooperation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to 
announce that for 1995-96 there will be no 

further reductions in revenue-sharing grants for local and 
northern governments, no further reduction in funding for local 
school boards, universities, regional and federated colleges and 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), and an increase of 1.6 per cent for district health 
boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I've presented through 
this Assembly to the people of Saskatchewan the first budget of 
this administration in which we can see some of the benefits of 
renewed financial stability; the first budget that allows us to be 
guided more by the priorities of the people and less by the 
dictates of an inherited financial crisis; the first budget that 
gives us the freedom to invest more in jobs and opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people.  Jobs can be the priority today 
because Saskatchewan people made difficult choices to get us 
to this point. 
 
As we've always said, Mr. Speaker, balancing the budget is not 
an end in itself.  Our goal is to ensure that we can sustain a high 
quality of life here for future generations.  As provinces around 
us struggle to get their financial houses in order, we can take 
some pride and feel some security in knowing how far we've 
progressed in restoring our financial house. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Today we are on the road to 
recovery and we're on that road because of the people of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, it is because of 
Saskatchewan people that the 1994-95 budget delivers the 
promise of no major program cuts and no tax increases, 
delivers the promise to meet our deficit targets and balance the 
budget in two years' time, delivers the promise to make jobs the 
top priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I ask my colleagues to rise with me 
and thank the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the hon. member from Riversdale: 
 

 That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee 
of Finance. 

 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, Hon. Minister of 
Finance, Legislative Assembly colleagues, I am honoured to 
rise and reply to the budget address on behalf of the official 
opposition. 
 
This is my first reply to the address as opposition member 
responsible for Finance, and, Mr. Speaker, as this is a most 
important function, I reviewed last year's budget address and 
the reply given by my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition. 



February 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

It was a most interesting and enlightening exercise, Mr. 
Speaker, to say the least.  The Leader of the Opposition called 
last year's budget, the iceberg budget -- a very appropriate 
description because most of the taxes and program cuts were 
below the surface, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is internationally renowned for its 
fondness for retroactive changes but in last year's budget we 
saw something different.  For the first time, Mr. Speaker, for 
the first time, we saw the government opposite bringing 
forward a change that would happen in the future. 
 
Those changes were program cuts, transfer cuts, and yes, 
Madam Minister, tax increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, downloading is not a real 
reduction in government expenditures.  Expenditures is a shift 
in government expenditures.  And that's what you did, Madam 
Minister, you shifted the responsibility where?  To our towns, 
our cities, our villages, rural municipalities, and our school 
boards.  That's where the shift occurred, Madam Minister, and 
you're downloading in a very serious way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those cuts just didn't disappear into thin air, as the 
government would like us to believe.  They had a very real and 
harmful effect on all taxpayers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the provincial government, local 
governments have to balance their budgets.  That means when 
the provincial government downloads onto local government, 
there is no choice, no option.  Our cities and our towns, Mr. 
Speaker, our RMs (rural municipality) and school boards either 
increase their fees, taxes, or cut jobs and programs.  The math 
is quite simple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government's reduction in transfer payments to 
municipalities and cuts in last year's budget resulted in 
increased property taxes, increased library fees, increased 
tuition fees, increased rates for skating rinks and curling rinks, 
increased rates for nearly everything that affects the average 
citizen.  That, Mr. Speaker, is what we got. 
 
Right here in Regina we saw dramatic increases in business 
licences, Mr. Speaker.  Some businesses saw their fees increase 
from $132 to $700.  That, Mr. Speaker, is where the taxes come 
from. 
 
Regina families were appalled when they heard city councillors 
considering a 51 per cent increase in recreation fees in this city, 
Mr. Speaker.  Regina businesses and Regina families were both 
taken aback by a proposal to increase the hourly parking rate by 
33 per cent.  This in addition to 2 mill property increase for 
what, Mr. Speaker?  For health care. 
 
In Saskatoon, University of Saskatchewan fees were hiked by 
another 10 per cent, and city councillors are considering the 
implementation of wide user fees, Mr. Speaker. 

In Kindersley the town was forced to put a $30 levy on garbage 
collection.  The list of fee increases goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker, due in large part to the government's iceberg budget.  
As the year progressed, pieces broke off and floated to the 
surface for everybody to see in the form of tax increases. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, in this budget, not last 
year's property taxes, not last year's, but this year's property 
taxes will once again be hit by an 8 per cent cut in revenue 
sharing.  Property tax is going to have to pay that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A 4 per cent cut in grants to schools, Mr. Speaker.  School 
boards are going to have to get the taxes from somebody.  A 
250 per cent increase in property assessment fees and a 2 mill 
levy to pay for new health district boards.  But the minister 
doesn't mention them -- not even a reference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This new round of downloading will create a new round of 
trouble for local government.  And yes, Mr. Speaker, contrary 
to the hon. member's statement, the new round of downloading 
will mean a new round of taxes and new fees for Saskatchewan 
taxpayers.  So when we hear great proclamations of no new 
taxes from the government benches, we have to wonder, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I hear the minister say that there are no new taxes in the budget 
document.  Well I have a budget document, Mr. Speaker.  I 
have a budget document that every taxpayer in the province of 
Saskatchewan received, and it's a tax form.  The Saskatchewan 
section of the tax form has an item called a surtax, Mr. Speaker, 
and that tax was introduced in this Assembly a year ago, and 
it's on your tax statement today.  It introduced it and then it 
doubled from 5 per cent to 10 per cent on top of their basic 
Saskatchewan tax.  And they say no new taxes, Mr. Speaker, no 
new taxes. 
 
One must wonder, Mr. Speaker, what the government is going 
to consider in no new taxes as it relates to utility rates.  Mr. 
Speaker, it is often said that budget addresses and the financial 
statements provide a snapshot, a snapshot, Mr. Speaker, of the 
province's finances. 
 
Well today, Mr. Speaker, we only saw a glimpse of that 
snapshot.  We are only seeing a part of that picture, Mr. 
Speaker.  And the only part of the government financial picture 
that we see is the Consolidated Fund.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 
had a budget presented here today. 
 
The latest government documents show, Mr. Speaker, that over 
40 per cent -- over 40 per cent -- of the government's revenues 
and expenditures are outside of the scope of this budget 
address.  Forty per cent of the government's operations were 
not addressed by this Hon. Finance minister, and they remain 
outside of the scrutiny of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
That's why the minister believes she can say, no new 
taxes -- no new taxes -- when people know that their power 
rates went up, Mr. Speaker, 11 per cent; 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard February 17, 1994 

SaskTel, 5 per cent; SaskEnergy, fifteen and a half per cent; 
and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) premiums and 
licence fees have also increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these Crown corporations are monopolies.  There 
is very little if any competition.  People must pay these rates.  
They have a monopoly.  The revenues from these Crowns are 
then transferred into general revenue from the Government of 
Saskatchewan.  And they fund programs in the province but we 
can't talk about them here because they're in Crown 
corporations -- 40 per cent. 
 
So when the government increases a utility rate, Mr. Speaker, 
it's a tax increase in the province of Saskatchewan.  Yesterday 
in question period we asked the Minister of Finance if she 
would commit to no increases in utility rates.  She refused, Mr. 
Speaker, effectively contradicting that no-new-tax pledge even 
before it was made. 
 
That is why the members of this caucus have introduced, Mr. 
Speaker, legislation to permit an all-party committee to review 
any and all government utility rate increases, members of this 
Assembly to be able to do that, and before the government is 
able to impose those rate increases on the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fraser Institute recently determined that 
Saskatchewan has the highest . . . Mr. Speaker, they said that 
Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of tax burden of any 
province for a family income, and that is in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the latest tax freedom day in Canada.  In 
fact we are the only province in Canada where over 50 per cent 
of the average family's income is taken to pay for the people 
and the government's projects that they want to introduce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Taxpayers' Association said, 
and I quote: 
 

 Despite campaigning on a platform of holding the line and 
even lowering taxes, since taking office in 1991, the NDP 
government has increased taxes by $2,300 per family of four. 

 
They calculate that the community of Craik has been soaked 
for $300,000; Maple Creek, 1.4 million; Melville, 2.9 million; 
North Battleford, 8.6; and Moose Jaw, $20.1 million. 
 
That's what they're taking out of those cities' economies, Mr. 
Speaker.  And after this, Mr. Speaker, the government members 
would have you believe that this is a good news budget. 
 
If someone has been beating you up for two years and they tell 
you they're going to continue to beat you up but not any harder 
than usual, I suppose that's good news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget contains no new hope -- no new hope 
for jobs for 8,000 new Saskatchewan people who are struggling 
to find work.  An article in 

yesterday's paper, Mr. Speaker, indicates that more and more 
businesses are moving to Alberta because of the exorbitant tax 
rates and oppressive business environment.  And the jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, and the jobs, Mr. Speaker, go with them. 
 
A former director of the Gaming Commission moved his 
business, MicroAide Services, lock, stock, and barrel to 
Alberta.  And what was said about it?  He said the economic 
and political climate has convinced him he's better off to do it 
in Alberta than in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is not an isolated event, Mr. Speaker.  Ask the Minister of 
Energy and Mines how things are in North Battleford.  Ask 
him.  Two major retailers, Eaton's and Kresge's, have pulled 
out of North Battleford.  Eight Royal Bank branches pull out of 
rural Saskatchewan.  And Moose Jaw -- in Moose Jaw, Woolco 
employees are having to fight to save 150 jobs just because this 
government doesn't allow decertification in that centre. 
 
(1515) 
 
So what does the government bring to enhance job creation, 
competitiveness, and business investment?  Mr. Speaker, they 
bring in changes to The Trade Union Act and The Labour 
Standards Act which will add more costs and more burden to 
Saskatchewan business. 
 
Perhaps the minister is right -- this is a no-news budget.  No 
new hope for wealth creation, Mr. Speaker.  There was no new 
hope for 20,000 people now on welfare and there was no new 
plan to revitalize Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan that's 
been decimated by this government's attack on them.  And we 
are led to believe that we have turned the corner.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has said that we have turned the 
corner so many times that . . . so many times, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe they've come full circle. 
 
In his reply to the Speech from the Throne last year, my 
colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, said the speech failed 
a very simple test to be applied to the government's blueprint.  
The first test was, did it reflect the wishes of Saskatchewan 
people.  That's what was asked, Mr. Speaker.  It is a test that 
the people of this province have been applying to their elected 
representatives, much like the throne speech.  And today's 
budget address failed to pass that test. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, as I will be looking through the 
budget documents and as my colleagues have, we will be 
looking at them and expressing our opinions about them.  And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, and because of that I would like to 
move adjournment of debate on this address. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 



February 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the hon. member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

 That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on Friday, 
February 18, 1994. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:18 p.m. 
 
 


