




















































Hansard: May 20, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2467 

 May 20, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that the Assembly 

may be pleased to cause the government to immediately 

investigate and offer changes to trials of child sex offenders. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on day 77 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding Saskatchewan Telecommunications Corporation, 

SaskTel: (1) did SaskTel rent out a number of cellular 

telephones and/or other equipment to persons involved in the 

indigenous peoples celebration held last summer in Moose 

Jaw; (2) if yes, was all of this equipment returned to SaskTel 

and; (3) if yes, did SaskTel receive payment in full for the 

rental of this equipment and; (4) if SaskTel did receive 

payment for this equipment, how much money is still owed to 

SaskTel and by whom? 

 

I so submit. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

my real pleasure today to introduce to all members through 

you, sir, 7 very special students from the Alexandra campus of 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) in Moose Jaw. 

 

They are visiting the legislature today; they'll be touring after 

their time here in question period, and I look forward to 

meeting with them on the steps about 11 o'clock.  

 

Mr. Speaker, they're accompanied today by Ms. Verna Nicholl 

and Ms. Paula Green.  I would ask all members to welcome 

these very special students from Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly a group of 10 students who are seated in your 

gallery.  These are students in the Balfour special tutorial class 

from Balfour Collegiate in the constituency of Regina Victoria.  

They're accompanied by their teacher, Pauline MacDonald. 

I look forward to meeting with them after the question period.  

This is a group that has in the past asked very many tough 

questions, and I look forward to another exchange with them.  

Please help me in welcoming this group here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a distinct 

pleasure for me to be able to get up in my place again and 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members 

assembled here, Mr. Speaker, a group from Luseland, which is 

in my constituency; it's the Arthur Gelan Composite High 

School.  They number 39, they're in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and they're from grades 9 to 12.  I'm looking forward 

to meeting them a little later for photos and some refreshments 

and probably some questions. 

 

They're accompanied by Edla Pajunen, Marianne Delhommeau, 

Lynn Walz, Nancy Zimmer, and Ray Reiber.  And I'm certainly 

looking forward . . . and if I've mispronounced any of those 

names, I apologize now because I'll have to do it later, I know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, would you and the rest of the people assembled 

help me to welcome this group from Luseland. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as you 

know, the constituency of Kindersley, because of the distance 

to Regina, seldom has school group visitors, but today we do 

have one.  I'd like to, through you and to the members of the 

Assembly, welcome a group from the Elizabeth School in 

Kindersley seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a group of 

grade 7 students.  Their teachers are Lane Peterson and Dave 

Burkell.  The chaperons are Cathy Knittle and the bus driver is 

Jim Baker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be meeting with the group following question 

period this morning for a visit and a photo and refreshments, 

and I'd ask all members to help me welcome them here to the 

Assembly this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Cumberland House Bridge 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, on May 19, 

1994, was an exciting, tremendous and outstanding day in the 

history of Cumberland House. The Government of 

Saskatchewan, in partnership with the people of Cumberland 

and the federal government, will be building the long-awaited 

bridge. 

 

We thank the people of Cumberland House, the leadership of 

Cumberland, led by mayor Harold Carriere and Chief Pierre 

Settee, as well as the elected leadership that is there today, Mr. 

Speaker.  And also the Cumberland Corporation. 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

We also thank Vic Althouse, the actual Member of Parliament 

representing Cumberland House.  Yesterday when I was 

listening to . . . I was looking at the notes, Mr. Speaker, when 

the member from Greystone had said it was Mr. Kirkby who 

represented Cumberland House.  It's actually Mr. Althouse who 

has been a strong supporter of the bridge.  But we also, 

nevertheless, thank Mr. Kirkby on his role in this regard. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, this bridge in Cumberland House 

has been promised, you know, by many governments.  The 

dream of course was never fulfilled all these years.  As a person 

that was born and raised in Cumberland House, as the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Cumberland 

constituency, as a cabinet involved in the decision-making 

process, I really, really appreciate this historic occasion, Mr. 

Speaker, and thank everybody who was involved in the 

process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moose Jaw Park Art 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

this morning I would like to take this time to inform the House 

that Park Art is once again happening in Moose Jaw this 

Saturday, May 21. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Park Art brings together from all over the 

province, artists, craftspeople, who display and sell their works 

in our beautiful Crescent Park.  The variety of works, Mr. 

Speaker, in this display and sale is absolutely astounding.  

Everything from pottery, paintings, jewellery, woodworking, 

can be both admired and purchased. 

 

This year to try and make Park Art attractive to the whole 

family, there will be a children's face painting area.  And for 

everybody there will be lots of different food booths, Mr. 

Speaker, to be sure that no one will go hungry.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, all members will want to know that both the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser and the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow will be serving as cooks in the food booth 

tomorrow, along with some other high-priced help like the 

mayor of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of local businesses have contributed this 

year in a variety of ways to make Park Art happen.  However it 

is again sponsored by the Moose Jaw Art Museum National 

Exhibition Centre. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to take time 

tomorrow to come to Moose Jaw and enjoy Park Art. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sask Forest Products Scholarship 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to announce to the House that Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation has 

announced that starting this year they will be funding an annual 

scholarship of $1,500 to be presented to a graduating student 

from either Carrot River High School or Hudson Bay 

Composite High School.  The award will be given to students 

who have shown initiative and marked improvement in the last 

two years of high school.  They must also have proven to be 

helpful in both school and community. 

 

Saskatchewan Forest Products have decided to do this and to 

get involved in this program because they are committed to 

helping people in furthering their education in these changing 

times. 

 

Once again I would like to announce to the House and in 

particular the students of Hudson Bay Composite High School 

and Carrot River High School that Saskatchewan Forest 

Products has announced this $1,500 scholarship for starting this 

year, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kinsmen Band and Choral Festival 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to inform the 

Assembly today about the 45th annual Kinsmen band and 

choral festival in Moose Jaw.  Events started Wednesday with a 

beautiful choir competition at Zion United Church.  Heavenly 

sounds were heard from 20 choirs, the highest number in 

competition's history. 

 

Of interest to members, Mr. Speaker, superb accolades were 

expressed by national level adjudicator, John Trepp, to the 

Moose Jaw children's choir and Peacock jazz choir, both of 

which are establishing a national reputation. 

 

Yesterday there were 83 instrumental soloists and 55 brass, 

woodwind and percussion ensembles who entertained the 

audiences as they performed at St. Andrew's Church and 

Peacock auditorium. 

 

Today and tomorrow, Saturday, 25 concert bands compete at 

Peacock auditorium and Central Collegiate and 129 highland 

piping and drumming soloists compete in beautiful Crescent 

Park. 

 

The finale of the festival is the ever-popular Main Street 

parade.  Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw loves a parade, and 25 to 30 

marching bands and the local MLAs, I may add, will be 

parading down Main Street tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to offer congratulations to Kinsmen 

organizer Russ McKnight and his crew, and to invite everyone 

to Moose Jaw this weekend to enjoy the beautiful sounds of the 

Kinsmen 45th annual band and choral festival. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

UNICEF Volunteer Honoured 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

congratulating Fred Routley of Prince Albert, who, at the recent 

annual general meeting of the provincial UNICEF (United 

Nations Children's Fund) organization was named the 

Saskatchewan volunteer of the year. 

 

Mr. Routley has co-chaired the campaign for several years 

through the Prince Albert chapter of superannuated teachers.  

And year after year, Mr. Routley spends many, many hours 

motivating many youth and adults to support this campaign.  

He has visited many schools, organized raffles, sold UNICEF 

cards and other merchandise and delivered collection boxes.  

And through his efforts $12,353 was collected to aid the 

world's children. 

 

The community and I would like to express our appreciation 

for all the work that Mr. Routley does on our behalf, and the 

leadership he shows amongst volunteers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Council on Children 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I am reporting 

on the work of the Saskatchewan Council on Children.  The 

council's mandate is to advise government and the ministers 

participating in Saskatchewan's action plan for children on 

priorities for achieving the well-being of Saskatchewan 

children. 

 

The promise of the action plan are that children are best cared 

for through their families and communities.  The council's 

recommendations will therefore also relate to the well-being of 

families and communities. 

 

The 25-member council consists of representatives from a 

variety of organizations who are involved in providing services 

to programs for families.  They represent a broad range of 

sectors including health, recreation, education, justice, and 

social services, and come from various geographical areas of 

the province. 

 

Particular attention has been given to ensuring Metis and first 

nation representation.  Saskatchewan's action plan for children 

with over $4.4 million to improve preventative, early 

intervention and support services, is a significant achievement 

for Saskatchewan.  With our action plan and our Children's 

Advocate, children's services are receiving the attention 

required. 

 

The council will play a key role in furthering the work of the 

action plan.  The council is having its second meeting on May 

27.  Their work is challenging.  We appreciate the time and 

expertise that council members are contributing to help the 

children of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Seat-belt Week 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to remind my 

colleagues and all others that this is the start of National 

Seat-belt Week, and it is a very fitting time, being the start of 

the May long weekend when many of us will be making short 

trips.  There's nothing that any of us can do that is more 

important this weekend, and at any other time when we're 

travelling, than to wear our seat-belts. 

 

It's a very effective method of reducing injury and preventing 

deaths, and in particular, Mr. Speaker, I urge that children . . . 

that special attention be paid to children, not only this week but 

all the time, in vehicles.  So I congratulate people for paying 

attention and wearing seat-belts -- a very important thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hospital Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question this morning is going to be toward the Minister of 

Health.  And, Madam Minister, one of my constituents, a Mr. 

Harold Schuler, had a severe heart attack on April 25 and he 

has been informed that he requires emergency bypass surgery.  

He has had six arteries collapse, Madam Minister, and although 

his doctor is doing the best for him, he cannot get Mr. Schuler a 

hospital bed until mid-August. 

 

Madam Minister, as waiting-lists for emergency operations get 

longer and longer, what are you doing to ensure that individuals 

like Mr. Schuler receive the immediate medical attention that 

they require? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

First of all, I can't respond to the individual situation; however, 

the member opposite should contact my office and we will take 

a look to determine whether or not everything . . . that it is 

proceeding normally. 

 

I must tell the member opposite that the hospitals and the 

physicians priorize emergency needs, or needs with respect to 

surgery, and if a person has an immediate need for surgery, 

they will have access to that surgery.  But essentially there is a 

priority list and it's up to the individual's physician to make 

sure that if that surgery is needed immediately, that the person 

acquires it, because if they categorize it in that fashion, they 

will receive the surgery. 

 

Now on the larger issue of waiting-lists, for example, we have 

had a committee review waiting-lists in Regina and look at the 

provincial scene.  We have been advised that we do not have a 

situation in Saskatchewan that is of a crisis nature.  There were 

recommendations made by this committee to the Regina Health 

Board to allocate beds with respect to specialists and it's my 

understanding that the Regina Health Board is working with the 

physicians and other people in the hospitals to implement the 

recommendations that were made. 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I'm talking about Saskatoon.  

And if you're hoping that normal procedures have been 

followed in this case, all I can say is heaven help us, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Harold Schuler wanted to be here this morning, but he was 

afraid his condition would not allow him to make the trip.  

Now understandably Mr. Schuler and his family are very, very 

concerned; and quite frankly they are worried that he won't 

make it to mid-August. 

 

And he has a question for you today, Madam Minister.  Harold 

Schuler would like to know:  do I have a right to live or not?  

Where are all the beds we taxpayers have paid for?  That's his 

question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we're very much aware of 

the stress and anxiety that people suffer when they are waiting 

for surgery or when they have a health condition that is of a 

serious nature.  It causes us concern as well. 

 

And with respect to this individual case, I would urge the 

member opposite to talk to the staff in my office.  If he was 

really concerned about Mr. Schuler, he should have come to 

see us a long time ago and we would have checked to make 

sure that everything was okay from Mr. Schuler's point of view.  

So I'm suggesting that to the member. 

 

However, I want to make this point.  The priority lists are 

established by the physicians and by the hospital.  And if the 

physician, his physician, feels he needs surgery immediately, 

his physician should advise to that effect and the surgery would 

become available through the hospital.  Because it's my 

understanding that if surgery is needed immediately, it is 

available and there's access to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question as well is 

to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, our office receives 

calls and letters every day . . . or every week from similar 

individuals as my colleague from Rosthern raises. 

 

Helen Leach from Eston has been waiting for seven months for 

hip surgery and still doesn't have a surgery date set.  And I 

contacted your office about these cases, Madam Minister.  

Because of her condition, Mrs. Leach is basically confined to 

her home. 

 

Marion Cochrane of Carlyle has been waiting for 10 months for 

knee replacement surgery and is in great pain.  Recently, she's 

been informed that she'll probably have to wait another six 

months, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, when you started your health reform you said 

that your changes would improve services to Saskatchewan 

people.  What do you have to say to these people today, 

Madam Minister, who are living in fear and in pain because 

they cannot get a hospital 

bed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to point out to the member 

opposite, it isn't a question of not getting a hospital bed; it's a 

question, in many cases with respect to orthopedic surgery, as 

to the availability of a particular specialist.  Some specialists in 

orthopedic surgery have very short waiting-lists.  Other 

specialists may have long waiting-lists. 

 

In fact, I remember when I was in opposition and the members 

were in government, one specialist had a waiting-list of over a 

year long for orthopedic surgery.  So seven months is an 

improvement on the situation when you were in government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously I've struck a sore point, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we have, unlike the former government, 

had a committee reviewing waiting-lists and making 

recommendations to the Regina Health Board, particularly with 

respect to orthopedic surgery, and the Regina Health Board is 

working to implement those recommendations.  And when 

those recommendations are implemented, it will have an 

improvement on waiting-lists. 

 

I should point out that this government is paying more towards 

orthopedic surgeries than the former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Casino Gambling 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My next 

question is to the minister of gambling.  Mr. Minister, 

yesterday you announced your plans for how your two casinos 

will be run and how the profits will be divided up.  Once again 

you seem to be a little bit ahead of yourself in your mad rush to 

expand gambling in Saskatchewan.  There's never been any 

public consultation or debate in this province as to whether the 

people of Saskatchewan want casino gambling, let alone how 

the casino should be run or how the profits will be divided. 

 

Mr. Minister, a couple of weeks ago your government 

introduced new smoking and new drinking legislation and then 

they announced that the legislation would be tabled to allow 

time for good public consultation.  And I say, good. 

 

Will you follow the precedent that that legislation set and will 

you now be introducing, when you introduce this new casino 

Crown that you're talking about, will you introduce the 

legislation and then table it and allow for a full round of public 

consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, let me say 

to the member from Rosthern that the amount of consultation 

and the amount of discussion with respect to the expansion of 

the casino operations in this province has been almost endless it 

seems.  Day after day in question period the Leader of the 

Third 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

Party, and yourself, and the member from Morse have had the 

opportunity to question us on the video lottery terminal 

program, on the expansion of casinos, on bingos, and other 

aspects.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker . . . horse racing, as 

well.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the 

dialogue. 

 

Let me say with respect to legislation regarding the casino 

corporation, it will be introduced.  There will be the 

opportunity for the member from Rosthern and others to 

question the operation of the casino corporation, and the 

dialogue with the general public will certainly be allowed as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that's great.  

That's wonderful that you're going to have full, open public 

consultation before we do anything with that legislation that 

you're bringing forward.  And I'll keep you at your word, Mr. 

Minister, that that is precisely what is going to happen.  I'm 

glad to hear that. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I was concerned here that your government 

is tripping over its own feet in its haste to get their hands on 

that big pot, that jackpot at the end of this gambling rainbow.  

And it shows, Mr. Minister, how you're implementing the 

control of gambling in this province. 

 

All we're saying is let's do it right, let's take our time so that we 

will do it right, and I'm very glad to hear your commitment 

along that line.  Because, Mr. Minister, frankly there have been 

a lot of major problems in your introduction of gambling. 

 

There've been introduction problems also with the introduction 

of the gambling machines themselves.  You've hastily changed 

your policy on outside managers.  The former minister, the 

Minister of Finance now, said that she would never allow 

outside managers.  Now you are saying this is the route that 

you're going to be taking.  Mr. Minister, your 

flying-by-the-seat-of-your-pants approach is not good enough, 

especially on a policy change that's going to have major 

implications to all citizens of this province. 

 

Now why don't you slow the process down?  And people, 

whether they want casinos . . . ask people whether they want 

them.  Ask them whether they're going to be comfortable with 

your management plan. 

 

Mr. Minister, why don't you consult with Saskatchewan people 

before you go ahead with your gambling plans?  I was going to 

ask that question, but now that you have made that commitment 

that there will be a full round of public consultations, I don't 

have to ask the question. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure if there 

was a question in there but there certainly was an endless range 

of rambling. 

But let me say this.  We have been at this process for almost 

three years now.  The number of meetings that have been held 

with the general public have been many and wide-ranging.  

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that some of the comments that 

we have received from people like the chief of the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations . . . and I want to quote for 

you, what this policy is about and what this will deliver.  We're 

looking at investment in the neighbourhood of $25 million in 

each of the two cities, Regina and Saskatoon.  And I want to 

explain to you -- because you don't seem to understand what 

this means for aboriginal people -- and let me quote from some 

of the comments of Chief Roland Crowe: 

 

 It's the first time that we have jobs that we are creating for 

ourselves with the cooperation of government.  It's the first 

time that there are this many jobs on the table. 

 

And I want to go on.  He says: 

 

 I think it gives us pride and we don't ask for hand-outs.  What 

we want is an equal and fair opportunity and that's precisely 

what this agreement gives us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, jobs and job opportunities for aboriginal people 

may mean little to the members of the opposition, but I want to 

say that the aboriginal people in this community are looking 

forward to the job opportunities and they support this 

government's initiatives with respect to development of casinos 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I seek to warn the government of the 

devastating effects that their labour bills will have on job 

creation in Saskatchewan.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not too 

proud to admit that in one sense I was wrong.  This legislation 

is creating jobs, but unfortunately the jobs will likely be created 

in Red Deer, Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Clearlite Glass and Seal Tite Systems of 

Saskatoon have written the Minister of Labour blasting the 

government for their blind adherence to the union agenda, and 

indicating that businesses will have to look elsewhere. 

 

Today we have received a letter from the city of Red Deer 

addressed to those two Saskatoon companies which reads, and I 

quote: 

 

 Thank you for inquiring about Red Deer as a possible 

location for your manufacturing plant. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Labour:  Mr. Minister, it 

appears that you and your labour Bills are about to create jobs 

in Red Deer, Alberta.  Would you not agree that this is a small 

piece of the sky that has just fallen for Saskatchewan? 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- So far, Mr. Speaker, nobody has left.  

I recall these same comments being made when we last 

changed The Trade Union Act in 1972.  I remember an 

individual company by the name of Smith Roles physically 

getting up and trouncing out of the province, only to come back 

a couple of years later. 

 

I'm not suggesting that this legislation isn't of concern to 

business people.  It is of concern to business people.  I think, 

however, that is because they misunderstand the effects of the 

legislation.  When the legislation is in effect and running, I 

think they will find that it is in fact a useful part of economic 

restructuring.  So I think the implementation of the Bills will 

allay many of these fears. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we 

talked to the president this morning and he tells us that five 

head office jobs and from two to six manufacturing positions 

may be transferred out.  It appears that between you and the 

member from Swift Current, we have two of the most ardent 

supporters of the Alberta advantage. 

 

Mr. Minister, the letter that they sent to you in protest was not 

only signed by management, it was signed by the people who 

work there.  Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you will also be 

participating in the sod-turning ceremony in Red Deer should 

these companies decide to move out of Saskatchewan due to 

your government's incompetence and their intransigence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- To say that the member has not 

offered any evidence that businesses are leaving Saskatchewan 

is to be very kind to him.  What the member is attempting to do 

is to, I think, encourage businesses in their concern about the 

legislation. 

 

I say again to the member that I think, notwithstanding your 

best efforts, notwithstanding the member's best efforts to create 

as much concern as you can in the business community, I think 

you and the others are going to find that in six months you're 

about as concerned about The Trade Union Act and The 

Labour Standards Act as you are now about occupational health 

and WCB (Workers' Compensation Board), about which you 

said last year at this time it would be the end of the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

The Saskatchewan economy is doing fine, thank you.  It is in a 

recovery stage and it will continue in a recovery stage 

notwithstanding the best efforts of the member from Maple 

Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Drug for Cystic Fibrosis 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, during the last year 

120 cystic fibrosis patients in Saskatchewan welcomed exciting 

news.  They now have hope against a disease which takes the 

lives of its victims at a young age by destroying their lungs. 

 

The good news is a drug called Pulmozyme.  It has been 

developed and registered for use in Canada.  Pulmozyme is not 

a cure, but its effect on cystic fibrosis is comparable to what 

insulin does for diabetes. 

 

Madam Minister, are you going to cover cystic fibrosis patients 

for Pulmozyme under the insurance plan to ensure that they 

won't be denied treatment because they cannot afford the 

$12,000 annual expense? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much for that question, 

Madam Member.  The process is . . . first of all it isn't the 

minister that decides whether or not they're going to cover a 

drug.  The process is that a drug of that nature goes to a very 

highly specialized formulary committee that we have in 

Saskatchewan, which is recognized actually across Canada as 

being in the forefront.  If that drug should go on the formulary 

and under what conditions it goes on, will be prescribed by that 

particular committee. 

 

Now I will look into this particular drug that you've referred to, 

and I'll get you detailed information on whether or not this is at 

that stage; and if not, why not; and how we can get it there; and 

what the time frame will be, hopefully, before we have a 

response from the formulary committee.  So I will look into it 

for you and I thank you for bringing up the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Pulmozyme 

was licensed in Canada earlier this year, and there has been 

some delay in placing this drug treatment under the health 

insurance plan.  Can you explain the delay in placing the drug 

under the insurance plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, I have been sent some 

information when the question was raised here, which indicates 

that there is new information being reviewed by the formulary 

committee.  Now I don't know the details of that; I will get you 

the details. 

 

I'm also advised that what is happening in other provinces with 

respect to putting it on the formulary is being looked into by 

the department.  So this review is in the process of taking place.  

Now as to whether or not there is a delay in the normal 

procedure, I can't comment.  So I will have to get you that 

information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Elections 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

my questions are for the Minister of Health as well. 

 

Madam Minister, it was reported this morning that your 

one-man stalling tactic, named Garf Stevenson, has already 

pretty much ruled out fall elections for the district health 

boards.  He hasn't even held . . . Madam Minister, he hasn't 

even held one meeting yet, but he is already saying that it's too 

late to hold elections this fall. 

 

Madam Minister, this proves that the consultation process, like 

most of your government's consultation processes, are nothing 

but a farce.  Madam Minister, why don't you save 

Saskatchewan taxpayers hundreds of thousands of dollars, call 

off this charade with Garf Stevenson, and get to work today 

ensuring health board elections are held this fall as you 

promised. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well we obviously know it's Friday, Mr. 

Speaker, because the member opposite doesn't matter -- he can 

get his facts wrong on Friday because it's difficult for us to 

respond until Tuesday. 

 

However we have indicated in this House before that we did 

not promise October elections.  And I told the member opposite 

that.  We said that that was the first available date, which is 

correct.  But the member opposite persists in perpetuating this 

misinformation to the public. 

 

Also I have been advised -- although I did not hear Mr. Garf 

Stevenson's comments -- that he essentially said that it was 

getting late for fall elections; however that in itself would not 

be the determining factor.  There was still a possibility that 

existed. 

 

And I want to repeat my position in this House.  Mr. Stevenson 

is reviewing far more than when we will hold elections -- far 

more than that.  But the members opposite refuse to recognize 

that.  The members opposite refuse to recognize that; Mr. 

Cholod refuses to recognize that. 

 

Mr. Cholod, who indicates that the boards were up and running 

for two years, is not providing the correct information to the 

public.  They've only been up and running for a few months, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are many issues to review before we proceed to 

elections.  We may very well not even want to have them in 

conjunction with municipal elections; we may want to have 

them after that, on their own. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

Madam Minister, how can you say these consultations and Garf 

Stevenson's $500-a-day fee are worthwhile expenditures of 

taxpayers' money, when the most important decision has 

already been made by Mr. Stevenson.  There are a lot of people 

in municipalities who would probably like to go to these 

consultations and say that the election should be held 

this fall, but what's the point, Madam Minister?  The decision 

has already been made by Mr. Stevenson. 

 

And now your government is going to spend $200,000 to 

pretend that you're listening to the people of Saskatchewan.  

Why are you doing that, Madam Minister?  If you're not going 

to hold the elections this fall, why don't you at least save the 

people of Saskatchewan $200,000 for Garf Stevenson and call 

off, call off your phoney consultation process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, the consultations 

by Mr. Stevenson go far beyond when there will be elections.  

And we may very well not have fall elections.  We have not 

ruled that out at this point, but the possibility of moving to fall 

elections is in question as I have said repeatedly in this House.  

And the members opposite know that. 

 

They choose however to attack Mr. Garf Stevenson personally 

-- to attack him personally.  That is their way of dealing with 

people.  They complain about the money he's being paid to do a 

consultation process with respect to a whole range of issues 

pertaining to elections. 

 

It is only a short while ago, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite were defending George Hill's million dollars, just a 

short while ago.  And now they stand up here and attack Mr. 

Stevenson.  I think that their approach to this whole issue has 

been absolutely narrow; it has been a personal attack.  And they 

are refusing to look at what the bigger issue is, which is how do 

we proceed to these elections, what sort of eligibility criteria, is 

there some other way of doing these elections and with 

municipal elections, and so on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you're right.  We attack these people and we'll continue 

attacking the Garf Stevensons and the Jack Messers and the 

David Dombowskys and every other political appointee of 

yours and patronage appointee in this province, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, you say that the consultations are legitimate 

and that people will be listened to.  Well, Madam Minister, I 

ask you this final question:  Madam Minister, if the majority of 

people at these meetings say that the elections should be held 

this fall, will you guarantee that the elections,  health district 

board elections, will be held this fall, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue is to determine 

when the most effective date would be -- in the process of 

health reform -- to move to elections, and what form of 

elections we are going to hold.  Mr. Stevenson is less 

concerned about the date of the election than how the elections 

will be performed, and how and when it would be most 

effective.  People working in the health care area . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

members opposite clearly don't want to listen to the response. 

 

People working in the health care area have advised, en masse, 

that moving to elections in the fall would be disruptive of 

health reform.  The members opposite, however, want the 

elections this fall because they want to make it political and 

grandstand, and they don't have the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member from Kindersley, I 

thought had just asked a question.  And no sooner does he sit 

down and the minister answers and he's constantly interjecting.  

Now allow the minister to answer the question.  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Stevenson will advise us as to when he feels it would be most 

effective to proceed to elections.  Mr. Stevenson will also 

advise us on a whole range of other matters because this is too 

important to do it without thinking it through carefully and it's 

too important to do it in a political fashion, as the members 

opposite want to.  It's important that we do it fairly throughout 

the province in the interest of health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a brief 

statement concerning Charles Robert, our temporary Clerk at 

the Table. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Farewell to Table Officer 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, this is about Charles 

Robert, our temporary Clerk at the Table.  Charles, this is his 

last day here.  He joined us when Bob Vaive went on to British 

Columbia to take a position there.  We are very fortunate that 

Charles was available to come back to Saskatchewan because 

he's been here on previous occasions to help us out.  We will 

miss Charles, his well-informed and wise counsel at the Table. 

 

His reason for leaving is that he is required, I understand, to 

begin work with two Senate committees -- Foreign Affairs and 

Energy -- next Tuesday in Ottawa.  He's not leaving because 

this is the onset of mosquito season here in Saskatchewan.  I 

know that all members will wish Charles well and to thank him 

for coming back to Saskatchewan to help us out.  I hardly wish 

for any further future vacancies, Mr. Speaker, but should they 

occur we sure hope that he can come back to us again. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to join 

the member from Regina Victoria in saying to Mr. Charles 

Robert that we're not happy to see you go, we're just happy to 

have had you here as an opportunity to get to know you.  

You've been an asset in the Public Accounts Committee, giving 

us advice about various areas and what we'll be talking about 

later today in relation to the Public Accounts Committee, has 

been largely due to your initiative and I want to thank you for 

that.  And I wish you the best as you go back to the Senate to 

deal with various issues that are going to be brought forward 

there. 

 

Thank you very much for being with us and the best to you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the Opposition 

House Leader we obviously rely very, very heavily on the 

expert advice of the Clerks around the Table and Charles has 

certainly been invaluable as time has gone on.  And I would 

certainly want to join with colleagues of the House in 

congratulating him for the appointment to the various Senate 

positions, and we wish him very well in his future endeavours. 

 

At the same time I want to just give a word of caution to 

Charles as well, that not all Clerks from Saskatchewan that 

wind up in the Senate have all that longevity.  I don't know the 

reasons why, Charles, but I'm sure you'll do well in your new 

position, so best of luck to you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Well 

on behalf of myself and the third party, we too would like to 

add our good wishes to Charles Robert as he leaves. 

 

I think one of the things with which we can all agree in this 

Assembly is the outstanding professionalism of the Clerk's 

office and the people who are within it, and the one thing that 

Charles did was to add to and reflect what we have been 

consistently able to receive from that office.  We're very sorry 

to see him leave and we wish him well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, just briefly and not to repeat the 

accolades that have been expressed about Mr. Robert -- with 

which I agree -- having had the opportunity to serve at the 

Table and take advantage of Mr. Robert's advice, I'd simply 

like to put on record that I have appreciated his good humour 

and his common sense advice that he's provided, and to simply 

say that I think the Senate's gain will be our loss here at the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and how much I've 

appreciated the service that he's provided us here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would be remiss if I didn't say a few 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

words of congratulations to Charles for coming to 

Saskatchewan.  I do want to let the members in on a secret, 

because many of you have been wondering.  I've made a few 

decisions this year and some of you have not agreed with those, 

and some decisions were good ones.  The good ones were 

because I relied on Charles's suggestions and advice, and the 

bad ones were when I didn't heed his advice.  So some of you 

will be happy that Charles will be departing and others will be 

sorry to see him go. 

 

I want to thank Charles very much.  You've been a tremendous 

strength to the Speaker.  And as I think one member said, he 

has a good sense of humour; he's very objective in looking at 

things.  And I want to thank Charles very much.  I hope that in 

the future, Saskatchewan can benefit again from having Charles 

here. 

 

I want to wish you well, and thanks again, Charles, for coming 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (No. 6) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of Bill 70, An Act 

to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act.  This legislation is an important milestone on the road to 

democratic reform that this administration has taken since 

being elected just over two years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, since we came to office we have 

undertaken many changes to increase the accountability of this 

legislature and of the cabinet.  We have acted and will continue 

to protect the taxpayer to make this Assembly more 

accountable to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act builds upon these reforms.  First it 

provides for an independent commission to review per diems, 

travel allowance, telephone allowances, constituency office 

allowance, communications allowance, and caucus allowances.  

In short, Mr. Speaker, it provides for an impartial review of all 

aspects of MLA pay and constituency office operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this commission is important to government 

members because we believe the ethics and the accountability 

of all legislature members is of paramount importance. 

 

Over the past several weeks, Mr. Speaker, the official 

opposition has introduced a series of proposed amendments to 

reform legislative practices.  And I want to say to members of 

the opposition, I appreciate 

their attempts and I believe that they should be congratulated 

for their initiatives.  However, Mr. Speaker, the attempt, in our 

opinion, is ad hoc and does not address the fundamental 

concerns of the taxpayers, that we as government believe need 

to be addressed. 

 

We believe that an independent commission needs to be 

appointed to deal with the whole range of issues on MLA pay.  

Mr. Speaker, we are acting to force change.  And while I seek 

the support of all members, we are prepared to act alone if 

necessary. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this Act goes farther than just 

appointing an independent commission to study MLA salaries 

and constituency office allowances.  It provides for a real 

mechanism for enforcing the rules of this Assembly that have 

been agreed to by members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the passage of this Bill, the role of the 

Speaker as minister responsible for the Legislative Assembly 

will be formalized.  Further to this, the power of that office will 

be increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the ability . . . the Speaker, sir, will have 

the ability to enforce the rules of this Assembly.  And that is a 

role that rightfully belongs with the democratically elected 

Speaker as president of this Assembly. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the case that a member disagrees with 

a decision, we have provided for a mechanism to involve the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner who is appointed by 

resolution of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment provides the express legislative 

authority for the enforcement of the directives of the Board of 

Internal Economy. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me reiterate that this Bill provides 

real and effective change to the way this Legislative Assembly 

operates and the accountability of its members to each other 

and to the public.  This Bill provides for an independent 

commission to review all forms of MLA salaries and all forms 

of constituency and caucus allowances.  It provides for a real 

mechanism to enforce the rules of this Assembly and provides 

for an appeal mechanism to members for seeking a second 

opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is fair to the public, it's fair to the 

members, and it's fair to the principles of democratic reform.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move that a Bill to 

amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

morning I would like to congratulate the minister for bringing 

forward a Bill that deals with matters which we have 

considered to be very serious for a long time. 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

As the minister mentioned, the official opposition, the third 

party, have brought forth proposals in this House to be 

discussed and be debated because these issues affect all of us in 

a way that at times is very deep and very personal; at the same 

time, respecting the public's need to know and understand what 

we do with our money, how we spend their money, and how 

we deal with issues of propriety and substance as members of 

this House. 

 

I agree with the minister that the independent commission is an 

absolute must; that we as legislators must be perceived by the 

public as being above board with our allowances and our 

expenditures; that the issues that have arisen over the last 

session of this House even are issues that rightly so must be 

dealt with in a right and proper forum. 

 

And I was very pleased to see in the legislation that the 

government has brought forward that the Leader of the 

Opposition, the Leader of the Third Party are part and parcel of 

that process, that there is consultation and it is an all-party 

effort to do things in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that on the issues of how 

members are dealt with that we do have some concerns.  I don't 

believe they are significant enough to stall or to cause a major 

problem with this Bill.  I think they're the kind of issues that all 

parties should sit down and discuss.  And certainly, we have the 

third reading part of this Bill where that is the right and proper 

place to have discussion, amendments, that type of thing that 

people can feel comfortable with. 

 

And as members, regardless of party stripe, at the end of the 

day we have to be comfortable with that process, that we as 

individuals can go to yourself, Mr. Speaker, we can go to our 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, we can go to our Board of 

Internal Economy, with the confidence that our issues will be 

adjudicated in a way that we perceive to be fair and 

above-board. 

 

And I think if all members think about that for a while, that we 

will come up with the right and proper solutions for this House 

to present to the public.  So for that process to carry forward, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment at this time, and we 

will carry on with those discussions through the next days and 

weeks. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, in consultation with the House 

Leader and his recommendation, by leave of the Assembly, I 

ask that we proceed to Bill No. 71 under private members' 

public bills and orders. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Provincial 

Auditor Act 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I move that Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The 

Provincial Auditor Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

(1100) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make 

one observation about the process.  The process had to do with 

a recommendation by the Public Accounts Committee, 

unanimously agreed to.  The vice-chairman, myself, and the 

Leader of the Third Party, put together, with the direction of the 

Clerk's Table, Mr. Charles Robert, and we want to thank them 

for their involvement. 

 

We also want to say that the Bill will provide an opportunity 

for the auditor to table, through the Assembly, similar to the 

Crown Corporations Committee, actions that are taken and 

reports that are made by the auditor, and that's the scope of the 

Bill and I appreciate very much the opportunity to have had the 

opportunity to present the Bill to this Assembly. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I move that the Bill be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Goulet that Bill No. 47 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, 1980 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

particular Bill does not have a lot of substance in it.  While it's 

important to SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) that 

this particular change be made, it's not going to have a great 

impact on the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The reason that this Bill is brought forward is because SGI was 

trying to spin off subsidiary companies and yet the auditor's 

report reported that that was not legal and so SGI had to bring 

those subsidiaries back into SGI proper.  And this piece of 

legislation will allow SGI to again have subsidiary companies 

which would report to SGI.  That opportunity is already there 

for the Saskatchewan Auto Fund but it was not there for SGI. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is not a major change in events of 

Saskatchewan's history, therefore we don't have a lot of 

problems with it going to Committee of the Whole at the 

present time.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 66 -- An Act 

respecting the Superannuation of Teachers and Disability 

Benefits for Teachers be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, this is 

not a Bill that will have a momentous impact on Saskatchewan, 

although teachers in the province are very, very interested in 

this. 

 

The teacher's pension came into place sometime during the 

1930s, about 1935.  At that particular point in time, it was 

funded . . . the monies collected from the teachers went into the 

Consolidated Fund and the Consolidated Fund turned around 

and paid back out to teachers, whenever they retired, their 

benefits. 

 

The previous administration changed that to allow teachers to 

administer some of these funds themselves.  The funds that 

were collected at that time went into a separate fund which the 

teachers administered, and this carries on that stance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We're prepared to let this go to committee and we'll discuss the 

particulars of the Bill in Committee of the Whole.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Research Council Act 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I 

should explain the reason the minister does not have any 

officials here is not that he's lax in his duties at this time, it was 

my commitment that the previous times that this estimate has 

been forward -- I did ask questions on the SRC (Saskatchewan 

Research Council) -- I was satisfied with the officials' and the 

minister's response at that time.  I have no further questions and 

would be prepared to let this estimate go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, just so anyone who 

is watching should realize that questions have been asked 

extensively on this, privately and in the House, so we actually 

completed the committee work on this Bill. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 

 

Mr. Chair: -- I recognize the Hon. Associate Minister of 

Finance and would ask that he introduce his officials to the 

members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me this 

morning is Scott Banda, the counsel for CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister.  

I have just a number of questions.  One of the questions that I 

have in regards to this Crown Corporations Act change is the 

definition of an indemnity as it relates to the changes that 

you've made and the expansion that you've made as an 

indemnity and the impact that it has in the area of indemnity 

not only means being able to use it as a function of a guarantee 

or something similar to a guarantee, but it also includes in its 

definition, as I look through the dictionary, for actions against 

the Crown in the past.  And that's a part of the definition in a 

Webster's Dictionary and I was wondering if that related to 

any of the definitions that you would place on the word 

"indemnity" as it relates to this Act and its involvement in 

relation to negotiations that you're taking in dealing with 

various Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  To the members 

opposite, I sort of anticipated this question, somebody would 

want to have a definition of indemnity, as how we define it and 

how we interpret it in this particular Act.  And I would take a 

minute or so, Mr. Chairman, to describe how we interpret the 

indemnity here. 

 

Let me start off, first of all, by describing what we interpret as a 

guarantee, and I'll use an example here and I'll use . . . I don't 

know if I can involve the Chair in this or not, but I'm going to 

use him anyway unless he 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

objects to this. 

 

But if the Chairperson decides to take a loan from a bank and 

his credit rating isn't all that good, he comes to me and says, I'd 

like you to guarantee this loan. Then, as anticipated, he defaults 

on his loan; the bank then goes after me.  That's a guarantee.  I 

have to pay the bank directly and that's a normal loan 

guarantee, and I think we all understand that.  As parents, many 

of us have guaranteed loans for our children; some of us I'm 

sure have paid; others may have been more lucky and have not 

had to pay, but unfortunately that's the circumstances of life. 

 

The indemnity, however, flows a little differently.  If the Chair 

made a deal with the bank . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . with 

the credit union, as my colleague suggests here, makes a deal 

with a financial institution and if I provide an indemnity to the 

Chair for this particular loan, and if something goes wrong -- 

the project fails and the money is called on the bank, or the 

financial institution calls on the money -- then the Chair has to 

pay the financial institution and the Chair comes after me for 

the indemnity. 

 

So the difference, fundamentally, is that in one case, if I 

guarantee, I will pay the financial institution directly; in an 

indemnity, there's an intermediate person who has to pay the 

financial institution, and then in turn, that person comes to me, 

if I've indemnified him, then I will . . . fundamentally, I guess 

we can say that I will keep him safe from loss in that situation. 

 

And the reason we're asking for this wording change in the Act 

is so that it broadens the scope on which we can negotiate.  

And we're not particularly anticipating specific deals here, but 

we want to broaden the scope so that if it comes up, we're not 

going to be caught without having the proper ammunition so 

that we can do this. 

 

(1115) 

 

Clause 1 agreed. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I'd like to thank 

my counsel here, Scott Banda, for the very valuable advice that 

he gave me in answering the question that the member asked.  

We had sort of anticipated that.  And I'd also like to thank the 

member for asking the question because I think it helped to 

clear up for all those listening and the people in the Assembly 

exactly what we're trying to do here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank 

the official for his attention, and probably the work that he did 

prior to this was significant in relating the matter to the 

Assembly and dealing with establishing the Bill in the first 

place as an amendment, and I thank you for that. 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 

1985 

 

The Chair: -- The Bill will be handled by the Minister of 

Justice.  And I would ask if the Minister of Justice has any 

opening remarks he'd like to make, that he do that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, I suggest we proceed 

with clause by clause. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we have no 

substantive objections to this Bill. 

 

This Bill provides for regional election of credit union 

directors.  Does this refer to the election of directors within 

each credit union, or the election of directors for Credit Union 

Central? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We're talking about the election of 

directors for each credit union and not for Credit Union 

Central. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you referred 

in second reading to the cumbersome and in some cases, unfair 

system of selecting directors that is used at present.  Could you 

outline for us this current system and some of the problems that 

have been encountered, and then compare it to what you're 

doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The present system is not very 

satisfactory, and I'll outline it as the member has requested. 

 

The situation arises where a number of smaller credit unions 

have merged into a larger one, or formed a large one, and there 

are examples in the Swift Current area that the member will be 

aware of.  In the new, merged credit union they are very 

anxious to have representation from the areas where there used 

to be a small credit union which has been absorbed into the 

larger one or merged with the larger one. 

 

Under the present Act, they have no way of guaranteeing this 

result, so the situation is one of where they try to manipulate 

the process in such a way as to assure that there will be 

directors elected from each district.  They go out, and in effect, 

elect a director in the smaller centre, and then they bring that 

name to the annual meeting of the larger centre to try and 

ensure that that director is in fact elected. 

 

Now that happens, but it's not guaranteed in any way.  And 

that's why I say it has that kind of a manipulative quality about 

it, because you have to be quite . . . do a lot of lobbying and a 

lot of advance work to try and assure a result that we now seek 

to do directly by legislation, by allowing for the direct election 

of directors from the smaller districts. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- This, Mr. Minister, comes at the request of the 

Credit Union Central.  Have you taken any steps to ensure that 

the local credit unions are in agreement with this?  Have you 

asked them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  We haven't done a formal 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

process, but we have been aware of the problem for a long time 

as a result of our conversations with various credit unions.  And 

we know that it's not just a Central idea, that it flies, that it is an 

idea that is most topical, in some of the districts directly 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, the Bill 

gives the credit unions the ability and the responsibility to 

make by-laws related to district boundaries and election 

procedures for directors. 

 

Are there checks in place to ensure that the rules for these 

elections are fair, democratic?  For example would credit union 

members be able to appeal to the minister if they felt their local 

election rules were conducted improperly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't have the entire Act with me as I 

sit here so I'm not certain of the appeal procedures.  But I do 

know that the voting provisions of the legislation are quite 

comprehensive, and that if there is any departure from the 

requirements of The Credit Union Act, 1985, there would be 

methods of enforcement in that Act by any members who were 

unhappy with it. 

 

The provisions are, as the member will know, quite extensive 

and explicit.  And it has been our experience that the credit 

unions are very democratic organizations and are very mature 

organizations.  And we don't anticipate any trouble in them 

conducting the kinds of elections that will be conducted as a 

result of the passage of this Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, the Act has 

a significant amount of changes that deal with . . . numbering 

changes that deal with a number of other Acts -- The 

Co-operatives Act, The Securities Act, The Investment 

Contracts Act.  I appreciate that the references remain the same 

only with different numbers.  However, getting off the topic of 

this particular Bill slightly, could you tell us if the changes of 

these Bills which necessitated these renumberings have any 

significant impacts on The Credit Union Act in general. 

 

I'll run that by you again.  I appreciate that the references have 

remained the same, only with different numbers.  However, 

getting off the topic of the Bill, could you tell us if changes of 

this Bill which necessitated these renumberings have made any 

significant impacts on The Credit Union Act in a general way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer, Mr. Chair, is no.  The 

amendments that the member refers to are technical and are 

simply trying to keep up with changes to other Acts and keep 

this Act relevant as a result.  But there is no change of any 

substance whatever contained in this Act. 

 

I think that probably the most significant one is certified mail 

or Canada Post priority courier after registered mail in section 

233.  That's just a different method of doing the same thing. 

Mr. Martens: -- I wonder, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, on 

that very issue whether the . . . and I had thought about that 

question, why wasn't fax machines . . . why weren't fax 

machines included in that reference as a part of 

communication? 

 

And as I understand it, there are going to be a whole lot more 

advanced technology in this area as it relates to the post office 

even.  I understand that there's going to be huge changes in 

how mail is going to be delivered in the next year or two in 

relation to transmission of information by fax and by even the 

mail service delivering those issues that way.  Can you 

comment on that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, that's a very important 

issue.  The technology is moving so quickly.  We have not got 

to the point in this country where fax machines are accepted 

yet.  Apparently the possibilities for forgery are still a concern 

and there are people all over this country giving a lot of thought 

to that so that we could move on to the next stage for the 

service of documents. 

 

There are other possibilities too, a computer-related e-mail and 

other ways to use the highway -- the famous highway that we 

hear so much about these days -- and I believe that they're 

coming.  I believe that in the next year or the year after, we'll 

be in this House with a series of amendments to permit other 

methods of service, but we're just not at that stage yet.  We're 

this far, but not further. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have personal information that relates to 

NCR being involved with post offices in the country, and 

they're providing those services and they're getting ready, I 

believe, for some 1,200 post offices to be involved in those.  

And those kind of deliveries will be a part of this overall 

transition and that could happen within the next year.  And that 

is significant. 

 

And so if you're taking that as a part of an overall strategy for 

the government to be dealing with that, and you have raised a 

legitimate observation about the very fact that, is this a 

legitimate signature on an individual's fax and is that a proper 

format to use, those are all things that have to be taken into 

consideration.  And perhaps that has to be dealt with in the next 

session or in short order anyway. 

 

So I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, thank you for your time 

and I appreciate your answers. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Research Council Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 1985 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1130) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'll just be a few 

minutes and then the member for the Liberal Party I see wants 

to get a few questions in, so we will try not to dilly-dally too 

long here. 

 

I do have a couple of important questions to ask the minister 

before we get on any further with the Highways. 

 

First of all, one of my colleagues is very concerned about the 

condition of Highway No. 42.  And I wonder if you would put 

that into your thoughts for a minute and give us a bit of a report 

on what you're going to do to alleviate the problems on 

Highway No. 42 -- some very serious situations occurring on 

that road as a specific problem. 

 

Then I want you to also move your mind to the operating 

authority for trucks in our province, which I believe is under 

the jurisdiction of the Department of Highways, and there's a 

bit of a licensing process that goes on that allows people to do 

trucking in certain areas at least. 

 

And it appears, from a call that I've had this morning from 

Wild Streak trucking, that Sam's trucking, of Swift Current and 

Estevan, has the monopoly to move equipment in the oilfield, 

at least, moving rigs and that sort of thing. 

 

Wild Streak trucking is a small company that is trying to 

operate out of a small town of Golden Prairie.  The owners are 

trying to make a living for their family.  They're not trying to 

take over the whole province; he assures me he wants only to 

get permitted enough to 

be able to sustain his operation. 

 

And he's wondering why these monopolies are so tight and why 

there isn't the allowance of some competition in that area, and 

why he hasn't been able to get an opportunity to be able to do 

some trucking, I guess especially in the south-west corner. 

 

So perhaps you could explain to us how that process works and 

what his chances are of being able to break the monopoly hold 

that Sam's seems to have on that area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I would like through Mr. Chairman to 

thank the member for his question.  If you could get me the 

information on this particular situation, I would be more than 

happy to check into it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you get your mind back to Highway 42 

as well, Minister, and tell us what's going on there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Through Mr. Chairman to the member 

from Maple Creek, I thank you for that question as well.  It is 

my understanding that department officials will be meeting 

with the rural municipality on June 8 -- in fact I believe the 

city, as well. 

 

I'm sure that the member's aware that AgPro Grain is located 

on that highway and that highway is very important to that 

grain delivery point.  The recent decision by the Canadian 

Wheat Board has increased traffic dramatically.  Along with 

that, the moisture of last fall and the extreme cold weather that 

we had was very damaging to that road. 

 

I want to say that the additional grain handling that's happening 

there has definitely increased . . . or reduced the turnaround 

time on grain cars which helps the agricultural industry 

extensively.  But we're always concerned in this province that 

efficiencies to grain handling has to also take into account our 

highway system and the municipal road system.  And we 

continue to make that argument to the federal government.  

And so hopefully, at some point in time, proper efficiencies 

will look at not just transferring costs but actually involving 

producers and municipal land, provincial road authorities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, like a good number of people in this Assembly, my 

constituency has some problems with highways also.  I have a 

number of highways that are in serious need of repair and 

maintenance, but one highway in particular I would like to 

bring forward to your attention is Highway 13 between 

Stoughton and Arcola. 

 

Now perhaps the member from Weyburn has brought this to 

your attention also, but the highway straight east of Stoughton 

is in very poor shape, it's quite rough, and it was breaking up 

this spring.  Now I know that the maintenance crews have been 

out there and have patched it up, but this is still a very major 

concern for the whole area.  I've had representations 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

from the communities along the highway; I've had 

representations from the hospital at Arcola because of the 

difficulties in transferring patients across that particular stretch 

of highway. 

 

Is the department looking at making any maintenance, any 

upgrading on that particular stretch of highway?  Combinations 

of 33 and 13, Mr. Minister, seem to be the most heavily 

surveyed stretches of highway in the province, and yet nothing 

is done about it. 

 

Now I believe I know the reason why those surveys are done; 

it's people coming out of the university and out of tech are 

using those particular stretches of highways for their studies.  

But when the citizens of the province drive up and down that 

highway they think something is actually going to happen, and 

yet nothing ever does. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what considerations are you giving to 

repairing the stretch of highway from Stoughton east to Arcola? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, through Mr. Chairman, to 

the member.  We agree that Highway 13, the Stoughton to 

Arcola area, is in need of rehabilitation.  As you are also aware, 

we continue to work little by little on the highways across the 

province because of our financial situation in this province.  

And so, as finances allow, we will certainly take Highway 13 

into account. 

 

Right now we priorize our highway construction and 

rehabilitation based on traffic counts, as you are well aware, 

fatalities on a particular section of road, and accidents on a 

particular section of the road. 

 

So we are concerned, like you are, and are the people in the 

Arcola-Stoughton area.  And as finances allow, we will 

certainly work on that section of road.  I want to say too that we 

are doing a section of seal-coating from Redvers to Carlyle in 

this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm pleased to 

hear that.  And if it comes down to a matter of politics, I 

believe the people in my communities would be more than 

prepared to allow the member from Weyburn to take credit and 

start building the highway from Stoughton east in his part of 

the constituency.  But as long as the road was to receive some 

upgrading, they're prepared to accept it starting at either end. 

 

Mr. Minister, I brought up another issue to you after the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 

and that was dealing with oil access roads, concerning the 

regulations of oil access and how close together oil access 

roads could be built.  I wonder if you could give me an update 

on that information, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

the question.  Oil access roads are very important of course in 

your constituency.  We fund oil access roads as a designated 

road and it's covered . . . 

the province's portion is the basic plus 25 per cent.  Generally 

the acceptance levels is every four miles.  But depending on 

special circumstances in an area where there is a lot of activity, 

we will certainly look at more frequent participation on roads 

that do in fact have access to the oil area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  When 

you say more frequent, how close together could oil access 

roads be?  My particular RM (rural municipality) in 

conjunction with Moose Creek -- or is it Moose Mountain; one 

of those two -- have oil access roads they would like to build 

and they would be a mile apart.  They could put them in a mile 

and a hundred yards apart because the gore is right where they 

want to build. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, is one mile acceptable?  Because there is a 

very much . . . a lot of heavy traffic in that area.  There's a 

significant amount of drilling going on where this particular 

road is taking place and the three RMs involved are quite 

interested in having this opportunity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  Of course again I stress to the member opposite 

that we have some financial concerns in this province and it's 

very difficult to look at help indeed closer than a mile apart 

and, in fact, a mile apart.  So we try and allow the expenditure 

as fair as we can, but within what we can handle. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that if the RM has 

some questions they certainly should get a hold of the district 

engineer in that area and discuss that with them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, the RMs 

have indeed talked with your department and that's why I was 

bringing it up today, because the answers they received were 

not those that they were looking for. 

 

My RM also brought up another issue that they were quite 

concerned about, and I talked to you about this earlier, is about 

permits for heavy hauling within an RM.  The RM was 

interested in having the authority to issue a permit; not a permit 

by which they would collect any fees or a permit by which they 

would restrict heavy hauling through their jurisdiction but 

rather a permit by which they could direct -- use this road and 

not that road -- so that access would still be allowed through 

the RMs but if they had a particular stretch of road that was soft 

or newly constructed and they wished to only maintain light 

traffic on it, that they could direct vehicles around it. 

 

The problem that arises is heavy traffic moving through the 

areas.  They don't necessarily know that it's occurring and 

therefore they can't instruct the haulers to use a particular road 

rather than something else.  And they were wondering if it 

would be possible to institute some sort of a permitting system 

that when rigs are moved through an area, that the RMs would 

somehow be notified. 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

the question.  In fact you did indeed bring that up with me 

earlier.  I have the department checking that out but, as you are 

probably aware, the RM does have a right to ban now on soft 

roads.  And they also have a right to issue permits based on 

where trucks should or not travel. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the RM's concern is 

not so much banning a road.  They don't mind one truck going 

down it.  But when you start moving a rig and you have 20 or 

30 heavy trucks moving through an area, they may not even 

know about it.  And that's what their main concern was, was 

first off to have the knowledge that this heavy traffic was going 

to be going through the area.  And secondly, to try and 

designate, use this road and not that road.  Because when the 

hauling is taking place, it doesn't always necessarily go by the 

most logical route or by the shortest route.  Because some 

pieces of equipment will travel at a different rate of speed than 

other pieces of equipment, so the trucks sort of fan out and then 

fan back in to their location. 

 

And the RMs would like to be able to say, please use this road 

and not that road.  And that's what the permit that they are 

looking at or looking for would give them -- this ability to do 

that without actually having to ban the road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

the question.  He will probably be aware that if you are 

overweight you do have to get a permit from the rural 

municipality. 

 

But the department are looking at the concern that you brought 

to me in this regard where you're suggesting that when an oil 

rig is moved that they go to the RM to get a permit even though 

they're not overweight, so that the RM has knowledge of where 

they're going to be travelling. 

 

The department is looking at that presently.  They're going to 

be talking to SARM about that.  And so we continue to look at 

your suggestion and I appreciate your suggestion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate 

that and I'll pass that on to my RM. 

 

Your reply though brings forward another question.  You say 

that an overweight permit, they have to go to the RM.  Cannot 

the trucking company apply to the provincial Highway Traffic 

Board or to a provincial body for an overweight permit and 

therefore do not need to provide that kind of information or that 

kind of request to the RMs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  It is my understanding that if an oil rig, for an 

example, is moving between two RMs, then he would go to 

Highways for the approval, the permit.  If he is moving within 

a rural municipality he would do that with the rural 

municipality. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It seems that 

most overweight rigs are moving from municipality to 

municipality and the RMs themselves have a great deal of 

difficulty finding out until after it happens. 

 

I'd like to carry on a little bit where my colleague was 

travelling in the operating authorities.  I wonder if you could 

give us an explanation of the procedures involved when a 

trucking company wishes to establish itself in a particular area 

in which other companies are already operating.  What are the 

procedures that they have to go through? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the criteria? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  Operating authorities, of course, would be given 

by application through the Highway Traffic Board, and there 

would be hearings if that was determined necessary.  

Interprovincial trucking is fairly deregulated at this time in that 

it's mostly a safety and fitness approval that they would need to 

enter a market, and transportation to out of province, or out of 

province into the province, is deregulated at this time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So actual fact 

you're saying that, inside the province, interprovincial travel is 

much more regulated than inner-provincial travel is then.  Mr. 

Minister, I've had, like my colleague, companies who have 

been trying to start up in the hauling industry and yet have run 

into a great deal of difficulty in trying to proceed. 

 

One particular company has gone to hearings a number of 

times now and been rejected.  They've had difficulty in finding 

out the reasons for their rejections.  I believe that there is a 

timetable set up there. 

 

I wonder if you could outline the hearing process, and the 

appeal process coming from that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  The process would be an application to the 

Highway Traffic Board, then it would get gazetted, and then 

would be an opportunity to express opposition.  And if the 

board felt that there was reason for a public hearing they would 

have that hearing, and would then make a ruling in the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We in Highways have had the opportunity to study 

transportation issues in the province of Saskatchewan and we 

do have a committee set up with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) representatives and SARM 

representatives and the Department of Highways officials and 

they are looking at this area in particular and I expect to review 

that report very shortly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mention 

the hearings that can take place and that opposition can then be 

presented.  Who is entitled to present opposition?  And what 

kind of information do 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

those who are presenting opposition to it have to provide to the 

committee?  And how is that information evaluated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  The Highway Traffic Board is a quasi-judicial 

board and there is no restrictions on who can submit a concern 

or, for that matter, support.  Usually I believe, it would be firms 

that are concerned with losing their market share perhaps or a 

concern about the carrier that is making application. 

 

There may be submissions by shippers who would like more 

access to a particular area.  Or there may be in fact 

presentations made by people that receive goods, stores in a 

community or garages or whatever, that maybe feel that their 

service is adequate at this time or maybe they feel that it is 

inadequate at this time. 

 

So there is no restrictions and I want to say again that the 

Highway Traffic Board is a quasi-judicial board. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does this 

board take into account the competitive nature of any 

opposition that may come forward?  If a new trucking company 

is trying to move in to a market, I'm sure that most of the other 

competitors in the area would feel that they are adequately 

serving the customer base and therefore there is no need for 

another competitor in the market.  A significant portion of their 

opposition would therefore be based on their own self-interest, 

that another competitor would either drive down the prices or 

take away the business from them. 

 

So what consideration does this board take into account when 

those kind of competitors are coming forward?  What kind of 

arguments can the opposition provide that would be significant 

in the eyes of the board to make a determination whether or not 

a new firm should be allowed into the business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  Certainly I believe competition would be one of 

the things that the Highway Traffic Board would want to 

weigh.  Certainly I believe their main concern would be the 

needs of the people, what in fact other firms are saying, what in 

fact shippers are saying, what in fact the people receiving their 

goods are saying. 

 

The Highway Traffic Board, as you would know, sets the 

maximum rate that can be charged on a particular good.  Most 

of these rates now are under that maximum, showing that there 

is competition.  A lot of the competition are from companies 

carrying their own goods.  So there is . . . competition certainly 

would come into the picture but there are many other issues 

that the Highway Traffic Board would determine. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps I 

should become a little more specific in what my questions are 

aiming at. 

In Arcola a company was trying to get into the field of hauling 

drilling rigs.  The other companies in the area were entirely in 

opposition to them coming in because it would dilute the 

market for everyone.  So in a lot of cases their arguments in 

opposition were simply the fact of another competitor coming 

into the market. 

 

Now I don't know whether the Highway Traffic Board 

regulates the charges and the fees that can be charged for 

hauling drilling rigs -- perhaps you can explain that -- but what 

kind of reasonable, logical arguments can someone who is 

opposed to having this happen, having a new competitor come 

into this field, present to the Highway Traffic Board that the 

Highway Traffic Board would reject a new application? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  I guess first of all I want to say that the particular 

rig mover that you're talking about, you know, I'm not aware of 

that.  But I would suggest that he certainly should look at some 

shipper support if he hasn't done that already.  But I want to 

say, I as minister cannot judge what the competition is or 

whether all the companies can survive in a particular area. 

 

The Highway Traffic Board, I believe, would take this into 

consideration, listening to the concerns of others that are in that 

particular business.  It's a quasi-judicial board, and certainly I 

as a minister wouldn't get involved in that.  There should be no 

political interference in that.  It should be done through the 

Highway Traffic Board; that's the right place to make that kind 

of argument. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I don't believe 

I had suggested that perhaps there was or should be political 

interference in this.  I was more concerned as to what the 

criteria was that the board looked at in making their 

determinations when it comes to accepting or rejecting a new 

application. 

 

You mentioned earlier safety and fitness.  Now what part 

would that play in the determination to accept or reject a new 

applicant for this type of an industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  If the particular applicant was seen to be unsafe 

by the Highway Traffic Board or uninsurable by the Highway 

Traffic Board, then they would not receive an authority.  The 

quasi-judicial Highway Traffic Board determines authorities on 

public interest and this is very broadly defined.  So safety, 

insurance, and the needs of the people in that particular area are 

all considerations of this board. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  After a 

determination has been made by the board to either . . . to reject 

an application, what is the appeal processes that are in place 

and what time frames are involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  I can't answer that at this 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

time, but I'll certainly get the information for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I believe there 

is an appeal process.  And I'm not exactly sure what the time 

frame is for people to file an application.  I believe it's about 30 

days. 

 

But when a determination is made, there's also a time frame, I 

believe -- and you can enlighten me on this -- that the reasons 

for a rejection are to be back into the hands of the applicant, I 

believe, within 20 days.  And in the particular case that was 

brought forward to me, that was not happening, Mr. Minister.  

They did eventually get the information, a partial explanation.  

It went to an appeal and again they were rejected.  Again there 

was supposed to be information passed on to them within a 

certain period of time, and again, Mr. Minister, that did not 

happen. 

 

I think that if there are rules in place, if there are time frames in 

place, that they should be enforced, they should be carried out, 

and the full information should be passed on to the applicant so 

that they can determine whether or not they can change their 

operation to meet the requirements of the board, if there is a 

problem that they are rejected for, so that they know the 

reasons why they cannot achieve their . . . succeed in their 

application, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  I don't know about this specific case and I would 

ask the member opposite that he should have them contact the 

Highway Traffic Board with their concerns.  If he would like to 

give me the situation, I certainly will check it out from this end.  

I just haven't got the details in this specific case, so I'm sorry I 

can't answer the question further. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

just want to bring to your attention and see if some of your staff 

knows anything about the conditions of No. 19 Highway from 

Elbow to 15 Highway and then 219 which carries you into 

Saskatoon from there.  See if any of your staff is familiar with 

the history on that road and the conditions of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member from Arm 

River for the question.  I stood in this House the other day and 

I'll do it once more.  I know that every member in your caucus 

has concerns about certain roads; every member in our caucus 

have concerns about certain roads; members in the Liberal 

caucus have concerns about those roads.  Because of our 

financial situation, we will improve and work on those roads as 

best we can within that limitation. 

 

In your case with that specific road, I will have my department 

look at it and see if we . . . how many letters we've received and 

what the condition is.  If you can inform me, sir, I would 

appreciate any help that I could get.  So I thank you for the 

question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this highway, 

why I bring it to your attention -- naturally we have highways 

throughout the province that all maybe needs work done on it, 

and I understand your 

situation where you have to work at them the best you can -- 

why I bring this one to your attention is this, Mr. Minister.  

There's a heavy traffic flow to Elbow, as you know, because of 

the golf course there and the park there, and I've never had so 

much complaints over the last few years about the condition. 

 

And it's the holes that are in that road; that's people pulling so 

many boats on No. 19 Highway that the holes are unreal.  

When you're driving along from Saskatoon with a car, maybe 

going back in the evening, and there's been quite a few people 

that have broke axles and what not. 

 

And I know I discussed this several years ago, and my 

understanding this was on the agenda for some kind of work to 

be done in 1992 and I was wondering what went wrong with 

this.  I'm not saying that they want to build a new highway 

because I think . . . if I remember correctly, Mr. Minister, if we 

go back in -- when this road was built -- if we go back, a few 

years back, that this road did not get the top put on it right.  

There was something not finished.  They were to do it at a later 

date. 

 

And it's not really . . . What it needs is to have something to get 

these holes filled in.  If you haven't got the funds to build a 

brand-new highway, which it needs, the people are just asking 

me by letters . . . but not so much from my own constituency.  

This is Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, city people that go out to Elbow 

park. 

 

And the people that live there say we can handle the holes, we 

know where they're at. But the strangers are really 

complaining.  So I was wondering if you can comment on that, 

please, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  As I mentioned earlier, because we have limited 

finances to work on highways in this province, because we're 

paying of course interest on our debt, we try and priorize our 

spending on highways based on traffic count, based on 

fatalities on a particular section of road, based on accidents. 

 

I noted on the highway that you were asking about, that the 

average traffic, the daily average traffic flow there is about 300 

to 350 vehicles per day, in comparison, for instance, to 

Highway 16 where the average daily traffic count is 3,500 

vehicles per day, where there have been 12 fatalities between 

1988 and 1991.  So we have to priorize where we reconstruct 

roads in this province. 

 

But I want to say too that the weather, you're quite aware of the 

weather last fall, the amount of moisture that we received in 

this province.  The moisture, combined with the frost last 

winter because of the extremely cold weather, we have 

problems with many pieces of road, some of them that we 

haven't had problems with for many, many years.  So we work 

as we can and as fast as we can to repair the holes that you talk 

about. 

 

The department of crews, I have to commend them; 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

they're doing an exceptional job. They're working as fast as 

they can to have those repairs done.  We have hired private 

contractors to help us with that.  But we can't do everything 

overnight.  So we will just continue to work as fast as we can to 

have those repairs done. 

 

I know, as a citizen of this province, that it would be nice to 

have a perfectly smooth piece of road.  With last fall's weather, 

with the financial situation of the province, we will just do as 

best we can.  And I know that the people of Saskatchewan 

appreciate that.  I've gotten many calls with concerns of a piece 

of road, but know that we will be getting at it as soon as we 

can. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, now I 

asked some real quick questions and didn't elaborate on any 

political speeches.  And we all understand what you're saying, 

Mr. Minister, about the priorities.  We also understand that on 

Highway 16 that there's a terrific traffic count compared to 

Highway 19, but when you take the year, entire year, 350 

vehicles per day on Highway No. 19 would not be fair to say in 

the summer months -- you'd have to do the summer months -- 

and I would venture to say you might have a thousand per day 

or more. 

 

But my question . . . I didn't want to get into the political 

rhetoric that your Premier did when we were in government.  

He used to talk about that particular highway, Highway 19, that 

it was so bad that they didn't need to make it to the golf course 

at Elbow, that you had 18 holes to the mile. 

 

So I didn't want to get into that.  I just want to ask you, Mr. 

Minister, and get your commitment.  All I want to ask you, so I 

don't have to belabour this:  Mr. Minister, if I can get a 

commitment that I can have someone in your department check 

into the seriousness of this particular road now and do what is 

right.  That's all I ask you for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- First of all I want to say to the member 

opposite that certainly traffic counts in the summertime are 

higher right across this province.  I note the Minister of 

Economic Development has told us several times that tourism 

inquiries and tourism is in fact up a lot in the last year or two. 

 

But I want to say we will do what is best and as fast as we can.  

I appreciate your concern.  I have the same concern in my 

constituency.  Members . . . your colleagues on that side of the 

House has the same concerns as my colleagues on this side of 

the House.  So we'll work as best we can and as fast as we can 

to make those improvements.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I asked . . . Mr. Minister, I 

asked very sincerely if I could get your commitment. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You did. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, you just said you look at holes and all 

these things for other parties and everybody else's problems.  I 

asked you if you would look, some 

of your department, into Highway 19.  I just need that 

commitment from you.  Highway 19, and do what is . . . and 

someone to drive over it and report back to whoever, the 

deputy or yourself, and say the condition of it and do what is 

right.  That's all I ask you to do.  Can I get that commitment, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- You certainly can.  My department 

people will look at it; they will report back to me.  I will report 

back to you.  I just hope that you don't expect everything to be 

done overnight. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to thank 

you for that commitment.  That's all the questions I have at this 

time. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairperson.  Mr. 

Minister, I want to welcome you and your officials here today.  

And just before we get into the subvotes we'll just touch on a 

few of the more general questions, I guess. 

 

Mr. Minister, I look over the last probably three, four years at 

the Highway budget and how dramatically it's been cut; it 

probably has been cut by some 50, 60 per cent over that time 

period. 

 

And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, in your view, dated back 

a few years -- two or three years, the highway system from then 

till now -- just tell me in your view what is the shape of our 

provincial highway system? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite.  The 

trend in reducing budgets over the last few years has been to 

protection and maintenance of the existing system.  We have a 

$6 billion infrastructure in this highway.  And we have to 

question ourselves many times: do we have to expand that $6 

billion infrastructure or do we work more towards protection 

and maintenance?  And so in the budgets you've seen some 

reduction in new construction but you have seen levelling off 

of the maintenance side of the budget. 

 

I also want to remind the member opposite that the largest cut 

to Highways budgets happened not in our term, but in the year 

of 1990-91.  So we will continue to protect and maintain the 

roads as to the best of our ability.  Certainly this year is unusual 

after several years of dry weather to have a year like we did last 

year with excessive moisture and the frost conditions.  So we 

will continue to work as best we can and as fast as we can to 

make the improvements that the people of Saskatchewan are 

suggesting. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I guess that 

is somewhat of a . . . leads into the next question.  With the 

amount of money that was cut back in 1990-91, surely it 

couldn't have all been in new construction.  I believe that a 

major portion of money was also in the maintenance.  And as 

you were saying, when we look back at last year it was, you 

know, with all the moisture . . . Not only that, but the 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

amount of product that is now moving by truck and less by rail, 

I notice some highways, especially in the south-west are getting 

to be in terrible condition.  How then can you justify more cuts, 

given what's happened with this trend for three or four years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Certainly the member from Shaunavon is 

right that we see additional truck traffic, rather than rail.  We're 

very, very concerned, I guess, with what might be coming from 

the federal government in the way of rail line abandonment, for 

an example. 

 

We're stressing to the federal government that they certainly 

talk to the province, talk to the municipalities before they make 

any rash decisions on efficiencies, you know, just considering 

the carriers, for an example.  We have a high stake in our road 

system and we would want to work together with them on any 

decisions that they make so that we can protect our road 

system. 

 

We continue to work on the protection and maintenance of our 

system.  I want to commend our work crews for the job that 

they have done so far this spring, and we will continue to do 

that.  We have hired, as I mentioned earlier, private contractors 

to help us repair some of the roads and we will continue to do 

that throughout this year. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, basically then what 

you've been telling me is that you think the roads are in fairly 

good shape across the province, even though, as one of the 

members earlier had mentioned, you were one of the members 

that campaigned on this road having 18 holes to the mile, and 

we knew what kind of shape those roads were in back then.  

And yet I've not seen anything substantive out of your 

department showing that there's been any change. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- First of all, I want to say to the member 

opposite that he knows very well that money doesn't grow on 

trees, and it takes money to do things. And when we're paying 

$855 million a year in interest, it certainly would help if we had 

a little bit of that for road construction. 

 

But I want to say that we have 25 per cent of all the roads in 

Canada -- a $6 billion infrastructure.  We have 3 per cent of the 

population.  We recognize -- and I want to stress that -- that we 

recognize the conditions of the roads this spring.  Certainly we 

have some concerns and there are some problems out there.  

There's no denying that.  We will continue to work with our 

highways crews, to work with the private industry to get those 

fixed as quick as we can. 

 

But the people out there are telling me, we understand your 

problem.  We know you're working on them; we appreciate 

that.  And we will continue to do that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

can you, can your office or can your department give any 

exceptions or exemptions to any road bans?  And I know that 

you and I discussed this not so long ago, of some farmers that 

were unable to 

move some of their product to market because of certain bans 

on the roads.  And actually in the case that you were familiar 

with there was probably no justification at that point why we 

couldn't have given an exemption.  I just wondered if you have 

that ability or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite.  This 

year we've seen extensive use of road bans.  And certainly you 

mention that there are some concerns out there, and there is.  If 

we wouldn't have used road bans, the problems would have 

been even more severe.  We haven't had to do that in the years 

previous as much, at least because of the weather conditions 

last fall and the frost and so we had some concerns.  We used 

road bans extensively. 

 

There is a case-by-case exemption that can be . . . because of an 

emergency.  And it is done by case by case.  As you can well 

appreciate, I'm sure, if you just took the ban off the road you 

would destroy that road perhaps.  But in a special circumstance 

where perhaps there is no fuel in the community or there is 

some special circumstance, there can be an exemption made 

and a permit given to that particular instance. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, if someone were to be 

wanting an exemption, what's the process?  What do they go 

through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- They would apply to the district 

engineer. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- So they would . . . and they would get this 

phone number or address.  Most farmers, for an example, 

wouldn't know who the district engineer is.  Is there something 

you could provide me more substantive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- It would be in the phone book. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I think 

we'll move right into these estimates of this year.  The total 

budget for this department is decreasing by I think some $18 

million or 10 per cent, roughly 10 per cent.  And that's a 

considerable amount of money to decrease in the budget again 

this year now. 

 

I just wonder what departments or what areas of your 

department are taking the biggest hit.   And I'm just wondering 

how some of these . . . if there's savings, how did you achieve 

them?  And what, perhaps programs that aren't readily seen in 

this document, what programs were perhaps cut back? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- To the member opposite, as I mentioned 

earlier, the trend is to the preservation and maintenance of our 

$6 billion infrastructure, rather than adding to or upgrading.  

Certainly we realize that each department in government has to 

share in this interest burden that we have, but it's no use to cry 

over spilled milk.  We will all take part in handling that. 

 

And in operations we've been able to do things like, for 

instance, use signs for an extra year, a savings of about 

$400,000 a year. The fact that I will not have my 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

picture on the Saskatchewan map, that we are going to be 

selling advertising there will help.  There has been a reduction 

in staff levels, which is not something we like to see but 

something that has to be done in times like this.  We're looking 

at our printing services and actually as many operational 

efficiencies that we can, and we continue to do that on an 

ongoing basis. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You had 

mentioned signs.  And I notice when you drive around the 

province, I get a fair number of calls actually from people that 

talk about these highway signs they now see -- huge bulletin 

boards.  And there's a few of them.  One is, don't travel in the 

snow zone, I believe it is;  and don't travel in the orange zone.  

And these are monstrous signs. 

 

In fact, as I recall, one of them was right downtown Regina -- 

don't travel in the snow zone.  Could you tell me where the 

snow zone would be when you're travelling past the Regina 

Inn, say, downtown Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite.  It's 

funny he mentions that.  Actually I did receive several 

comments this summer about the importance of snow zone 

signs, for an example.  Just to remind people of the dangers of, 

for instance, the Department of Highways snowploughs going 

down a particular piece of road. 

 

We had a fatal accident last year near my home town where a 

person was passing a snowplough.  So it's a good reminder for 

the people of Saskatchewan that there are snowploughs on the 

road, and be careful. 

 

And we have to continue to think of that, to remind people.  

Any fatality on highways is far too many for me.  So if we can 

reduce that, I think it's well worthwhile. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I don't 

want to make light of this, so don't take it wrong.  But for the 

people watching today, could you tell them exactly where the 

snow zone is when they see the sign? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  Saskatchewan is very unique.  We have four 

seasons, and one of them is winter.  And there is snow across 

this province. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that anything to 

remind people on the highway of concerns like snowploughs 

and swirling snow and those kinds of things, I think is very 

important.  One fatality to me is too many.  If we could reduce 

the fatalities to zero would be fine. 

 

So any reminder that we can give the travelling public of some 

of those concerns, I think is appropriate. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Of course your 

department has no ability that I know of, 

of raising funds outside of general revenues.  And I'm just 

wondering, do you have any . . . has your department brought 

forward any alternatives for any cost recovery or suggestions 

that perhaps there should be toll-highways or toll-bridges.  Can 

you give us an idea of what your department has been advising 

you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  I think what he brings up is very important -- is 

there room for industry participation; is there room for 

participation of other governments; and that sort of thing. 

 

We are at present working with the uranium industry, for an 

example, on some cost-sharing arrangements on roads in the 

North.  We work with the Mistic Management, for instance, in 

the north-west portion of the province.  We work with 

Weyerhaeuser for an example.  We work with other 

governments along our borders -- Highway 17, for an example, 

is cost-shared between Alberta and Saskatchewan, the 

maintenance. 

 

It was very interesting at the recent SARM convention where 

rural municipalities invited provincial Department of Highways 

to talk about the needs for looking at the whole road structure 

in a particular RM, whether it be highways or rural roads. 

 

So we continue to work on that aspect of it and I think it's very 

important, and certainly we appreciate your comment. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, part of my question had to 

do with an actual toll on the public for highways or bridges, but 

more of a user fee.  And I don't mean this to mean cost sharing 

with other levels of government or other jurisdictions or 

companies; I'm talking about the general public. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Toll roads is an interesting concept.  In 

Saskatchewan I'm not sure if they would work.  I mean, we 

have a spread-out population. People, you know, don't use, you 

know, one particular road more than the other.  It would be, I 

think, very, very difficult. 

 

But certainly if you have any ideas that this might work or you 

support toll roads, certainly you could bring them to my 

attention.  I'd certainly have a look at it. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, under the first subvote under 

administration I noticed the budget is decreasing by $113,000, 

and that's in operating expenses.  And I was just wondering, 

like, how did you achieve these cuts in operating expenses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you.  You're talking about 

operating, I believe.  The reductions mainly in operating were 

from mainframe operating costs relating to the processes we 

were using in the department, elimination of some of the 

advertising campaigns, and reductions in miscellaneous 

operating expenses.  And the total savings there were $107,000. 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you're able to cut 

back in those areas, I notice then that salaries didn't really take 

any cut-back.  Is there a reason for this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Under salaries there were decreases.  

There were positions abolished during the 1994-95 budget 

process, and that was $50,000 there.  The deputy minister's 

salary is lower than the previous deputy minister, with savings 

of $9,000 there.  And elimination of funding for positions that 

were abolished in '93-94 was another $46,000 there.  So there 

was some savings in salaries. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- But, Mr. Minister, when I take a look at 

the construction and maintenance subvotes, I mean there's been 

dramatic cuts in this area in the last few years -- four or five 

years.  And yet when you look at administration, the cuts 

haven't been in proportion.  Why would this be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  I'm sure he was quite aware that when he sat on 

this side of the House, not too long ago, that we did reorganize 

the Department of Highways at that time -- that was about two 

years ago -- so there was a lot of changes in the number of 

senior positions at that point in time.  This year in fact, there 

were 28 positions abolished and those, thank goodness, were all 

able to be handled under early retirement, and we continue to 

do that. 

 

And as I said earlier, our emphasis is to maintenance and 

preservation.  I don't believe it's time to add to a $6 billion road 

infrastructure.  It's time to look at the preservation and the 

improvement or the fixing of the system that we have. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well I agree with you, Mr. Minister, at 

these times there's a lot of road work that needs to be done; 

however you're not doing it.  And in fact you're cutting back in 

all these departments.  And my question was: why doesn't it cut 

back in proportion with administration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- As the member opposite will of course 

realize, that the majority of reductions certainly came from the 

capital or the reconstruction side of the budget.  And we did 

this purposely because as we have to reduce, we want to 

concentrate on the maintenance and preservation of our road 

system. 

 

Certainly we know this year that we have some problem.  And I 

want to thank you for your support because you realize, as well 

as we do on this side, that we did have some bad weather last 

fall, and there are some highways with quite a few roads that 

need fixing.  And our people will be working on that on an 

ongoing basis and we will do the best we can with 

consideration to the financial health of the province. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm anxious to help out with 

the House here today in moving things right along, but I'm 

going to have to ask you this question for the third time, and 

don't give me the answer about your construction projects. 

I want to know why the administration isn't being cut back in 

proportion to the rest of the budget -- just a simple answer and 

then we'll move on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Because it was the first thing that was 

cut two years ago.  I did answer that.  There was a restructuring 

of the department two years ago.  That's when the 

administration was cut.  And I have no other answer.  That's 

when it was done. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Do you have the figures with you now to 

tell me what the administration was two or three years ago, 

whenever this major cut took place in comparison to this year's 

budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you.  I will certainly be more than 

happy to get you that information.  I don't have it here today 

but I certainly will get that to you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Do you have a rough idea? Can you just 

ballpark it?  What percentage?  Is it down 30 per cent, or 50 per 

cent, or down at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- We only have . . . we're dealing with a 

set of estimates for this budget and that's the information that 

we have here with us, but I certainly will be more than pleased 

to get you those figures. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, if we have to go 

by only these estimates then the question is once again: if you 

can find areas to cut all throughout the department, why 

couldn't you find them or why couldn't the department officials 

find areas in administration to cut in proportion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Well I'm sure you're well aware that this 

government is doing an exceptional job in looking at all the 

efficiencies.  The first thing we did when we came to 

government, when you sat on this side of the House, was look 

at reorganization of the Department of Highways.  And we 

continue to look at efficiencies every year and we will continue 

to do that for the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we'll move on because 

you are promising to get some figures together for me to show 

how you can justify not cutting back administration in this 

budget.  So I guess we'll discuss that at a later date. 

 

Under subvote 2, accommodation and central services, I see 

that there's an increase of $50,000, and I'm just wondering why 

the increase is necessary, to begin with.  Where is that money 

going?  Well I'll leave it at that. 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

the question.  First of all, I want to say that our accommodation 

actually decreased by 1.7 per cent or $112,482.  The increase 

came because of improvements to the Regina south weigh 

scale, the Moose Jaw equipment rental depot, the Assiniboia 

equipment storage building, the Regina weigh scale 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

on No. 11, and the Kindersley weigh scale. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under the third 

subvote, construction subvote, how does your department 

distinguish, I guess, between construction projects versus 

maintenance projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Well that's a tough question.  I guess one 

you fix, I mean a hole or you fix a piece of road.  The other you 

reconstruct, you do the road bed.  I don't know how else I can 

answer that but, you know, there's repair and there's 

reconstruction.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Are you able to 

provide a list of the projects and the dollars spent in both of 

these categories?  Or was that . . . did you include that in the 

package that I received from you the other day?  I didn't look 

right through it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Maintenance is day-to-day activities, so I 

wouldn't be able to supply you with that information; but 

certainly on the construction projects, I certainly would be able 

to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you.  What percentage of this 

budget is allocated to surface, surfacing, resurfacing, service 

transportation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I would like clarification.  Was that 

surfacing? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I would 

have leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure 

today to introduce some special guests here in the Assembly -- 

my sister and her husband, Barry and Delana Floberg, and their 

son, Brandon, who are here with us today. 

 

I'm not sure what you're doing here, Brandon, because my kids 

are at school right now, but welcome anyway, and I'm sure all 

members will want to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I certainly would appreciate if he could . 

. . to the member of Shaunavon, if he could give me the exact 

information that he requires and I certainly would be pleased to 

provide that to him. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Yes, Minister, I will work on that  

question later while I get you prepared for another one here, 

because I'm still under that subvote. 

 

How does the department define the need for projects, and how 

are they priorized?  What role does your office play in 

priorizing projects, or does your office play a role? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

the question.  That again is a very difficult question to answer.  

I certainly can provide sort of the information that he requires 

but . . . factors are traffic; there are accidents; there are safety 

factors considered; there are tourism factors considered; there's 

economic development factors considered.  There are 

contractual obligations that the department may be under.  

There may be some legal obligations that the department . . . So 

there are many answers to your questions. 

 

If you want me to be more precise, I would certainly take a 

written question and I would certainly get the answer to you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the question is: does 

your department provide you with a list of projects that are 

needed or necessary?  And who in the department, or who in 

your office, or is it you, Mr. Minister, that decides which ones 

you do and which ones you don't do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for that 

question.  The department does prepare a list of projects, both 

for the winter tender schedule and the summer tender schedule.  

I approve that list.  Certainly there is . . . and I think the 

member might be suggesting that there is some politics played 

here.  And I want to say to the member opposite, it's not my job 

to make those decisions.  The Department of Highways are the 

engineers.  They are the people that know what road needs to 

be done and when, and I take their advice and follow that 

advice. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd 

like to introduce to you and to all other members of the 

Assembly here . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you.  I'd like to introduce to you and all 

other members of the Assembly, a group of students who've 

probably come the farthest that any students can come from in 

Saskatchewan.  There are 18 grade 7, 8, and 9 students and 

they're from La Loche.  And it's probably the farthest point 

north, with the exception I believe of Garson Lake, that you can 

reach by automobile. 

 

I want to welcome them here on behalf of the MLA for 

Athabasca who is not able to meet with them today.  They're 

taking a short visit of the building.  We'll be going for pictures 

at about 1 o'clock.  And I ask all 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

members to welcome these far-away visitors and I hope they 

have an enjoyable day here in Regina.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I didn't mean to 

accuse your department or you of being political in the 

priorizing of projects.  Don't take me wrong.  I'm just 

wondering, what is the process?  Who does it?  When the list is 

given to you, is that an accepted list or is it dealt with strictly in 

your office by you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  I authorize and that's where it ends.  I listen to my 

department's request and what they suggest be done, the 

reasons for that and that's the process. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And the reason I 

ask this was not to accuse you of being political, as I said, but 

more of one . . . I get a number of people asking me about 

certain small chunks of highway, especially on Highway 13.  

It's in definite, desperate need of repair.  And I was just 

wondering what the process was, if one was to hopefully move 

something along and get some work done on a particular piece 

of road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  If there is a concern, I guess, on a particular piece of 

road, the process would be to get a hold of the district engineer.  

It is my understanding that the district engineers of across the 

province continue to monitor the road system. Suggestions 

would come from those people into the Department of 

Highways here in Regina and that's where plans are made for 

upgrading or fixing of roads. 

 

So if you have a particular concern, I guess, with a road in your 

constituency, certainly you should get a hold of the district 

engineer. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  And that 

previous question, I was unsure what you didn't understand 

about it -- my question on percentage of the budget for 

resurfacing.  But the question prior to that one, you mentioned 

that you would send the list of the projects; I guess that would 

all be included.  I'll be able to see for myself the actual project 

and the dollar value, so we don't have to touch on that question. 

 

Well under this subvote, is the Cumberland project which you 

played a part in yesterday, in announcing, is that included in 

these figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Under vote 68, Saskatchewan 

infrastructure program in Saskatchewan Estimates 

1994-95, would have a section for infrastructure programs. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does the 

Department of Highways and Transportation . . . do you have a 

Saskatchewan-only policy or a union policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- No. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Did you have a Saskatchewan-only policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- No. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well I was told by some contractors not 

too many weeks ago that you actually had a Saskatchewan-only 

policy, and in fact was shown a copy where it did say that there 

was a page in there of Saskatchewan-only policies.  So maybe 

you'd want to talk to your officials about that for a moment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question.  I believe 

that there was a clause in a couple of the contracts that were let, 

but that was removed because it shouldn't have been there.  

And that matter has been clarified with the construction 

industry. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well how did those clauses get into those 

contracts or deals to begin with and why were they there?  

What was their purpose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question to the 

member opposite.  It's good if all our . . . the construction, or as 

much as possible, is done by our contractors. 

 

It's interesting to note that many of our contractors do work in 

Manitoba or Alberta and they believe that the door should be 

open.  We agree with them that they can go out of province to 

work and that actually other firms can come into the province 

to work.  So we would certainly encourage them to use 

Saskatchewan products when that's possible, but it's not a 

determining factor of their contract or it's not mandatory. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, who then asked that you 

make a change in this tendering policy?  Was it Saskatchewan 

contractors or other levels of government, other provinces?  

Who exactly asked you to correct this error? 

 

(1300) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question.  We were 

made aware of the wording of those particular contracts by the 

construction industry.  And I don't know how it happened; I 

don't know.  But it was certainly, when we were made aware of 

it, removed from the contract. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Under subvote 4, Mr. Minister, 

maintenance and transportation, what extent . . . how much of a 

shortfall 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

are you actually, do you feel . . . In your own words, just tell 

me how much of a shortfall do you think there is from between 

the need that the province has and what your department is 

providing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite.  We 

certainly believe that we can live within our budget.  This is the 

amount we requested in order to maintain our transportation 

system.  Certainly we would all like to have more.  We have to 

live within our means.  We have to do more with less.  We 

have to become more efficient.  We have to look at internal 

efficiencies and that's what we're doing. 

 

So certainly it would be nice to have more.  Every department 

would like I'm sure to have more, but I think the taxpayers of 

the province of Saskatchewan are, you know, I think they're to 

their limit.  They don't really want to pay more taxes and I 

agree with them.  So we will look at efficiencies within the 

system and we'll do the best we can with what we have. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A few years ago 

the member from Rosetown was the Minister of Highways and 

of course he threatened the province with gravelling of 

highways, and we all know the outcome of that.  It went over 

like a lead balloon of course.  Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, 

are there any roads or highways in the province that are being 

reverted back to gravel now, this year? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I wonder, Mr. Chairman, whether the 

Assembly would permit me to make some introductions of 

some students. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, in the east gallery we have 

32 grade 7 student from Beardy's Memorial Elementary School 

and they are here with their teachers, Eldon Okanee and Harry 

Salahub, and other chaperons, I believe.  Have I got the names 

spelled . . . sound correctly?  Thank you very much. 

 

Beardy's is just outside of Duck Lake, halfway or three-quarters 

of the way from Saskatoon to Prince Albert, and we often get 

visitors from Beardy's to our city of Prince Albert.  I want to 

take this opportunity on behalf of the MLA from Redberry 

constituency, where Beardy's is located, to welcome them to 

the Assembly. 

 

I hope they have a good time here and a good time in Regina 

and certainly a safe journey back home.  So would the 

members please welcome these students from Beardy's. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- At this time there is no reverting to 

gravel planned.  There has been some suggestions from rural 

and urban municipalities that may desire this and I suppose we 

would take a look at it in a particular situation where it was a 

suggestion of the rural or urban municipality. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  But does the 

department not have certain sections of road that aren't being 

used heavily, not maintained, that are being allowed to go back 

to gravel state, every year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Not to my knowledge. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what the 

savings . . . or can your department officials tell us what the 

savings, say, per kilometre to revert road back to gravel, what 

would the savings have been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Because it's not our policy to do that, I 

do not have those figures; but I certainly could have the 

department work on that and get you some figures.  And I 

would have to know, I guess, what you want.  Is it 

reconstruction into gravel, or is it reverting an existing road, or 

whatever?  I would need those details. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the details are simple.  

The department officials must have calculated out at one time 

that if we revert back to gravel certain pieces of highway 

around the province . . . I know when that announcement was 

made there were some I think 90 miles of highways that were 

going to be reverted back to gravel in the Shaunavon 

constituency.  So they must have brought forward to the 

minister at the time, you know, an amount of savings, a 

breakdown of . . . a justification as to why they would do this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I certainly, because I'm not dealing with 

that right now, I certainly can get those figures to you.  If they 

are somewhere in the department I would be more than happy 

to do that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thanks, Mr. Minister.  So that if they're 

going to get those figures, cost per kilometre, then I take it that 

you'll give it in a breakdown as far as savings in the South 

where a roadbed is much different than the savings in the 

northern half of the province.  And no doubt you'll be able to 

get those sort of breakdowns for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- We'll try our best. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, subvote 5 under operations, 

this has dropped by some $450,000.  And I'm just wondering 

how these cuts were achieved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite for 

his question.  Some of the reductions were in positions that 

were abolished in the 1994-95 budget process.  There were also 

reductions in duplicating and general contractual service costs; 

there were reductions in miscellaneous operating expenses; 

there were equipment rentals and lease 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

reductions; radio tower rentals; and other miscellaneous 

activities.  So it's sort of all over the place, but efficiencies that 

we could find within operations that could be reduced. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me . . . when I 

look under operations -- planning and coordination -- that's 

having quite an increase and that's happening at a time when all 

other subvotes are having decreases.  You're cutting back on 

construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and yet your 

planning and coordination is going up.  Could you give me 

some reason as to why this would happen?  I can only assume 

that you're planning to build a lot of road in the next year or 

two.  Would this be correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- If you look at subvote 6 you will see the 

change there.  There was a transfer from one area to the other, 

so you have an increase in one and then a decrease in the other. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- All right.  Thanks, Mr. Minister.  Does the 

department rely exclusively on in-house project estimating 

services or is some of this contracted out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question.  The 

majority of the work is done in-house.  There are some 

circumstances where it's contracted out. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- In these circumstances where it's 

contracted out, could you provide a list of those contracts, who 

they went to, the reason for the contracts, monies paid out to 

those companies or individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Yes, we would be more than happy to 

provide you with that information. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, what's the nature of 

engineering support services that are offered to some of the 

rural municipalities?  Is there fees, or fee for service for any of 

this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- As you will note, that there was a change 

when we first took over government, removing Rural 

Development and moving some of that responsibility into 

Highways.  We provide that service to rural municipalities at 

no cost. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Subvote 6 -- 

we'll move along.  Under transportation policy.  Does your 

department have a single, clear transportation policy that you 

could tell me what it is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for that question.  Yes, we are 

developing a transportation policy for the province of 

Saskatchewan, looking at our transportation needs and the 

changes that have taken place.  We have set up a 

Transportation Council with members of SUMA and members 

of SARM and department officials; and that report is nearing 

completion.  This was under a commitment made under the 

Partnership for Renewal document and it certainly will take a 

look at the changes that have 

happened in our province in the last several years, and try and 

take a look into the future as to what our needs might be to the 

year 2000. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  While speaking 

of future needs, I assume that your department has an overall 

plan for infrastructure for the province.  And I was wondering 

if you could give me some idea of what the infrastructure plans 

are for project needs and demands and such for the upcoming 

years. 

 

(1315) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- The department works on a five-year 

plan.  That five-year plan is reassessed when you do your 

winter tender schedule, when you do your summer tender 

schedule, and that's done on an ongoing basis.  As you know, 

there may be some economic development in a certain area, or 

there may be a new terminal built in another area, or there 

might be a new tourism attraction in some particular area or 

there might be some type of highway problem that might occur 

or there might be a rail line abandoned.  So this has to be 

reassessed, and we reassess that twice a year, both when the 

department makes up their winter tender schedule or the 

summer tender schedule. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, I see there's a decrease here 

of, well it's almost 20 per cent.  And I'm wondering what 

operating expenses were cut. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- As mentioned earlier, in subvote 5 there 

was an increase and there was a decrease in subvote 6 and it 

was just a transfer. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- There's also a $270,000 grant that was cut, 

and I was wondering who had received that grant and for what 

services, and why of course was it cut? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- As you are probably well aware, the 

Department of Highways did grant to certain bus companies in 

Saskatchewan some monies to offset their costs.  Some of the 

routes in fact were subsidized between 20 and $110 per trip per 

passenger.  That was handled through the Department of 

Highways in the 1993-94 budget, or in this last . . . like it was 

eliminated.  So we do not have that $270,000 as a grant any 

longer. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In subvote 7 

under regulation, safety.  Why is it necessary to increase 

spending on salaries in this subvote?  And I'm wondering if it 

represents new positions or wage increases, or what is the 

reason. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- The majority of the increases were 

because of the new union agreement and out-of-scope, in-range 

movements. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  I want to thank 

you for your time today, and also thank you to the officials. 



May 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you to 

the minister and the officials for waiting around, but there are 

some things that I need to get on the record and I think the 

minister will appreciate why I need to do that.  As he said to 

some of my colleagues, there is only so much budget to go 

around and you've all got problems.  It's my duty in here, on 

behalf of my constituents, to show you that my problem is 

greater than anyone else's and that you need to concern yourself 

with that. 

 

My colleague from Maple Creek, the Highways critic, brought 

up the issue of Highway 42, and it's not unlike others in the 

province that have sections with a light topping.  This particular 

one though is problematic, minister, for a number of reasons.  It 

is one of the major gateways to the Lake Diefenbaker area.  

And as you know, that is an area that has extensive tourism 

components, recreational components, and it also is now 

developing a lot of secondary industry and processing. 

 

As you know, there was an agreement signed recently to bring 

on large-scale potato production into that area, and that's 

occurring on the west side of the lake this year, but will come 

on to the east side of the lake next year also. 

 

You're talking about the transportation of thousands of tonnes 

of product on this highway.  And thank goodness, that isn't 

happening this spring because as we've seen, with the Wheat 

Board trucking program because of the terminal in Moose Jaw, 

that highway is being used extensively.  And I know you have 

nothing to do with determining what the Canadian Wheat 

Board does, but that program is using this particular highway 

very extensively. 

 

And we got the situation there, I'm told by my constituents -- I 

wasn't there to verify it -- that actually a semi was stuck in the 

middle of the highway right through the blacktop and was 

actually physically mired in the middle of the highway, and 

they had to use a Cat to drag it out. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, that's a very difficult situation for people to 

cope with, and I would like your comments on what you 

foresee both short term and long term.  Because these 

multipurpose areas, which the Lake Diefenbaker basin is, I 

believe require some special attention for you to live up to your 

commitments in tourism, your commitments in other areas.  

Certainly the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Economic 

Development, have been working very closely with groups 

there to bring on a lot of value added processing. 

 

Unfortunately we don't seem to be using the rail lines like we 

should, and in fact this highway is going to shoulder most of 

the burden out of that region.  So would you please comment 

on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question, to the 

member from Thunder Creek.  I realize certainly what your 

concerns are with Highway 42, and as mentioned earlier, each 

one of us has some very, very 

similar situations.  The department officials are going to meet 

with the RM of Eyebrow on June 8 and to discuss some of 

those concerns that you have. 

 

But it is very important -- and I think you mentioned most of it 

-- that the transportation needs are changing.  We're looking at 

a lot more trucks on the road.  The Canadian Wheat Board 

decision, the recent decision, certainly has an effect on the road 

that you're speaking about. 

 

Our concern I guess is that the federal government may make 

unilateral changes on efficiencies without talking to provincial 

road authorities or without talking to producers or without 

talking to municipal governments.  Rail line abandonment will 

affect our road system drastically; incentive rate changes would 

affect our road system drastically. 

 

Is there possibilities of short-line railroads, and if so, will there 

be a commitment by the federal government to ensure that they 

can actually survive?  We don't want just to have a unilateral 

decision by the federal government that actually just transfers 

efficiencies or transfers costs and sort of hide that as an 

efficiency.  You can save the federal government money and 

you can save the CN (Canadian National) and CP (Canadian 

Pacific) money, but if you transfer that cost to provincial road 

authorities or to the municipal road authorities, that doesn't 

solve our problem. 

 

So I have requested a meeting with Mr. Young to discuss those 

very issues and I'm hoping that that will happen very shortly.  I 

have written to him about those issues because I think they are 

very important to us. 

 

In regards to Highway 42, we will meet with the rural 

municipality.  There are concerns, like I say, throughout the 

province in similar circumstances, and we'll do the best we can.  

But considering the financial health as well, of the province, we 

sort of have to try and balance that out right at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate your comments, Minister.  I 

know it's difficult, and you can perhaps elaborate on me what 

your short-term plans are.  The section that is the worst part is 

from Eyebrow to Keeler.  And that was identified two or three 

years ago.  And when Sask Wheat Pool were doing their 

consultation on building that concrete elevator at Eyebrow, 

they were told that this was probably going to happen because 

they had a trucking program in place at that time to truck down 

to AgPro in Moose Jaw. 

 

And I don't know if you're going to have to talk to some of 

these elevator companies or the trucking companies or what the 

score is, because the provincial taxpayer does have a legitimate 

right to have their concerns aired with these people because 

there's obviously people doing quite well. 

 

In the case of Sask Wheat Pool, they're getting their elevation 

charges at Eyebrow and they're turning around and trucking it 

to Moose Jaw under a full compensatory rate and they're 

getting their elevation charges again through AgPro, and that's 

all coming 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1994 

out of my Wheat Board pocket.  And the taxpayer's paying for 

the road they they're pounding up while they're getting double 

elevation charges. And I'm not sure that that's an entirely fair 

scenario for the taxpayer or for the guy growing the grain.  And 

I think the circle is going to have to be widened so that more 

people become responsible for what's going on here. 

 

I guess what I'm telling you, Minister, with this particular 

highway, is that because of the number of things that are going 

on up there, that the problem is not going to go away.  You are 

just going to have additional things coming on stream just on a 

yearly basis that will make this problem even worse and worse. 

 

For instance, your minister responsible for tourism is working 

with the people at Palliser Park to put a wildlife interpretive 

centre in there, which they expect will draw people from all 

over North America, and if they can't get there over the road it's 

kind of counter-productive.  So can you give me an idea of 

what you're doing short term to at least keep the road passable 

until we get through this spring season. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question and comments.  As I mentioned earlier, the 

department will be meeting with the RM there on June 8 to 

discuss some of the things that can be done.  The Department 

of Highways crews are working on it on a continuing basis, 

trying to get through this spring. 

 

We are interested of course in working with private companies 

in the oil field area, in the uranium area, in areas that have a lot 

of logging, like in my constituency, for an example, and 

working with grain companies to discuss the issues that you 

talk about.  We definitely need more cooperation. 

 

And things are going to change, as I mentioned earlier.  There 

could be . . . if branch lines are abandoned, it's going to have a 

great effect on our road system.  If incentive rates change, it's 

going to have another effect on our roads. 

 

So we have to work with the federal government, with the 

Grain Transportation Agency, with local rural municipalities, 

with producers.  We have to work together on this, because if 

it's done unilaterally or just with one point of view, it's surely 

not going to work. 

 

(1330) 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 16 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 

thank the minister and his officials today on behalf of the 

member from Maple Creek who had to leave, and say we 

appreciated the time that we spent here, and hope that all of the 

concerns that were raised will receive the due appropriate 

amount of attention.  So thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I too, Mr. Chairman, would like to thank 

my officials today.  I also would like to thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for his questions and the third party for their 

questions.  Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:34 p.m. 

 


