




















































Hansard: May 16, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2345 

 May 16, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair.  

I guess it's more than a week ago now that we had an 

opportunity to have amendments brought forward that could be 

handed to people in the business community.  At that time I 

forwent the opportunity to give a second reading speech, and 

what I'd like to do is to just spend some time this evening being 

able to discuss parts of what I wanted to say at that time. 

 

What we were wanting, of course, was to provide an 

opportunity for people in the business community to have a few 

days to be able to consider what was being put forward.  It's 

something that, of course, any member of the government or 

people on the opposition side would appreciate as well, is an 

opportunity to spend enough time to really consider what 

changes mean to the different proposed Acts that are being 

brought before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Chair, a government has power and a government has 

responsibility.  And I recognize that the government has the 

power to go behind closed doors and they have the power to 

broker deals.  I recognize that the Premier can travel, in fact 

can disappear and travel around to meet corporations and use 

whatever tactics he chooses to stop people from opposing his 

legislation.  That is how some choose to exercise power. 

 

But what of responsibility?  What about the responsibility of 

the 53 members opposite, those on the government side of the 

House, the responsibility that they inherited when they became 

government?  The members opposite, but particularly the 

cabinet and the Premier, have a huge responsibility -- a 

responsibility to think about the consequences of exercising 

their power.  Somehow, the government members, the 

leadership opposite seems to have abandoned their 

responsibility to the very people that they purport to be 

protecting, particularly with their labour legislation. 

 

How many times have government members shouted across the 

floor, and I quote: "You don't care about workers.  You don't 

care about women.  You don't care about part-time people"?  

Now I haven't counted, but I know that it isn't just a few times, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

But telling me that one cares and showing that they really care 

are two very different things.  When one tells people that they 

care about their jobs but they don't create any jobs, how much 

do they really care?  When you tell people in unions that you 

are making changes for them, but there are thousands hanging 

around their union halls waiting for a job, what message are 

they getting? 

Are you giving them the message that their government is 

making changes to legislations that could cost them their 

contracts?  Are you shooting straight with them and telling 

them what impact their government policies are having around 

the country on the chances for Saskatchewan attracting 

business? 

 

I find it most interesting, Mr. Deputy Chair, that the members 

opposite choose to sit at the back and make comment. 

 

They want me to speak from the heart.  Let me tell them what 

people across Canada really think of you, their government and 

their labour legislation.  Now this was not, Mr. Deputy Chair, 

this was not simply the people at the Liberal Party convention 

in Ottawa the last few days.  Some of these individuals were 

indeed premiers from across Canada making comment on the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and saying, what are these 

people doing?  Why would they think that this would allow 

them to be competitive, to draw investment to the province of 

Saskatchewan?  What would ever entice a government to make 

decisions that in fact will hurt the very people that want jobs or 

want to maintain their jobs?  What would they do this for? 

 

Well I told them, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, I 

told them that this indeed appeared to be exactly what it reeks 

of and that is fulfilling a political agenda, not the agenda of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Member.  The people of 

Saskatchewan have a very particular agenda.  If you ask them 

what is the top thing they're concerned about, it's jobs.  It's the 

ability to be able to have a quality of life, take care of their 

families, live by their neighbours.  That's what they're 

concerned about.  If they have a job, they want to keep it.  If 

they don't have a job, they want one. 

 

What does this particular piece of legislation do for people who 

want jobs?  It doesn't give them more jobs.  It definitely does 

not.  And does it in fact protect jobs that are in Saskatchewan?  

It does not. 

 

Would you like to know what your Premier had in discussion 

with me about two weeks ago?  What he said was this: in the 

1960s when The Trade Union Act was being considered for 

change and was finally amended, everybody like me, everyone 

that was opposed to this, actually thought that the sky would 

fall in.  He then said: you know, in the 1970s when there were 

proposed amendments to The Trade Union Act and everyone 

was opposed, they thought the sky would fall in.  In 1982 when 

there were proposed changes to The Trade Union Act he said: 

you know what, people thought the sky would fall in.  And he 

said to me, the member from Saskatoon Greystone, you 

shouldn't be so concerned, because the sky won't fall in. 

 

Well I'll tell you something.  If you honestly believe, members 

of government, that 1994 is the same as 1982, is the same as 

the 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

1970s, is the same as the 1960s, we're in real trouble because 

when you talk about who's the same and never changes, you are 

definitely living in the past. 

 

The day that the Minister of Labour announces changes to our 

Labour Standards Act, and we have people from Iowa and 

South Dakota flying into Saskatoon -- member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland -- flying into Saskatoon to make proposals to take a 

thousand jobs out of Saskatchewan, that's when you should 

give pause to proposed labour legislation.  This is not the same.  

Labour legislation is not going to be moved to some state, or 

some other province, it stays right here.  The tax system stays 

right here.  But what's transportable?  Technology is 

transportable.  Jobs are transportable.  Capital is transportable.  

And you just don't get it, that 1994 is not 1970s, folks.  And it's 

very, very problematic for the people of this country to 

understand what you call cutting-edge labour legislation is 

anything less than quickly going past into the dark ages. 

 

They are very, very concerned for the people of this province.  

They're concerned about what kind of message this is giving to 

the rest of the nation -- in fact the North American continent.  

And don't think that people don't read The Financial Post.  It 

was indeed shocking that there were people who read that our 

Minister of Labour would say we require these changes to 

labour legislation.  Why?  Because, and I quote, Mr. Minister 

of Labour: the ruthless greediness of business. 

 

This is truly an unbelievable situation, that this is precisely . . . 

and you know people wonder if in fact it was just one moment 

in time.  Well here we have The Financial Post, dated May 14, 

and what does it say but: Saskatchewan labour laws spark fury.  

It's as if you think we live in a place with a glass bubble over it 

and no one else knows what you're doing.  Other people do 

know what you're doing and it's having an impact.  It's having 

an impact, and I'll tell you something.  It wasn't a particularly 

inspiring time to have people talk about Saskatchewan as 

though our government was run by a bunch of fools. 

 

If you indeed care so much, if the government cares so much, 

Mr. Deputy Chair, how come people like Les Dubé are telling 

the Alberta Report that he will move 30 jobs to Alberta 

because of this proposed legislation?  How come everywhere 

that I went in Ottawa, people are asking me, what is the matter 

with the Government of Saskatchewan?  Are they trying to in 

fact ruin the province?  How come other premiers are asking if 

our ministers don't really know what economic growth is all 

about and what the component parts require?  How come I 

open The Financial Post and see these kinds of headings?  

And it's not just once; it's twice in two weeks. 

 

Now I want to read you some of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

then you can tell me if this is going to be a good advertisement 

for our province.  In the same newspaper which is read by 

every investor and corporate player across North America who 

would have an interest, an actual interest in the Canadian 

economy, in a paper where I read about Canada's competition 

in global markets, this is what I read about Saskatchewan. 

 

Ten major Saskatchewan business and taxpayer organizations 

are demanding an emergency meeting with Roy Romanow in a 

last ditch effort to try to head off, and I quote, "proposed 

radical new labour laws."  It continues, and I quote:   

 

 The move came one day after the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce passed a resolution at its annual meeting calling 

for the resignation of the Labour minister, Ned Shillington. 

 

You, government, are considering radical new labour 

legislation that does not exist anywhere in North America, the 

letter says. 

 

Now what message does this send out?  It sends a message that 

this particular government does not care about how policy 

affects people.  It sends a message that they do not consult; that 

if they did consult, they consulted after the fact; that if in fact 

they did consult, they did not listen; that they in fact chose to 

ignore the actual job creators in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And by extrapolation that they actually do not care if 

Saskatchewan grows or whether people do have greater 

opportunities for more jobs, whether they be full time, part 

time, or any time. 

 

And everybody in this particular government talked about 

consultation, but when push came to shove the opinions of the 

people out there . . . the opinions of the inner circle were in.  

No matter how ill-advised the decisions, the government set 

about to implement an agenda that would do two specific 

things:  put money in the government coffers prior to the next 

election; and to cater to special interest groups within their own 

political party. 

 

And I will say this much -- there have been some masterful 

political parries and thrusts by this government.  Unfortunately 

their legacy of responsible, well-planned decisions will be very 

difficult to identify. 

 

The health reform concept had to be tried.  And the health care 

system was headed for disaster as it has been in province after 

province across Canada.  But it did not have to be changed in 

spite of the input of people who understand it.  It could have 

been changed with their direct cooperation and their approval at 

the community level. 

 

Consultation does not have to be a retroactive process.  But it 

took the threat of a lawsuit to get the Minister of Health in the 

province of Saskatchewan back to the discussion table with 

rural Saskatchewan, the threat of a law suit.  It took court 

action by a bank to get the Minister of Agriculture to dust off 

The Farm Securities Act. And I wonder what it's going to take 

for the Minister of Labour to give pause to what is transpiring 

with this labour legislation before this House. 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

The Minister of Energy spent a great deal of time consulting 

about co-generation and then pulled the plug.  The Minister of 

Gaming made up his mind to have casinos and VLTs (video 

lottery terminals) regardless of the consequences and obviously 

could care less about hearing any facts that might contradict his 

plan. 

 

To quote a member of the Saskatoon Economic Development 

Authority, and I quote directly:  "It is time this government 

learned that being together with people in the same room does 

not constitute consultation."  There is no doubt, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the Minister of Labour convened and attended 

numbers of meetings around the province.  No one questions 

that. The problem, according to many who attended those 

meetings, is that the minister made speeches but rarely listened. 

 

And now in his infinite wisdom, the Minister of Labour has 

been . . . which has been collected of course over an almost 

equally infinite period in politics I want to add, has decided that 

in the midst of an economic crisis in Saskatchewan it makes 

sense to introduce labour legislation that could completely 

destroy whatever chance we have of being competitive. 

 

(1915) 

 

Now I did not say "would destroy" because I don't have any 

conclusive evidence that it will.  But I ask the members 

opposite, is it not incumbent upon the government to direct the 

taxpayers' resources into evaluating the impact of government 

policies and legislation before implementation?  After all, the 

government has practically all of the resources.  It's the 

government that has no real money except the taxpayers' 

money.  Why is it that we would not use some of those 

resources to ensure that what is being done by government is 

going to really work in the best interest of what it is you're 

trying to accomplish? 

 

Is it reasonable for the minister to suggest that it is up to the 

opposition parties or the people affected by legislation such as 

The Trade Union Act to do the government's homework?  I 

think not.  I think not.  It is the government that has the 

resources that they have collected from the taxpayers.  It is the 

government that comes up with the public policy, the 

amendments to legislation, that in fact are going to result in 

substantive changes for the people of Saskatchewan.  And it 

should be the government that ensures that they do the 

homework for the people of Saskatchewan to know that it is 

going to work. 

 

My most serious criticism is really about the process that the 

government employs when it is taking on a task.  I believe that 

government should propose a course of action to the public, 

that the government should provide credible analytical 

evidence of why the policy is necessary, and then sit down with 

affected parties to determine what impact policy will have on 

them.  What I cannot understand is the reluctance of the 

government to take this legislation to the public domain, to let 

employers and labour have 

time to assess its impact and communicate to us or to the 

government. 

 

Why wouldn't we want the Department of Finance and the 

employers to agree to the terms of reference for a costing 

study?  Why wouldn't we want that?  Why wouldn't we want to 

know exactly what this would cost and if it produces a net 

positive result for the Saskatchewan economy?  That's 

something that the Department of Finance should be concerned 

about.  It's something we all want.  So what is so fearful?  

Where the consternation in simply gathering information and 

being able to provide evidence?  And if we find that the 

legislation will not have a negative effect, why wouldn't any of 

the members of this Assembly want to vote for it?  If it won't 

have any negative effect, everyone here would support it.  I 

contend until those kinds of questions are being answered, are 

able to be answered, it is irresponsible to bring this kind of 

thing to a vote.  

 

Now we believe that it is incumbent upon the government to 

have a non-biased evaluation, non-biased evaluation based on 

consultation and yes, based on research.  Not research that even 

people from Peat Marwick have openly stated in public 

meetings is not valid, and not, in fact, even reliable because 

they didn't know what it was they were supposed to be 

evaluating for and all of the variables were not taken into 

account. 

 

I sat in the very meeting that business people came together, on 

a Friday night in Saskatoon and listened to one of the people 

from Peat Marwick, who had done your study, indicate that in 

fact it could not be considered reliable and valid as research.  

What it is we need to do is to ensure that we know what the 

effects will be. 

 

It would seem to me that if the proposals being put forward by 

the Department of Labour are so good, the business columnists 

and the financial analysts from The Globe And Mail and The 

Financial Post should be writing about them.  But it's an odd 

thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nobody has a good word to print 

about the initiative.  Even the unions have been strangely silent 

on the issue.  Either they are overwhelmingly in favour or they 

have forgotten what they have wanted and don't appear . . . 

don't want to appear too closely connected -- or they have 

gotten want they have wanted and they don't want to appear too 

closely connected with the government's agenda. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, this is not an issue which sets up as simply 

as the government would like.  It's not simply a matter of 

business versus labour, as I indicated a week ago.  It's not a 

question of employers versus workers.  The fact is, as I 

mentioned then, that the two are inextricably linked and what is 

bad for one is ultimately bad for the other.  That, in a nutshell, 

is where I see the difficulties with this proposed amendment to 

The Trade Union Act.  What is perceived benefit for workers 

will be detrimental to employers and ultimately to the 

economy.  What is detrimental to the viability of companies 

and to the flexibility of the public sector employers will result 

in 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

lost jobs and will result in fewer opportunities for employment. 

 

The question that must be asked, therefore, is whether this 

benefits a select group of workers who already enjoy wage and 

benefit advantages over other workers in our society, whether it 

enhances the contracts of those workers at the expense of job 

opportunities for those with no work at all.  It is a fundamental 

difference of philosophy, I suppose, in how one views the role 

of the worker and the role of the employer. 

 

We happen to believe that employees and employers are 

partners in productivity.  We believe in the notion that 

government should be involved in ensuring reasonable 

standards for working people, that wages and working 

conditions in Saskatchewan should be equitable with those in 

other provinces.  The issue of working conditions and wages is 

not the only concern of the working people we consult with.  

The number one issue for working people in Saskatchewan, 

and particularly for the unemployed who are looking for work, 

is that they have jobs, period.  When I raise concerns in this 

legislature, Mr. Deputy Chair, as I did with the labour standards 

legislation, I'm not doing it because I disagree with the ideal 

world that the proposed changes attempt to produce for 

employees.  I understand why the unions and the government 

want to make the changes, and I understand that if there were 

no downsides to the legislation, that people's lives would quite 

likely be better for them.  The problem is that we have a 

responsibility to be objective.  We have to be objective in our 

analysis of what the downsides of legislation might be. 

 

There is grave danger in enacting amendments to public policy 

without having done the exact analysis that would help us to 

know if the policy will produce the results we expect it to 

produce.  And that is an important concept to understand, and 

we now have the tools available to do those kinds of analyses.  

It's the difference between wishful thinking and strategic 

planning. 

 

Now I too truly wish that things could be better, better for a 

great many people in society.  But wishing is not going to make 

it so.  If the changes proposed by government will produce a 

net economic gain for the province and ultimately for society in 

general, then I and everyone that I know in this House would 

support them.  But I have not been provided with the evidence.  

None of us have been provided with the evidence that this will 

happen.  In fact all of the evidence that I have been provided 

tells me that there is more danger than potential, positive 

potential, that is going to arise from these changes. 

 

So what would the government like to see?  Would they like to 

win the battle but lose the war?  Are the members opposite 

content to paint everyone who questions this legislation as 

someone who doesn't care, as someone who doesn't care about 

workers and women in our society?  Do they really believe that 

people could be that shallow?  Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 

simply cannot understand the mentality, that 

kind of mentality.  I don't assume, come from a basis, that I 

think that people on the government side simply don't care 

about people, or they don't care about business, or they don't 

want economic growth.  I don't make that assumption. 

 

I cannot understand the mentality of people in a government 

that can become so attached to a policy and to changes -- as 

we're seeing in The Trade Union Act and The Labour 

Standards Act -- but they are unable to provide the factual 

research that supports their position.  Do members of caucus 

not wonder why the government will not take the time to cost 

these changes?  Do the members opposite find it unreasonable 

that employers need more then a few weeks to assess the cost 

of changing an Act that has been unchanged for 10 years?  

Simply put, too many people don't understand what the rush is. 

 

And I can only conclude that the government sees the employer 

as the enemy and I don't understand why.  Why is there 

someone having to be perceived as the enemy, someone to be 

confronted, to do battle with, or to overcome?  I don't 

understand that.  Based on that conclusion, the only motivation 

to amend The Trade Union Act seems to be in response to the 

trade union movement, who also seem to view management, or 

employers, as someone over whom they are trying to gain 

control. 

 

Now I shudder to think that the Labour minister, the person 

responsible for consultation with all parties affected by this 

labour legislation, would make the comment that changes to 

labour legislation are needed to rid the workplace of conflicts 

created mainly by the greedy ruthlessness of business.  That's 

the direct quote. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the top 10 companies employ 15,000 people.  

When I refer to top 10 companies, we're talking about 

economic contribution to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The majority of the work force of 440,000 are employed by 

government agencies, public sector employers and small 

businesses.  In the past few years, the level of labour unrest has 

been minimal.  Very, very few work stoppages have occurred.  

And the evidence is overwhelming that business and labour 

have been working in harmony, in harmony, to keep the doors 

open so that employers can remain competitive and employees 

can stay employed. 

 

That's not to say that there aren't some circumstances where 

things can't be improved.  We could name a few where there 

have been abuses.  But overall, there has been no evidence of 

some labour unrest in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But let's discuss the motivations of the job creators in 

Saskatchewan -- the people the government likes to refer to as 

their partners in economic renewal.  Why did they invest in 

businesses?  It's a simple question.  The Minister of Economic 

Development should know it.  The minister in charge of 

Finance for the province should be concerned about it.  I think 

the members 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

opposite should give some thought to this as well. 

 

Do you believe, do you believe that investors and private 

entrepreneurs take their own money, borrow money from 

banks, take the risk of losing their investment because they can 

create jobs?  Does the government think that business comes to 

Saskatchewan and stays in Saskatchewan because the owners 

feel obligated to provide a tax base?  Does the government 

believe that people open businesses because the Department of 

Economic Development needs to meet its projections?  

Obviously the answer to each and every one of these questions 

is none of the above. 

 

The reason that people choose to travel the road of free 

enterprise is because they are risk takers.  That is not 

characteristic of everyone in society.  Not everyone has the 

ability to take a concept and develop it into delivery of a 

product or delivery of a service that people are going to be 

willing to pay for.  And not everyone who tries is able to 

succeed.  That possibility of failure actually deters many, many 

people from even trying.  And that is where the distinction is 

made between those who create jobs and those who simply sell 

their abilities and services to their employers. 

 

The fact is that an employer can train new people to work in a 

business or an industry because there is a seemingly 

inexhaustible supply of workers, and if workers become scarce, 

the employer can raise his wage rate to attract the best workers.  

That is part of what is called the element of competition and 

that is the element of competition that exists in a free market, 

Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

It is the response to supply and demand that fuels the market 

and drives the decision-making process of people who are 

investors, for people who choose to have the entrepreneurial 

spirit put into action.  And the people who drive the 

free-market economy, no matter what language they speak or 

what currency they trade in, all of them understand the very 

basic forces of a free enterprise system. 

 

(1930) 

 

What complicates things, Mr. Deputy Chair, are the other 

variables.  There are many things that have nothing to do with 

supply and demand, cost and productivity.  All of these things 

come into the equation and that is what government tends to do 

to business.  Government tends to change the equation and that 

is what this discussion on The Trade Union Act is all about, 

Mr. Deputy Chair, and that is that government has introduced 

something that is actually going to interfere. 

 

There are varying degrees of interference depending upon the 

political regime that's in power.  And some that interfere, of 

course, some of that interference I think is very necessary.  And 

it results in the legislation of certain basic conditions of 

employment which will be acceptable under that government's 

jurisdiction. 

 

Those basic conditions range from hours of work to 

conditions of work to rates of pay, and Canada as a nation 

offers some of the best working conditions and the most 

considerate legislation towards workers that one can find 

anywhere in the world. 

 

But there are always those who would like it to be better.  The 

current Trade Union Act represents the primary piece of labour 

legislation in effect in Saskatchewan.  The current Act has 

essentially been the same for over two decades.  And except for 

certain marginally material amendments made by the 

Conservative administration in 1983 under Bill 104, it has 

reflected and represented and accepted acceptable balance to 

the rights, duties, and obligations of employees, employers, and 

trade unions in the Saskatchewan workplace. 

 

Essential to the implementation and application of The Trade 

Union Act are the powers and the duties of the Labour 

Relations Board, the tribunal which is empowered and 

mandated by the Act to enforce its provisions. 

 

Additionally the Department of Labour, primarily through its 

conciliation services branch and private resources -- primarily 

arbitrators and outside mediators -- provide the support 

functions to the fabric of labour relations under this particular 

Act. 

 

It's commonly accepted that the fundamental purpose of The 

Trade Union Act is to establish statutory provisions under 

which employees are free to choose whether or not they are or 

wish to be represented by a trade union.  Now secondly, it 

proposes a statutory framework within which free collective 

bargaining is provided for; in fact it's encouraged and it's 

enforced. 

 

The social objectives of the legislation are to ensure that 

fundamental rights of employees to choose to be represented or 

not represented by a union are given expression.  And 

additionally that terms and conditions of employment can be 

established through a system of free collective bargaining. 

 

Now for the most part, Mr. Deputy Chair, the existing Act has 

been accepted by practitioners in labour relations to represent a 

reasonably balanced approach, thereby contributing to 

industrial stability and a framework within which businesses 

can be both competitive and productive. 

 

The proposed amendments to the Act substantially alter the 

basic framework that has served labour relations in the 

province of Saskatchewan well.  I mean, I think that there has 

been agreement that we have not seen a great deal of labour 

unrest, Mr. Minister.  And I think that there is agreement that 

The Trade Union Act has actually stood the test of time. 

 

Its provisions represent . . . the provisions, of course, as far as 

the proposed amendments are concerned, represent an 

abandonment of the level playing-field so essential for labour 

relations statutes, and it threatens the rights of individual 

employees, the essential opportunity that must be given to 

business and labour to address the competitiveness through a 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

system of free collective bargaining.  And finally, it smothers 

the system of individual employee freedoms and free collective 

bargaining with a bureaucratic blanket.  The result of this can 

be none other than a rejection of individual employee freedom 

of choice.  And I look forward to the minister's comments on 

this.  It's imperative that there be employee freedom of choice, 

so long the cornerstone of labour legislation. 

 

Rendering business incapable of making those adjustments 

required to maintain a competitive position and discouraging 

business reorganization -- discouraging expansion and location 

in Saskatchewan -- with what result?  Well the result that job 

opportunities are going to be lost and Saskatchewan economic 

growth is going to be further discouraged. 

 

Now I've concluded, of course, Mr. Deputy Chair, that a lot of 

the people on the government side of the House would prefer 

that we not even have any kind of discussion about this.  In fact 

the preference seems to be that there be no questions really 

posed because we've had so few answers that have ever come 

in return.  It's not dissimilar to what has been experienced in 

this House as far as gambling is concerned -- a lack of interest, 

a lack of interest in coming up with substantive evidence as to 

why this has to be the case now, what the costs really are 

involved, what benefits these are really going to provide as far 

as economic growth in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

ultimately, the jobs.  The result of this can be none other than a 

rejection of individual employee freedom of choice.  And I 

really wonder why it is that the government would want to 

bring this forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I'm not satisfied that this Bill has been 

created from any other semblance of consensus between 

business and labour.  It does not seem to be the case; in fact it's 

very confusing that one would not want to insure that that kind 

of alliance was going to be the basis for changes in this kind of 

legislation. 

 

Therefore if the legislation itself emerges from a conflict zone, 

how can we expect this legislation to be the agent of 

compromise when actual disputes arise? 

 

Now I will be putting that question to the minister, so he may 

want to attend to it as I repeat it the second time.  How can we 

expect this legislation to be the agent of compromise when 

actual disputes arise? 

 

But then unfortunately I am becoming quite convinced that the 

government has no true, honest commitment to stable relations 

between employers and employees or there would have been a 

very, very different approach used with these proposed 

amendments to both pieces of labour legislation this year. 

 

After all, the government and the union leadership both seek to 

maintain their perceived value to the rank-and-file union 

member by creating a climate of unrest and coming to the 

defence of the worker.  Mr. Deputy Chair, this dog may bite 

back.  The changes to 

The Trade Union Act will create a Labour Relations Board 

which will have very, very sharp teeth indeed. 

 

But the very groups who support increasing the powers of the 

board today may be subjected to the administration of those 

powers by the board some years down the road, which does not 

have a labour bias and that could spell the same disaster for 

trade unionists as business people and public sector employers 

see in the fine print of this agreement, and I hope to speak to 

these in greater detail a little later as far as the questions posed 

to the minister. 

 

Not only might the changes to The Trade Union Act create a 

labour relations board which will one day seek to destroy its 

former master, but the changes will have immediate impact as 

well.  The implications of some changes will discourage or help 

to discourage expansion and the start-up of new businesses in 

our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I realize that the government has tried to dismiss this 

concern as the Chicken Little mentality, but I doubt the national 

economists would buy into such a plot. 

 

One only has to read The Globe and Mail or The Financial 

Post to get an indication of the shock waves this is sending 

throughout the Canadian investment community. 

 

And I was speaking to a constituent just the other day who told 

me a story about an individual who was in Toronto on the day 

of the announcement about The Trade Union Act that the 

government was bringing forward.  The individual was in 

Toronto promoting Saskatoon, on behalf of downtown 

businesses, as an ideal place to invest.  The day before the 

legislation was announced, this fellow met with a very positive 

reception and people were feeling Saskatchewan just might be 

a very worthy place to look at. 

 

Then came the trade union amendments.  The story hit the 

business pages and the networks and the next day people were 

laughing at our representative from the Partnership in 

Saskatoon, laughing at our friend when he made his sales calls, 

saying things like a person would have to be nuts to walk into a 

province with that kind of labour legislation.  They wanted to 

know how the government got business to agree to such an 

approach.  That's what they wanted to know.  How in the world 

did they get business to agree to such an approach? 

 

His answer was, we didn't agree, we weren't even consulted.  

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Chair?  The business 

community in Toronto met that response with clucking tongues 

and looks of disbelief that the government of a province 

looking to create growth would do anything so detrimental to 

its economic recovery after watching what the Bob Rae 

government had done in Ontario.  They wondered how in the 

world would another government try such a thing in Canada. 

 

How many ways does one have to try to receive a 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

message, Mr. Deputy Chair?  Should the business community 

hire a sky-writer to write "pull the Bills"?  Should they have 

them fly across the front of the building so that people who 

govern in this province can actually see it and perhaps receive 

that message? 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, the minister may have made dozens of very 

snide comments about the opposition's concerns about this Bill.  

People actually phone in.  They phone in -- and I don't even 

know what political party they belong to; that's irrelevant -- 

they phone in to say that the government should be ashamed of 

itself because they do not inspire the people of this province to 

have real confidence in their judgement. 

 

They do not have confidence.  And would you like to know 

why?  Because all the questions that have been raised regarding 

this and regarding gaming and regarding no-fault and regarding 

the things that are of true concern and the rights of 

Saskatchewan people to understand about, the responses that 

are given are so uncivil.  That's what they respond to.  And they 

wonder why it is that the government members, the ministers, 

lack so much confidence that they'll not simply respond.  Why 

won't they just simply answer the questions?  And they actually 

raise on the telephone, why is it that there's such uncivilized 

responses from the members opposite to questions raised by 

opposition?  There's been an absolute unwillingness to respond 

to the issue with any objectivity, whether it be in question 

period or anywhere else.  And continuing, actually, to insist 

that questions belong in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the minister knows full well that by 

avoiding issues in question period we could not get answers 

that would perhaps give us a level of comfort to move to 

Committee of the Whole.  And second, I think it's important to 

know that this legislation has wasted more valuable hours in 

the part of job creators in this province than any single 

initiative that has happened in probably the last two decades. 

 

I have a non-stop parade of people who come through my 

office, including union representatives and former New 

Democrats, who simply cannot believe the way in which this 

has been dealt with.  They're actually confused because of the 

way in which the consultation process went and the lack of real 

consideration for people's input. 

 

And I have to pose this question, and I do hope that this will be 

taken note of as well:  why is the government so afraid of the 

people?  What is it about this that makes one so afraid to take 

the time to do it right?  To put it before the people of 

Saskatchewan, put it before all of the affected parties and let 

them have a real sense of what it's going to mean. 

 

Have the government members failed to assess the impact of 

this Bill?  And they don't want to be embarrassed by the truth?  

I mean have you failed to be able to determine what this will 

really mean and you just don't have the answer?  Or do you 

have the answer 

and you don't want anyone to know?  Is it because the Premier 

and his cabinet tell people whatever they want to hear about 

what will and will not be in the Bill and regulations, so that one 

can hurry up and pass it before everybody finds out? 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, in the interests of 

democracy I wondered, and I continue to wonder, why you 

wouldn't take a step back.  Instead of having people meet until 

four in the morning with your deputy minister and others trying 

to sort out what is in this Bill, why wouldn't this be given the 

appropriate time to just establish what is really going on here?  

Give it some time for general circulation and revisit this in the 

next session. 

 

(1945) 

 

I don't understand why it is you either don't want to answer the 

questions on it specifically.  I don't understand why it is you 

wouldn't want the people to fully understand what's here and 

being proposed that may change their lives in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I understand the concerns that have been raised 

by the employers of Saskatchewan.  This is a time of 

tremendous change for local municipalities.  It's a tremendous 

change for school boards, for universities and health boards and 

Crown corporations and private sector businesses.  It's a very 

tumultuous time. 

 

None of these employers feel that they've had adequate time to 

determine whether they can live with this amended legislation.  

And who are we talking about here?  We're talking about the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association.  We're talking 

about all of these different groups being SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations, and wide ranges of people 

-- public and private sector employers who have raised 

questions about The Labour Standards Act and The Trade 

Union Act. 

 

All they want is an opportunity to understand how this will 

have an impact on their decision making, so they can make 

good decisions for the people of Saskatchewan.  They should 

not be asked to take an entrenched position when all they're 

asking for is time, time to compute the impact. 

 

Now I hope that the arguments, the points of view that I've 

made, are going to have some impact.  And I do hope that 

members of the government who are able to influence the 

government agenda will indeed bring these cases forward as 

well.  I would be astonished if not one member received the 

mail that they were sent, that I got copies of, when it said that it 

had been sent to them as well because they were the members 

of the Legislative Assembly for the people who indeed sent 

their concerns along. 

 

It makes no sense to be evaluating clauses of a Bill which 

change on a daily basis, and yet that's what we were faced with 

-- trying to come up with 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

understanding a Bill that changed over and over and over again.  

Making arguments about the impact of legislation which cannot 

possibly be at all understood or measured in the kind of 

ridiculous environment of back-room debate. 

 

And I do appeal to the government, Mr. Deputy Chair.  I appeal 

to the Minister of Labour as an elected representative, to have 

allowed people the time to adjourn debate on The Trade Union 

Act and allow for all the concerned parties to have a few 

months to really examine what this is going to mean, and do so 

where they're not feeling under such threat. 

 

I don't believe that we should proceed further.  We should not 

be going clause by clause until we have heard from the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, until we've 

heard from the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association, until we've heard from the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association, the universities, the members of the 

business coalition, and the top 10 employers of the province of 

Saskatchewan until they have had time to do their own impact 

analyses. 

 

I do not believe that it is appropriate to pass final judgement on 

the final changes until the Department of Finance has produced 

concrete analyses of what this will mean to each government 

department.  I don't think we should do this until the 

Department of Finance determines how it would affect our 

capacity to generate tax revenues, both corporate and 

individual.  And in fact, when I posed this to the Department of 

Finance, the Minister of Finance, and I said have you done this, 

have you in fact, as a Department of Finance, determined what 

the impact will be on the finances of the province of 

Saskatchewan, there was a one-word answer -- no. 

 

Until we, sitting in the third party, and I'm sure the opposition, 

the official opposition, has concrete evidence to support the 

assurances from the Department of Economic Development 

that this will not have a negative impact on the competitiveness 

of Saskatchewan business, we feel that it would be 

irresponsible -- not simply premature -- but absolutely 

irresponsible of the government to proceed clause by clause 

without that evidence. 

 

It is therefore my wish that the minister would comment on 

much of what I have said tonight.  We believe that it is 

imprudent to proceed clause by clause in this kind of 

assessment that would follow, until we've had evidence that 

indeed this legislation has been properly costed -- costed 

beyond any kind of study that was done initially -- debated, and 

agreed to, by employers and workers in the province of 

Saskatchewan in the spirit of consensus that your government 

promised would be the basis for change to these Acts initially. 

 

And when we feel that we have been reasonably reassured that 

Bill 32 and 54 will not cost more jobs than they will protect, 

that the changes will not have a negative overall impact on the 

province, then we would be very willing, in fact anxious, to 

proceed to 

the final stages of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have some questions here from individuals 

throughout Saskatchewan and I'm sure that you would like to 

make some comment on my comments and I appreciate the 

generosity of spirit of being so patient, since I was unable to 

give a second reading speech, that you would be so patient.  

What I will do first is welcome your comments and then I have 

some specific questions from individuals in Saskatchewan 

about your Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It'll be very brief.  I want to say to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone that if you participated 

more in the session, and were less ready to leave the entire 

work of the session to the Conservatives, you would have heard 

all of the comments made many times. 

 

If the member from Saskatoon Greystone thinks there is 

anything to distinguish your comments from those made by the 

Conservatives, you are sadly mistaken.  All of us on this side of 

the legislature have heard those comments made many times. 

 

And I know what the hon. member is going to do.  She will be 

here for a brief period of time, and then will flit off somewhere 

else, and leave the Conservative members to do all the work of 

the session, which is what you've done to date. 

 

I'm not going to dignify your comments with a lengthy 

response.  If you had been here all during the debate on this 

Bill, you would have heard those comments raised many times 

before and I think every bit as eloquently, if not more 

eloquently, by the Conservative members. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, that's 

precisely why people call saying that you lack common civility, 

is because of responses like that. 

 

I am not here to respond to the fact that we have had a missing 

Premier in Saskatchewan for a considerable length of time.  

That's not what I'm here to  comment on.  And I most surely 

can tell you that there has never been at one moment in 

anything raised by the official opposition that they have 

received an adequate answer from you, sir.  Ever. 

 

So regardless of what your views are, and what it is you're 

trying to propose and create for the public at large on television 

this evening, there are businesses throughout this province that 

are very concerned about what you're doing, including public 

sector employers -- people who are genuinely concerned.  Their 

concerns have been raised not only by the official opposition 

but have been raised by myself and members of our caucus.  

And you, sir, have never answered once in a straight manner. 

 

And that is why we are hoping just once you can put aside what 

you consider to be very clever comments, which are only 

perceived by the average person out there as really very, very 

unfortunate that a member of 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

a government, and in particularly a minister of a government, 

would choose to behave in such a manner. 

 

Now, this is a question directly from a gentleman in 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you.  Now, O.D. 

McComb, the president of the West Winds Motor Hotel in 

Biggar, Saskatchewan, he talks in his letters about the costs of 

the legislation and why the government believes business can 

support the changes to both labour Acts.  What I will do is to 

read his comments: 

 

 On numerous occasions you've pointed out to the voters of 

Saskatchewan that to create jobs and to have the economy 

grow in this province, it would be done by small business.  

That is all well and good providing small business is still 

around to carry out these ideals.  With the increasing cost of 

doing business in the province, it is becoming more evident 

that small businesses have reached the max.  The one thing 

we do not need at this time is the government to get more 

involved in the way we staff and run our businesses. 

 

 We do not need non-union employees forced into unions 

even though majorities may reject this move.  I understand 

that the Labour Relations Board could impose first union 

agreements on employers.  As well, the contracting of service 

by many companies, including Crown corporations, may be 

prevented, again affecting small businesses. 

 

 I do not agree that legislation in this province should be 

written and implemented without a full and open debate by 

all concerned.  I do not believe that government, union, and 

bureaucrats have the right to dictate how our workplace will 

be managed. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is his question.  Why do you feel this 

business person should not have time to debate and consult 

until he is satisfied? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There has never been a piece of 

legislation in this province which has been as broadly consulted 

as this one.  It has not produced a consensus.  I think that's the 

nature of the activity we're about.  But there has been ample 

opportunity to consult.  There was the Ish commission, which 

began over two years ago.  There was the Priel commission.  

There was tours by the Department of Labour; there were tours 

by myself.  None of these separate consultations by different 

personalities produced a consensus.  The time has come, as I've 

said on many occasions in the past, the time has come to get on 

with it and make a decision and put it in motion. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well Mr. McComb continues, Mr. 

Minister.  He says he doesn't believe that the government of the 

day understands or can appreciate the impact that these types of 

things have on the survival of small businesses.  And here's an 

example that's provided: 

The increase in minimum wage last year cost my 

organization $10,000.  This was not because I increased all 

employees up to the minimum wage, but because this 

increase had a snowball effect on all employees' salaries.  For 

instance, if an employee had been with me for one year and 

was making 50 cents per hour above the old minimum wage, 

we could not expect that employee to not hold the same 

margin of difference over the new minimum wage.  

Therefore increases throughout our business was inevitable. 

 

 Our business employs a lot of part-time student workers 

during the summer.  This gives these students work so that 

they can return to their schooling in the fall.  To force our 

business to pay benefits and schedule employees weeks in 

advance under labour standards will only discourage us from 

hiring these people.  So who is really hurting who?  I've 

suggested the government table this legislation until small 

business can get back on its feet from all the uncontrollable 

expenses that government has imposed on us over the last 

few years. 

 

He would like a response in asking . . . He's wondering what 

harm would it do if you were to take this legislation and place it 

aside as requested by him, for a period of time until the next 

session or until real economic recovery has taken place in the 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As I said, we believe it would 

accomplish nothing.  There has been ample consultation and I 

think we've achieved about as much consensus as we're going 

to until after the Bill is passed. 

 

Once this legislation is in effect I believe it will disappear as an 

issue, as WCB (Workers' Compensation Board) and 

occupational health and safety did.   I remember the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone stood in her place last year and 

rained the worst tears about how the occupational health and 

safety and WCB was going to cause so much damage.  Not a 

soul mentions it now; it's working fine.  So will this legislation, 

given an opportunity.  The time has come to put the legislation 

into effect. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I don't know how much that will satisfy 

Mr. McComb.  I guess he was just wanting to know what harm 

would be created by postponing, and I think that what people 

have asked, and consistently asked . . . And you make mention 

of why I don't sit here all the time. In part it's because 

sometimes there are 15 and 20 people who come to my office 

independently to discuss the legislation that's being brought 

forward by this government, whether that be the impact 

brought forward by the minister of Gaming, the impact of the 

legislation . . . that's not just of course legislation; we're talking 

about the actual gambling in Saskatchewan being increased.  I 

mean there's a wide range of concerns of people, and I'm really 

wondering what harm there would be.  I mean do you see that 

things would halt in 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

its tracks, Mr. Minister?  What would really change for the 

province of Saskatchewan if this were set aside, as Mr. 

McComb was asking?  He has a very simple question, and I'm 

wondering if you would be able to answer it. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The time has come to bring the 

discussion to a conclusion.  It's been going on for two years and 

the time has come to bring it to a conclusion. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I find that rather curious, Mr. 

Minister.  You say that the discussion has gone on for two 

years?  With whom?  The business community hasn't had this 

discussed with them for two years.  In fact they just had 

amendments that were handed over to them a very brief time 

ago.  They didn't even know what was in this legislation. So 

with whom have you had discussions for two years that you're 

saying that the time has now come? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Various groups throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I see we're proceeding in the same kind of 

way here. 

 

Mr. Minister, a manager of Westcan International in Regina 

raised the following concern, and I quote: 

 

 The new law will impede our union contract negotiations. 

 

What would you say to this individual to give them reassurance 

that their contract negotiations will in fact proceed in an orderly 

manner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Nothing in this legislation will affect 

that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'll make sure 

that I fax that line to him. 

 

The manager of Westcan International goes on to say, and I 

quote: 

 

 With Alberta creating an environment for entrepreneurs, 

Saskatchewan will become less competitive.  We will not 

attract new business. 

 

It appears that, regardless of what your point of view is, the 

business people in the province do not feel that this is going to 

result in placing Saskatchewan in a more competitive position.  

How would you respond to that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no correlation 

between low-wage economies and prosperity.  The member 

opposite would have us repeal all labour laws and that, she 

believes, would introduce prosperity.  In fact there's no such 

correlation.  If an absence of protection for workers would 

bring about prosperity and a high-wage economy, the U.S. 

(United States) would be a country 

mile out in front.  In fact it isn't.  Ever since the war -- and one 

must remember that we escaped all the damage that the East 

and Europe suffered during the war -- ever since the war North 

America has been in retreat in terms of its position in the world. 

 

Who has been succeeding?  Central Europe and western Asia, 

which have very progressive laws.  If you want to correlate 

practical experience with labour laws, you will conclude that 

progressive labour laws are an essential element in prosperity. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know where it 

is you've read in anything that I've ever stated that I would get 

rid of all labour legislation.  I have never stated that, nor would 

I agree to it.  I think I've made it quite clear this evening that I 

stated where the place is for labour legislation and I think that 

we should be delighted in the province of Saskatchewan that 

we've had as few episodes of labour unrest that we have.  And I 

think a great deal of credit goes to the kind of legislation that 

we have had in the province of Saskatchewan.  I have not 

opposed it.  I never have indicated that I've had opposition to 

all labour legislation, nor would I. 

 

It's a very interesting situation where you say that there is no, in 

fact, evidence of countries that do well or what the criteria are 

for countries that do well and economies that do well.  In fact 

taxation is one of the key issues as far as countries, whether or 

not they do well, whether economies are performing well.  And 

the more kinds of regulation that there is, as far as labour 

legislation is concerned, that indeed is considered to be 

problematic for investment in a lot of different economies 

around the world. 

 

So we must be reading very different kinds of books.  Perhaps 

what I'll do is send some to your office . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And I'll send some back with you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, and I would appreciate that.  I think it 

would be very, very interesting if we could in fact attempt to 

compare some notes.  All I'm concerned about, Mr. Minister, is 

that there actually be some evidence -- I mean real evidence -- 

in the province of Saskatchewan that what you're doing is not 

going to be harmful to the economy and that it's going to result 

in exactly what you want to have happen.  I think you have 

laudable goals.  And I hope they're laudable.  I hope that this 

isn't simply a political agenda that's being met here.  And I do 

hope that things turn out well. 

 

But I would like to have some clear evidence as to whether or 

not there's anything available in research that shows that what 

you're doing will not have a negative impact on the economy of 

Saskatchewan.  And to date you haven't provided us with any 

of that. 

 

The manager from Westcan International concludes, and I 

quote: 

 

 I had plans of diversifying into other areas of the 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

 trucking industry but now I have no confidence in our future 

at all. 

 

And that was a direct quote, Mr. Minister.  Was it your 

intention to halt diversification in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  I mean what would you say to a business 

manager who has no confidence in the future that you've 

created. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I understood correctly, that was a 

trucking firm.  The trucking industry is going flat out in 

Saskatchewan.  Why would I expect diversification?  Because 

they've got all the business they can handle right now.  Who 

does that come from?  The head of the trucking association 

whom I met shortly . . . whom I met a brief time ago. 

 

The member wonders why I doubt that she would support 

progressive labour law.  The member from Saskatoon 

Greystone spoke for almost three-quarters of an hour.  Not 

once, not once did you ever voice the concern of workers about 

their workplace. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone talked continually 

about what business wants out of this.  And that is a legitimate 

concern.  But it would have been legitimate for the member of 

Greystone as well to give some passing thought as to what 

workers want out of the workplace.  That is why I assume that 

if you are elitist in your approach to this legislation you are 

going to be equally elitist when it comes to other labour 

legislation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, I think your comments are very, very telling if we're 

talking about elitism.  You, sir, are an individual who has 

indicated that you have consulted around the province and 

those people with whom you said you consulted have indicated 

one thing unequivocally; that you did not listen. 

 

In my speech this evening to you, in my address to you, indeed 

I did comment on workers.  I commented on workers on 

several occasions which I'm sure that you'd just be overly 

excited to review these tomorrow in Hansard. 

 

Similarly I in fact indicated that there are some businesses, but 

few, few that should be addressed -- but don't have to be 

addressed by changing all labour legislation in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- who in fact require some action to be taken for 

the way in which they treat workers.  I'm not going to stand 

here and mention one in particular that is actually putting small 

businesses out of business, not simply abusing their part-time 

employees in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I indeed am concerned and I'm concerned because these 

things affect my own family.  All right?  So I find it absolutely 

astonishing that you could accuse me of elitism when there are 

people in this province in the business communities and public 

sector employers who feel that you're being very elitist with the 

way in which you've approached this legislation and not in 

bringing everybody to the table. 

You can talk about the Priel commission and the Ish group, and 

all these different groups that have come together to talk about 

this.  The point is we're now in the here and now, and people 

have been feeling excluded from the process.  Now that, sir, is 

indicative of elitism; when people feel that they aren't being 

heard and they make up a huge proportion of the people who 

will be seriously impacted by your legislation. 

 

The person in charge of Luseland Motors told us this, and I 

quote, "If these changes are implemented I'll close my business 

down completely."  Now that's about as pretty plain as one can 

get.  How would you respond to someone who runs a small 

business and faced with the costs you propose, will have to 

simply quit his business?  I want you to respond to him.  I've 

indicated to all these people that we would forward your 

responses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me be perfectly clear about what 

we have here.  What we have here is a filibuster.  It is a 

time-honoured tactic in a filibuster to read the morning mail.  I 

have been a member here for almost 19 years.  I have seen any 

number of filibusters.  Everyone of them degenerates into 

members reading the morning mail to try to pass the time of 

day. 

 

I'd be happy to respond to these people if they care to contact 

me.  I do not intend to get into a lengthy discussion about each 

individual situation when you read the morning mail.  It is 

within the rules for you to read the morning mail, to rag the 

puck.  Earlier in the day we had the member from Maple Creek 

who read my own speech back to me, in second reading.  Now 

that's a darn good speech but I didn't quite see the relevance of 

it coming from him. 

 

We had others.  We had the member from Kindersley engage in 

a long series of personal attacks.  That's okay.  I'm a big boy.  I 

can dish it out as well as take it.  I don't particularly mind that, 

but that's another tactic.  The member from Saskatoon 

Greystone is reading the morning mails.  Perfectly within the 

rules to read the morning mail.  Don't expect me to dignify this 

with a lengthy response to each one.  I couldn't do it on the 

basis of a short letter.  It's simply a commentary.  One could 

not comment on the situation without knowing a lot more about 

it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I find it most interesting, you call this the 

morning mail and I call it the people of Saskatchewan having 

genuine concerns.  And maybe that's why you will be defeated 

in the next election.  I find it quite appalling, Mr. Minister, that 

you will stand in your place and indicate to these people that 

they are not deserving of an answer to their question. 

 

Now you may say that you don't want to dignify their questions 

with a response, but I am telling you, sir, that that should be 

your job -- is providing the people of this province with 

answers to their questions.  You were elected to represent 

people; not represent select groups of people who support your 

party, but to represent all people.  And this gentleman from 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

Luseland Motors deserves a response from you as readily as 

Barb Byers or anybody else does.  And I think it would be hard 

pressed if I stood here and read a letter from Barb Byers to 

have you stand up and say you wouldn't dignify it with a 

response. 

 

Why not, I pose to you?  This gentleman is indicating that he is 

in a position of stating that the labour legislation being brought 

forward in the province of Saskatchewan, he believes, will be 

the final straw for his business.  Now I think perhaps you 

should draw upon whatever dignity you have left to try to 

respond to his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have responded to every single 

letter which has come to me, and there have been quite a 

number.  All have been answered.  I could not begin to answer 

a question as to whether or not this legislation will be the end 

of his business without knowing more about it.  And it is a 

foolish question to put to me.  I couldn't begin to know that 

without knowing the details of his business, the financial shape 

of his business, what it is, where he goes, what he hauls, where.  

I have responded to every single letter that has been written to 

me. 

 

But for you to ask me to respond to his concern he's going to go 

out of business in a thoughtful way is simply to dignify what is 

a filibuster.  The gentleman's entitled to a response.  You're not 

entitled to have a filibuster dignified by lengthy responses from 

me.  You want a filibuster.  It's a time-honoured tactic, but you 

will continue to do so, and you aren't going to . . . I say to the 

members opposite, you're not going to get answers to inane 

questions.  Because when you ask me to respond to his 

question -- am I going to go out of business? -- how on earth 

could I answer that without knowing a lot more about it? 

 

It's a perfectly legitimate question, in a different forum.  It is 

not a legitimate question in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I find that most intriguing, Mr. 

Minister, because I've actually read some of the responses from 

the illustrious members opposite when they were in opposition 

which is not terribly enlightening as far as the level of what 

was put across.  But it's very, very interesting how there were 

tactics used in this House that went on with reading all different 

kinds of things.  Question after question after question of 

written questions.  Ringing the bells for 18 days at a time.  

Things that really dealt with wonderful performance here. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Wayne Lorch, the president of P.W. Lorch & 

Associates, contacted my office. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I wonder if the member from Greystone 

will entertain a question? 

 

The Chair: -- That wasn't on the record.  I'll recognize the hon. 

member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

member from Greystone would entertain a question? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, no actually I would like to see if there can be any 

kind of answer that would come from the minister this evening.  

To date we haven't been too successful. 

 

Mr. Wayne Lorch is the president of the PW Lorch and 

Associates and he contacted my office.  He observed that the 

program of labour legislation will, and I quote:  "reduce private 

business investment from both resident and non-resident 

investors."  And he notes that his business would lose clients 

and revenue. 

 

Now when a consultant to business, and that's what he does for 

a living, Mr. Minister, has concluded that the proposed 

amendments to the labour legislation will actually reduce 

investment in Saskatchewan and its economy, I think that there 

is reason to be concerned and I wouldn't consider this to be 

inane at all.  In fact what I would have concluded is that since 

you've probably responded in writing to many letters of this 

kind of concern, that you'd be able to respond tonight. 

 

What would you say, Mr. Minister, to a business consulting 

professional, to a professional who's a business consultant, that 

concludes that in fact he believes that these proposed 

amendments to The Trade Union Act and to The Labour 

Standards Act too, would hurt investment in Saskatchewan.  Is 

that something that you could dispel, this kind of concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would respond to him that I do not 

agree with him.  That I believe that this legislation, progressive 

labour law, is an essential part of economic restructuring.  I 

would go on to point out to him why I think that's so, as I have 

done repeatedly, time and time again, in this House. 

 

(2015) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I am most interested . . . first of all, I'd like 

to know where the evidence is to support that conclusion that 

you have no concern at all.  And I'd also like to know, Mr. 

Minister, why this is so important at this time?  What is it that 

has transpired that requires this kind of change at this point to 

The Trade Union Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The evidence is both sophistical and 

analytical, as I've said many times before.  It is analytical in the 

sense that those countries which have progressive labour laws 

are generally the most prosperous.  I refer you again to central 

Europe and western Asia. 

 

Countries which have regressive labour laws, I refer to our very 

good neighbours to the south -- and they have been good 

neighbours to us -- are in economic decline.  As is England, 

which has regressive labour laws.  Most regressive labour laws 

in Europe are in England.  It's a nation which has been in 

economic 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

decline since the First World War.  So that's one little bit of 

evidence. 

 

The other bit of evidence I would pass on to you, and I have 

done so repeatedly in the past, is the comments made by the 

centre for Canadian labour market productivity, a body funded 

by the federal government, which points out that if workers . . . 

that the future belongs to companies which can adopt 

technology. 

 

You can only adopt technology as it now exists to the extent 

that workers buy into it and want to participate in it.  They must 

be assured of some of the rewards as well as all the risks which 

go with the new technology.  And that's the evidence which I've 

offered many, many times before in this House. 

 

As for whether or not this would adversely affect the 

gentleman's business, I haven't any idea without knowing 

whether or not . . . what his business is. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, part of what . . . his name is 

Mr. Lorch, Mr. Wayne Lorch, the president of P.W. Lorch and 

Associates.  Mr. Minister, he does go on to say something that 

is quite contrary to what you have just cited. 

 

He said that: 

 

 This is "more government control" at a time when the entire 

world is moving toward "less government control." 

 

And Saskatchewan appears simply out of touch with that 

reality. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've indicated that of course you have evidence 

to support and in fact you've indicated that there are places 

throughout the world that it appears from what you've said are 

strengthening their labour legislation, and that that has a direct 

correlation with their strengthening economies.  I think that 

there is contrary evidence to that, something which Mr. Lorch 

has stated. 

 

And here we have a consultant to business people, and he notes 

that this is contrary to government change worldwide and 

nationwide.  I'm wondering if you in fact could provide us with 

the information that would support otherwise.  I know that you 

cited a report, and I think that would be very helpful if you 

could send over a copy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- All right. Let me quote to you from a 

document published by the Society of Management 

Accountants of Canada.  It talks about a number of myths with 

respect to productivity.  Let me, for your benefit, read: 

 

 Myth No. 3:  A de-unionized economy would be more 

competitive.  A de-unionized economy (and then the response 

is that a de-unionized economy) would probably pay lower 

wages.  I think we can bet on that.  But lower wages do not 

equal a more competitive 

economy.  In fact, the opposite is likely to be true. 

 

 Michael Porter put it well in his modern classic, The 

Competitive Advantage of Nations.  In his opening chapter, 

Porter tells us that "the only meaningful concept of 

competitiveness at the national level is national productivity."  

In the special study that he did for Canada, with support from 

the Business Council on National Issues, (note the source) 

Porter wrote with equal bluntness that, "Based on 

international evidence (including the ten-nation study), 

absolute levels of unionization do not appear to have a 

decisive impact on the ability of the nation's firms to increase 

productivity or compete successfully."  In fact, if 

de-unionization were the key to higher productivity, the 

United States should be the world's most competitive 

economy.  As our American friends say on election night: 

"The upstate returns are coming in."  The United States bet 

heavily on pursuing a "union-free" strategy.  Countries like 

Germany, that bet on a "negotiated adjustment" strategy, 

clearly have taken greater advantage of the opportunities that 

globalization presents.  Canadians can ill afford the cost of 

replicating the Reagan fiasco. 

 

That in the classic, The Competitive Advantage of Nations. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, that was all very interesting, Mr. 

Minister, but not one individual who has written to me or come 

in for discussion has ever even mentioned de-unionizing.  They 

haven't discussed that.  What they're concerned about is the 

proposed amendments to your legislation and how that will 

have a direct impact on people in Saskatchewan and their 

opportunity to have some jobs.  Mr. Lorch concludes, he says: 

 

 My Saskatchewan clients will (he's talking about a 

percentage of them now, not all of them) relocate outside 

Saskatchewan.  My foreign clients will choose not to invest 

in Saskatchewan and (he also states) will not invest in 

Saskatchewan businesses which are subject to Bills 32 and 

54. 

 

Mr. Minister, is this the effect that you thought that this kind of 

legislation would have on Saskatchewan?  I think what's 

important here is to just get a sense that there's been some real 

exploration and examination of the potential impact here.  Have 

you in fact got evidence to support that you've examined each 

and every one of these areas to ensure that we won't lose 

investment and we won't lose businesses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, and the matter has been 

repeatedly explored over the last few weeks when the member 

was, I suppose, at the Liberal convention and elsewhere. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, well I'm sure.  I actually listened 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

to many, many, many of the attempts at responding to things as 

I'm sitting in my office visiting with people who are concerned 

about these -- in front of the television set by the way.  And 

yes, well for a government that has 55 members -- and 53 now 

which is very telling -- but 55 members and 22 of them didn't 

show up for a vote on the human rights legislation, I wouldn't 

be so hard-pressed to start talking about how interested people 

are in being in this House at times that matter. 

 

Given the responses that you, sir, have given and continue to 

give, usually on quite a regular basis -- and I do appreciate that 

you did try to bring forward some evidence this evening in your 

prior response -- I would suggest that in many instances it is 

very worth while talking to the people in a direct way who are 

going to be very seriously impacted by what's going on in this 

House. 

 

I'm wondering then if you could table, if you could send to me, 

the evidence that you have that shows that this will not have an 

impact on investment in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can shower the member with tonnes 

and tonnes of paper.  I doubt that she would find it very 

enlightening and I'd be most amazed if she ever read it.  I think 

the member can make up her own mind about whether or not 

she thinks the legislation is good or bad for Saskatchewan.  I 

invite her to do so. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I guess that's the way that you arrive at 

conclusions, Mr. Minister.  It's not the way that I arrive at 

conclusions.  I like to base it on evidence, and what I find most 

interesting is how you say you should just simply make up your 

mind one way or the other.  I'd like to have it based on some 

evidence. 

 

Similarly, I have asked endlessly of the minister in charge of 

Gaming to provide us with the definitive study upon which he 

is basing his expansion of casinos in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I have yet to receive it. 

 

I would like to have the information.   I think that people would 

receive great solace if they knew that the Department of 

Finance and the Minister of Finance had in fact done their 

homework on what will result from these changes to this 

proposed legislation. 

 

Similarly, I think that people would receive a great deal of 

comfort if they knew the Department of Economic 

Development had had a role in this and had done an analysis of 

its impact.  Similarly, I would feel greatly comforted if what 

you would do would be to indicate these are the pieces of 

research that are objective, that have validity and reliability, 

that prove that indeed these amendments to the proposed . . . 

the proposed amendments to The Labour Standards Act and 

The Trade Union Act in fact will not have any deleterious 

effects on the economy of Saskatchewan and jobs for people. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's a library down the hall which 

has a whole world of literature available. If the member wants 

reading material, I invite her to go down to the library where 

she'll find it readily at her fingertips. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm not concerned about all of those things, 

Mr. Minister.  I'm concerned about the pieces of research, the 

research, the studies that you have used to reach your 

conclusions.  That's what I'd like to have a copy of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's the same door -- it's the library.  I 

invite the member to go down and avail yourself of all the 

literature that's down there on labour-market productivity.  

There is an endless amount of it. 

 

I invite the member to go down and take what she wants and 

what she finds useful.  We did.  We reviewed what we thought 

was the relevant literature.  And we had a series of extensive 

consultations.   That's the basis on which we make the decision.  

The member has available to her precisely the same options; I 

invite her to utilize them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just what 

exactly did you deem important?  I mean that's probably what 

we're trying to get at here, is that you concluded certain things 

from pieces of information that you read.  I have no idea how 

objective any of that information is.  You may in fact have 

gone to certain things available from a library and pulled only 

those things that would support what it is you're trying to do.  

How would one know that, if you're unwilling to bring forward 

and provide the evidence on what you based your decision? 

 

I see no reasoning behind what you're saying here.  Go to the 

library and see what's there.  What we're trying to conclude 

here is how you came to the decision that you did and its 

impact on the province of Saskatchewan.  Is there no evidence 

in your department that is in a file that can tell us unequivocally 

that this will not have a negative effect on economic growth in 

Saskatchewan? On investment in Saskatchewan? On jobs in 

Saskatchewan?  Surely you have this available and that it must 

be at your fingertips, really. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I could dispose of this very easily by 

simply promising to send it to you, but that would be 

dignifying this question with a response.  I don't think it 

deserves the dignity of a response. 

 

Unlike a book which comes with a list of authorities to which 

the author referred, statutes don't do that.  Statutes are the 

product of human judgement.  They're the product of our 

experience that we get from people.  They're the product of our 

consultation.  They're the product of our background of 

knowledge.  They don't come with a bibliography, unlike a 

book.  I could send you an endless amount of paper material; 

that however would be to dignify your question with a response 

and I frankly don't think it deserves the dignity of a response. 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, 

I can only conclude that you do not have the information, or 

you would provide it.  I think that you would proudly provide it 

if you had it.  And I cannot imagine why anyone would not 

want to provide the evidence for the basis of their decision 

making.  In fact it surprises me a great deal. 

 

Mr. Minister, another company has contacted my office, and 

Mr. Bradley . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I'm wondering, Mr. Chair, if the Leader of the 

Third Party will entertain a question at this time. 

 

The Chair: -- The member from Regina Albert North has 

requested leave to put a question to the hon. member for 

Saskatoon Greystone and I recognize the hon. member for 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  I will 

continue with the minister.  He doesn't need any relief at this 

point.  I will just continue with the minister. I'm sure that as we 

continue he just may surprise everybody and respond to 

something tonight.  I don't think I need to start taking up 

answering questions.  I'm having a hard enough time trying to 

get answers to questions. 

 

Mr. Bradley is a manager in a firm, refers to your labour 

legislation as follows.  He says the last four years have been 

very tough in his business and he says that they are just 

beginning to see recovery.  They can't take further set-backs, 

and there is every possibility for them to operate . . . in fact the 

direct quote is:  "There is every opportunity for us to operate 

from Manitoba or Alberta." 

 

It appears, Mr. Minister, that the proposed labour legislation is 

going to cost jobs in some places in Saskatchewan and the 

people of Saskatchewan know it.  It isn't simply business 

people who are getting in touch with us.  I've been in a 

community where people are very concerned about the fact that 

the company with whom they work, the small company, has in 

fact already looked elsewhere, and has not simply made 

overtures but are seriously going to be moving.  In fact it isn't 

merely an opinion or a guess or an estimate, for this gentleman.  

He still hasn't made up his mind totally, but it's obvious that 

he's searching and this whole company may leave the province. 

 

I'm wondering if in fact you've received similar kinds of pieces 

of information from people and if you've contacted these 

individuals and actually spoken with them directly about how 

serious they are, if you've been saying the kinds of things that 

they need to hear in order to feel more comfortable about not 

making such rash decisions at this point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have, over the period in time I've 

been a minister, I've answered every letter which has been 

written to me.  I've returned every 

phone call which has been made to me and I have honoured 

every request for a meeting, and I have honoured almost all 

requests for personal meetings in my office. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- That wasn't my question, Mr. Minister.  

My question was: have you received information, like this 

gentleman's, where people have specifically indicated to you 

that as a result of the proposed amendments to the legislation 

that they may in fact move their businesses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have received quite a number of 

letters which have raised every conceivable point of view, I'm 

sure, including this one. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I take it from your comments then, when 

you said I'm sure, including this one, that you're not quite sure 

and that you haven't had direct contact.  And I can quite 

understand with your schedule that there are some individuals 

you may not feel the necessity to call up and speak directly to.  

But I'm wondering who is making those calls.  Who is actually 

calling the people or dealing with people directly to give them 

some reassurance?  If this is the lengths to which they will go 

as a result of concerns regarding your proposed legislation, 

who's making the calls? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I, my staff, and the Department of 

Labour. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I take it then, Mr. Minister, that these 

people who are on staff relay the information to you about the 

specific concerns that people are raising in the public and 

private sectors who are employers.  And what sort of 

information then are they giving out?  Are they able to give 

such specific information that people are no longer concerned?  

I keep getting this kind of information and I'm wondering 

where it is these people can go to begin to feel more secure 

about what's going to happen rather than potentially moving 

their businesses out of the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, they don't relate every phone call 

to me.  There aren't enough hours in the day to do that.  My 

comment this time, as my comment has repeatedly been in the 

past: once the legislation is in effect I believe most of these 

concerns will dissipate as they did with previous reforms to the 

labour law which we brought in. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there's a manager of 

Norsask Farm Enterprises, and he told us that, and I quote: 

 

 In the farm machinery business, a unionized shop would be 

totally unworkable due to the labour regulations enforced on 

a very nervous industry. 

 

The farm implement industry and the machinery sector, as you 

would well know, is extremely vital to the province of 

Saskatchewan, to our economy, given how much we rely upon 

them.  What would you do to 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

ensure, with this particular sector of our economy, that they 

don't have anything to worry about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think it is most unlikely that the 

farm machinery manufacturing business will be at all affected 

by either Bill. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I appreciate that comment and what 

we will do is send that one line to the Norsask Farm 

Enterprises.  But I think one of the things that we would like to 

know is: where is your evidence to show that it wouldn't have 

an impact on them?  If you in fact have it, I think that this 

company would be very, very pleased to know that you have 

factored that in and you've come to some conclusions about 

what in fact may or may not happen.  I mean if nothing's going 

to happen, they would be delighted to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would be happy to meet with these 

people if they want to do so.  That's the only way one can 

sensibly and realistically give them any reassurance.  It can't be 

done in the abstract, in the fashion in which you're asking. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I think what they want is definitely 

some reassurance.  You know one of the things that has come 

as some surprise is why it is all these small-business people 

have to take time away from their business when often there are 

very few people other than themselves who are there running 

the business.  And it's extremely difficult for people to be 

getting up and coming to Regina to find out what in fact 

changes to labour legislation is going to mean to their bottom 

line. 

 

I think one of the things that would be very helpful is to ensure 

that their reassurance would come from the government going 

to them, not the other way around.  It's rather surprising 

actually.  This manager at Norsask Farm Enterprises says some 

further comment, makes some further comment, and I quote: 

 

 If these two bills are passed, I would be looking at liquidating 

and pursuing business in a province or state which is 

conducive to our enterprise. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's not only Saskatchewan business that's 

nervous.  Not only are they prepared to leave the province, 

some people are even prepared to leave the country.  I'm just 

wondering if you would tell me, and tell me very directly: do 

you care?  How concerned are you that businesses might leave 

and take their jobs with them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We are very concerned that they 

might do that.  We have repeatedly stated that. 

 

I just want to point out that in 1972, the then Blakeney 

government passed what was at the time the most progressive 

Trade Union Act in Canada.  The years that followed were the 

most progressive . . . were the most prosperous in this 

province's history.  That was unrelated to The Trade Union Act.  

The Trade Union Act was neither a . . . 

An Hon. Member: -- That had absolutely nothing . . . 

absolutely nothing to do with The Trade Union Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's right.  No, the member's quite 

right.  The years of prosperity which followed had nothing . . . 

the member from Morse is quite right.  The years of prosperity 

which followed had nothing to do with The Trade Union Act.  

It happened as a result of different causes.  And I would say the 

same thing here.  There is simply no evidence to suggest that 

progressive . . . well it was increase of productivity; it was also 

increasing commodity prices.  It was higher commodity prices. 

 

There is simply no evidence to back up the member's 

suggestion that progressive labour laws are going to bring 

about a period of abject poverty for this province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I don't know where you 

found the term "abject poverty", but it never came from my 

lips.  I have never stated that labour legislation and changes to 

it would result in abject poverty for anyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  What I've suggested is that there is no evidence 

that you've provided to me, and to the business people of 

Saskatchewan, and to the workers of Saskatchewan, that would 

suggest that your legislation will not cost jobs, will not cost 

economic growth, and will not cost investment in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  No one that I've heard introduced the words 

"abject poverty" as a result of introducing your legislation. 

 

It's interesting that you should mention 1972.  Here you were 

introducing labour legislation in 1972 that you considered to be 

state of the art or on the cutting edge.  In the 1970s, Mr. 

Minister, I think you will acknowledge that all through the '70s, 

Saskatchewan had circumstances the likes of which had never 

taken place before -- high potash, high oil and gas, wheat prices 

were as high as possible.  In fact people were projecting 8 to 

$10 bushel wheat in the '70s.  I mean it was a circumstance 

unparalleled in our history.  And I find it absolutely astonishing 

that you would use that as an example.  And I guess it just 

points out why you and the Premier are of like minds. 

 

We are now in a very different kind of global economy where it 

is equally easy to pick up and move to one of the states below 

the 49th parallel, right directly below here for some businesses, 

or to pick up and go to Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, 

and other places.  And when they do that, they actually take 

jobs with them and they take a tax base with them.  And it's a 

very, very serious situation when you, as Minister of Labour, 

actually cite the 1970s as something with which we can 

compare ourselves.  The circumstances are completely and 

totally different. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the things we're talking about here is the 

ability to be competitive in this kind of global economy.  And 

we're talking about, not simply some of the things that people 

have to face in business as employers who want people to be 

able to work for them, and they want to have even more people 

work for them because that would show that there's 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

success, there's real growth.  These are people who have to be 

able to deal with their bottom line.  And if the bottom line 

keeps being readjusted by government, it actually costs people 

jobs. 

 

Now the manager of Norsask Farm Enterprises concludes that, 

and I quote, "Bill 54 will result in higher labour costs and 

reduce my flexibility to compete in a very seasonal industry."  

He says the labour legislation will, and I quote again, "have a 

very drastic negative effect on my bottom line and the future of 

my employees." 

 

Now really what this discussion is dealing with here is that 

when I stated that business and employees are inextricably 

linked, I don't know how people can talk about workers in one 

breath and not understand that there won't be workers without 

employers.  I mean, heaven forbid, if what we have and what 

took place in the 1970s, the true area of growth in this province 

was the bureaucracy.  It wasn't small business which is the 

greatest employers of people; it was government bureaucracy.  

The taxpayers paid for all of those jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's flexibility that is essential to competitiveness, 

and I don't have to tell you this because you do know this.  And 

this business believes that this particular legislation is going to 

be drastic to its bottom line.  Now have you in fact pencilled in 

what this legislation will do to competitiveness of 

Saskatchewan businesses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Myth number two from, I remind you 

. . . published by the Society of Management Accountants.  

This has not, heretofore, been a rabid NDP (New Democratic 

Party) organization.  I'm not saying they're rabidly anti-NDP, 

but they have not been, in the past, well known for taking the 

same position we do. 

 

Let me read myth no. 2: 

 

 Unionized companies are (the myth is) . . . Unionized 

companies are slow to innovate because of union resistance 

to change. 

 

The response: 

 

 In 1986 the Economic Council of Canada (Economic Council 

of Canada, one of the most respected such bodies in the 

world) . . . the Economic Council of Canada published the 

results of the most extensive survey ever undertaken in this 

country of human resource management practices and 

technological innovation.  After reviewing the results of this 

survey, Professor Richard Long wrote that " . . . there was no 

significant difference between unionized and non-unionized 

establishments in the mean number of innovations 

introduced."  In plain English that means that unionized 

companies were just as fast to innovate as non-unionized 

companies.  In fact, in some areas of human resource 

management, unionized companies had a much better track 

record.  Professor Long found that, amongst 

 smaller companies, unionized firms were more likely to have 

established quality circles than were non-unionized 

companies. 

 

 It is true the pattern of innovation is different in unionized 

companies.  When employees are represented by a union, 

they are much more likely to have a say in how innovation is 

introduced.  It should be no surprise, then, that the Economic 

Council's survey also found that labor management 

consultation committees were much more common in 

unionized companies.  When all is said and done, there is 

more employee involvement in unionized companies than in 

most non-unionized companies. 

 

The member might try reading some of the literature on the 

subjects right down the hall in the library.  I would invite the 

member to help herself. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- It is interesting, Mr. Minister, because I do 

read a number of things, and I do speak with a number of 

people, even across the country who happen to disagree with 

your view on this. 

 

You said that the passage of the Workers Compensation Act 

and the occupational health and safety legislation -- which the 

latter everyone keeps stating in this legislature that I did not 

support, when in fact the occupational health and safety 

legislation I did in fact vote for -- you indicated that of those 

two Acts that went through, the Bills that went through, they 

had no impact on the economy.  And I'd like to know how you 

measured that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't think I said they had no impact 

on the economy; I think they've had a significant impact on the 

economy for the good. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I'm equally interested in how you 

measured that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Because we have a much safer 

workplace.  We are indeed tackling Saskatchewan's 

unacceptably high accident rate.  We have put in place a 

workers' compensation scheme which is finally giving workers 

some measure of protection, something that truly was absent 

during the last administration. 

 

(2045) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, do you consider that 

any of the 1,000 businesses that went bankrupt since 1991 in 

the province of Saskatchewan, that they went out of business 

because of the cumulative impact on both the economic factors 

and government regulations?  I'm sorry, I noted that you were 

being interrupted, I'll repeat this. 

 

Do you consider that any of 1,000 businesses, the 1,000 

businesses that went bankrupt in the province of Saskatchewan 

since 1991 went out of business because of the cumulative 

impact of both economic factors and government regulations? 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I doubt that was a very significant 

factor. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well has your department been in contact 

with the Department of Economic Development to in fact look 

at this and examine this to know whether in fact there is any 

correlation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have had extensive consultation 

with Economic Development.  I smile because I think it has 

exceeded a degree that either one is comfortable with.  We've 

actually worked together on this.  And I stand by my comment: 

there is very little correlation between the degree of 

government regulation and businesses which go bankrupt.  That 

may occasionally be a factor but I suspect it's very rare. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there are 82,000 

people . . . I'm sorry, did you say order?  Oh, I'm sorry, I'm 

hearing words.  Mr. Minister, there are some 82,000 people on 

welfare in Saskatchewan and 41,000 unemployed.  I'm just 

wondering how you think they got there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would like the member to put that to 

the Minister of Social Services.  This really has nothing to do 

with The Trade Union Act. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I guess what I really thought is that 

you would have an equal concern about insuring that people 

who would like to have jobs would have them.  You seem to be 

going at great lengths to talk about how all these different 

people who are employed need further benefits.  I think the 

concentration should be on people who don't have jobs to get 

some, and people who have jobs to keep them. 

 

Mr. Minister, if what you said is true, then you should be able 

to make an objective case supported by unbiased analytical data 

which would convince people that there should be absolutely 

no concerns with the amendments to The Trade Union Act.  

And if the case to impose greater regulation, more extensive 

benefits for employees, more restrictions on employers, if the 

case is so easy to make, I want to know why you don't make it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Because frankly the member's mind 

is closed.  The member voted against these Bills on first 

reading before you ever saw them.  What on earth is the point 

in trying to convince someone whose mind is closed? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I find this most interesting, Mr. 

Minister, because I'd like to know . . . in fact I did not vote 

against The Trade Union Act in first reading.  I think, perhaps . 

. . Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Because you didn't get an opportunity . . 

. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- That is absolutely not true.  One of the 

things that I think you should note is that there was 

an absolute apoplectic reaction on the part of people who 

wanted an opportunity to know what it was you were doing.  

And I find it very interesting that in fact if it had been done 

well there would have not been the kind of reaction in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan ,that 

there has been.  There would not have been the need for 

endless, endless long night meetings and retroactive 

consultation.  I mean one of the reasons why there have been 

problems here . . . I think that it would be very significant for 

people to see the very first drafts of what has happened, 

compared to what is going on now.  I mean there were people 

almost falling over at the prospect of some of the things that 

had been brought forward in the initial legislation. 

 

I would just like to know what it is that keeps you from making 

your case.  I mean just show us the unbiased analytical data and 

your case could be closed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members opposite are 

filibustering the legislation.  You have every right to do that.  

Don't expect me to dignify these sort of questions with lengthy 

answers.  Filibuster away.  Hop to it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, 

I'd just like to make an observation about being called a cat.  I 

have never called anyone an animal name in this House and I 

would suggest that other individuals keep that to themselves as 

well. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I don't think he called you a cat; I think 

he called you . . . 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And is that a racist statement then too? 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, there's a number of things that 

I think that I want to put on the record by asking questions.  In 

the Leader-Post on April 13, there was an editorial that talked 

about . . . it says the heading, "NDP's new union act a further 

destabilizer". 

 

And I quote: 

 

 All of the jokes about Roy Romanow's "right-wing" 

government went out the window yesterday.  The new Trade 

Union Act introduced in the legislature served to remind of 

the NDP philosophy that nothing must happen in people's 

lives without big government squatting on it. 

 

And that is . . . I think should be a statement that you should 

have some response to. 

 

The public are saying to you, Mr. Minister, without even a 

doubt in their minds, it's time for you to explain to the people 

of Saskatchewan, not to us.  You can hold us in all the derision 

that you want to have but you must at some point in time 

answer for your actions to the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

And would you explain to the people of Saskatchewan where 

you have demonstrated after the 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

fact, after you've tabled your legislation, where you've gone out 

and visited with the people about what reaction that they had, 

and especially the business community.  Have you done any of 

that at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh, yes.  There have been quite a few 

meetings with both business community and trade unionists 

once this legislation was introduced.  There have been at least a 

half a dozen of each. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well half a dozen meetings with as much 

concern as has been expressed, do you think that's adequate to 

do the job?  And with how many people was that?  A half a 

dozen here and a half a dozen there, or was it the serious people 

in the business community that you met with to deal with the 

concerns that they had? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I believe the consultation has been as 

extensive on this as we have ever had on any piece of 

legislation brought before this session. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I can agree with you on some of that.  At 

least the Bill that deals with SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance); there probably was so little consultation on that one 

that even those people who believe in it don't understand it. 

 

The Bill . . . the second point made in this editorial says the Bill 

gives unions broader powers in certification.  Would you 

explain that to us in this Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, what broader powers in certification that the 

trade union gives to the trade union movement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The basic rules with respect to 

certification and decertification are not affected at all by this 

legislation.  All that is in the legislation is the provisions with 

respect to automatic certification and decertification which is, 

as has been repeatedly noted with the House amendment . . . 

will require a vote in each case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So one of the amendments to the amendments 

says that there is no added powers in certification, is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I don't think I'd say that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then you probably meant that the . . . that if 

there is any interference on the part of any employer or 

management in relation to a certification vote, then it's an 

automatic certification.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it's not correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, then explain to me what is correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- A secret vote is required once the 

board finds that there has been an interference such that it has 

prevented the will of the employees, the free expression of the 

will of the 

employees, to join a union.  If the unfair labour practice is such 

as to thwart the free expression of that will, then the board has 

the right to certify the union subject to a secret ballot being 

taken. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- With what kind of a percentage in vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Same as any other vote. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Which is what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Since time immemorial, it's been 51 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, there's times when your party has won 

with 37 per cent, see.  It also points -- continuing this article, 

Mr. Minister -- it also points . . . I'm sorry, it also anoints the 

political-appointed Labour Relations Board with scary powers.  

Would you explain some of those that are in excess of what 

was there in the '80s?  Would you explain that to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They are powers of process.  Their 

power to make decisions on the collective agreements really 

doesn't change.  What changes is their ability to enforce their 

decisions.  They have the power to make interim orders.  They 

have the power to make rectification orders, compensation for 

monetary loss, and amendment and correction orders.  Those 

are powers to enforce their orders, but the jurisdiction to make 

the orders really doesn't change. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does it also include their accountability is not 

challenged . . . to be able to be challenged in a court of law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, that's unchanged. 

 

Mr. Martens: --  Does that mean that they cannot be 

challenged in a court of law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: --  No, this is a very complicated area of 

the law.  They are certainly reviewable under the . . . by virtue 

of the prerogative writs.  There is no direct appeal but their 

decisions are reviewable under prerogative writs. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Which means? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well this is a whole law class in law 

school.  It means that the decisions can be reviewed if they 

violate, if they go beyond, the jurisdiction of the Labour 

Relations Board or if they violate the principles of natural 

justice. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the basis of that, does the board have any 

more power in this Act than it did before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well we will wait and see, I guess.  Going on, 

"It will be able to decertify a union engaging in unfair labor 

practices."  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, you're doing fine.  So far 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

you're not doing too badly; that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- "However if it even suspects that there has 

been employer interference, the board will be able to unionize a 

business."  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Rules are exactly the same as what I 

stated earlier for both union and management. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the question doesn't admit of a 

yes or no.  The answer is not that simple. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It says here, "However if it even suspects that 

there has been employer interference, the board will be able to 

unionize a business."  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then at what point does it become able to do 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I explained that a half a dozen 

answers ago.  I invite the member to read Hansard.  I just 

finished explaining the answer to that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I've sat here all day today, 

except for lunch, and haven't heard that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Not to me.  Well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. being legal counsel, maybe you should explain that to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan exactly what is meant 

by that then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the unfair labour practice prevents 

the free expression of the will of the employees as to whether 

or not they want to belong to a union, that Labour Relations 

Board may automatically certify or automatically de-certify the 

union subject to the taking of a vote. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Then it goes on, "However it will also 

be able to change court orders."  Is that correct?  The board will 

be able to do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it cannot change a court order. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you specifically point out the section that 

says it cannot? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, no.   I mean you'd have to have 

a section there which said you can.  The Labour Relations 

Board cannot change a court order.  The courts you refer to are 

superior courts.  This is an inferior tribunal, to use the language 

of the lawyers.  An inferior tribunal is subject to the decisions 

of a superior court. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It goes on to say: 

 

 Coupled with last month's Bill to change The 

Labour Standards Act, the government is at a point of making 

Saskatchewan appear totally inhospitable to new industry, 

and in particular, to small business. 

 

Now you have not given us an explanation or a point of view of 

a logical economic point of view that says that this is going to 

do: (a) give economic benefit to the people of Saskatchewan in 

more jobs; (b) give more economic opportunity for people to 

have better pay; (c) you have not explained where we're going 

to get new jobs from to make these important changes in all of 

this, nor have you told us whether there's a negative impact.  

And you haven't given to us the details of what that kind of 

information should have been dealt with under due diligence in 

your department to give us an explanation.  Would you provide 

that for us today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have done so repeatedly today and 

I've done so repeatedly over the last three or four weeks since 

this Bill was first introduced.  I invite the members to review 

my response.  I've given it repeatedly.  You don't wish to 

believe it or accept it, that's your choice.  Hey, it's a democracy; 

you make your own decision.  But I've answered that question 

repeatedly and I've answered it repeatedly this evening, 

actually. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then I would assume that if I said that there 

is going to be a decline in employment opportunity, a decline in 

employees in the labour force in Saskatchewan, a decrease in 

the economic benefit that is going to accrue to Saskatchewan 

because of these labour laws, you would agree with that then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's what you and every 

Conservative person in the province has been saying.  Of 

course I disagree with it and I believe time will prove us 

correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well that's not what the people in the 

Financial Times have said about . . . or The Financial Post 

have said about the way you have attacked the issue.  The 

Financial Post, April 27, 1994, the title: "Ruthlessness' root of 

new laws."  Now what kind of an image does this portray to the 

people of Canada to make investment here?  It has to after all, 

at some point in time, come down to this, Mr. Minister, that 

someone is going to want to have a return on his investment to 

invest in Saskatchewan. 

 

On the news today, as I understand it, Flexi-Coil decided to go 

along with the coalition.  They said it is going to be tough in 

Saskatchewan doing business.  How many more people does it 

take coming onto this side before you begin to recognize that 

you're going to lose opportunities for people in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

There are business communities that can move to other places, 

Mr. Minister, but there are businesses who are tied not only to 

the ground in capital construction, but have assets in the 

hundreds of millions of dollars in this province who cannot 

move. 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

What are those people going to do if the kind of climate you 

create, and the kind of decline of opportunity that you have in 

the province of Saskatchewan . . . because of this kind of an 

attitude that is established not by me but by you. 

 

In talking to the people in Toronto, in talking to the people in 

B.C. (British Columbia), in talking to the people in investment 

communities throughout the world; what kind of confidence are 

they going to have in you providing an economic climate so 

that growth can occur in Saskatchewan?  Give us some of those 

reasons. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have done so repeatedly over the 

last few days.  I believe that once they see this legislation in 

operation many of their fears will dissipate.  I recognize there 

are some fears.  And members opposite have done their level 

best to aggravate and exaggerate those fears because you think 

it is in your political interest; maybe in your short-run political 

interest, but I think in the long run when all this is done, you're 

going to be done. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it says here, 

and I quote: 

 

 Saskatchewan Labour minister, Ned Shillington, says the 

recently introduced ground-breaking labour laws are needed 

to rid the workplace of conflicts created mainly by the greedy 

ruthlessness of business. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is completely derogatory to the people who 

have built the economy in this province of Saskatchewan.  It is 

absolutely disgusting. 

 

Now you can talk about having a hype and say I want to create 

business, selling and marketing the opportunities in this 

province, and I have always done that all my life. I still do that 

because I believe this is a good place to live.  And then I have 

to go against the grain when you go around talking about the 

greedy businessmen in this province, the ruthlessness of 

business.  I think that's disgusting and people in this province 

believe that's disgusting. 

 

When you have people who are well-respected businessmen in 

Saskatoon, in the North Saskatoon Business Association, the 

chamber of commerce, restaurateurs, all these people saying 

we're going to have a great deal of difficulty, Mr. Minister, 

dealing with the kinds of changes that you want to have here.  

And you call them ruthless. 

 

If I went to all the McDonalds' managers and owners in this 

province and told them that they were ruthless and greedy 

when they put together some of the biggest economic . . . no, 

the biggest health care assistance plan to build homes in 

Saskatoon and Regina out of Big Macs that they donated to the 

province of Saskatchewan so cancer patients could have a place 

to stay when they went to those cancer clinics to have 

chemotherapy and all of the treatments related to that.  You 

think they're ruthless and greedy?  They did that.  They did that 

all over Saskatchewan.  They put that 

together and you call them ruthless and greedy. 

 

And they're the ones that have a concern.  They'd like to come 

to you and talk to you about the kinds of things that you have 

mentioned in this kind of a paper.  If they were to sell their 

market opportunity would anyone want to come and buy it? 

 

Those are questions that you need to answer to that community 

because they're your constituents.  They are your constituents 

because you're the Minister of Labour and you should have at 

least the courage to go and visit with them.  And would you do 

that before you pass this legislation?  Would you do that for 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I've also answered that repeatedly.  

We believe this legislation should be passed in its present form 

and should be passed before the end of the session. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the answer, I guess, is no. 

 

Business groups say the laws will have serious consequences 

for the province's economy and set precedents nationwide for 

tipping the scales in the favour of unions.  You said it's to bring 

some balance.  Well, Mr. Minister, this isn't balance; this whole 

thing is going to topple over.  It's like an elevator that's being 

pulled down, and if you've ever seen it, once it gets over centre 

it just keeps on going.  And that's what you've done with setting 

these labour Bills before the House here today . . . or this 

session. 

 

And that's what the business community is saying.  They're 

saying to you that we can't take this, we don't want to take it.  

We want to provide employment, we want to provide a 

legitimate employment.  We want to provide it in a way that 

has consensus built between the employer and the employee.  

That's what they're saying. 

 

And I go, I meet with these because I get services provided to 

my family business and to the community that I live in.  I meet 

with these people all the time, and this is what they tell me, and 

that, Mr. Minister, seems to contradict all of the things that you 

have said about the conditions that exist with the people that 

you've met with. 

 

You say to us that the business community is going to have to 

deal with this regardless of what they think; they're going to 

have to deal with it.  Well, Mr. Minister, have you ever thought 

of the economic impact that would happen if Flexi-Coil moves 

out of the province?  Mr. Minister, if Intercontinental Packers 

decides not to continue its discussion in the packing plant in 

Moose Jaw, have you ever considered the impact that that has 

in the province of Saskatchewan -- the lost jobs it has in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Those are all things that must be 

considered when relating to the kind of business environment 

that you create when you put these labour laws in.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is the reason why we ask you to present these 

options to the public of Saskatchewan so they can discuss them 

throughout the summer, and then tell you what they really want 

to have.  Would you do 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members opposite continue with 

the same kind of rhetoric, and I guess I continue with the same 

sort of responses.  There is absolutely no evidence to suggest 

that this legislation is going to have a deleterious effect on the 

economy in Saskatchewan.  I've said that repeatedly, and I 

continue to say that.  I believe that once this legislation is in 

effect, given a reasonable period, it will become just as 

controversial as have the other labour reforms, and I bet you 

can't name the four labour Bills that we've reformed because 

there isn't enough controversy about them for anyone to 

remember them.  I suspect these will join those Bills which will 

have a positive effect on workers' lives, but which won't be 

remembered by members opposite. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, why there is in the 

paper, I believe it's in the Star Phoenix, why there is reference 

made to one endorsement from Sears of Canada.  Would you 

be able to tell me why Sears of Canada would be in favour of 

this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I suspect it has something to do with 

the fact that Sears operates across Canada, is generally thought 

of as being a good employer, has the opportunity to compare 

this jurisdiction with other jurisdictions, and finds our approach 

sensible and reasonable. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would there be something to do with tax 

breaks for Sears of Canada -- that's the reason why they said it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is really defaming a 

good corporate citizen in this country.  I really want the 

member to think about what you're saying.  Yes, just think 

about what you're saying for a moment.  And you might ask 

whether or not you want to repeat those comments outside the 

House.  They really are libellous if they weren't said in here.  I 

really think the member opposite ought to give some thought to 

what you're saying. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let's get down to serious 

business here about who you're turning off and who you're 

turning on.  There are a whole lot of businesses in the province 

of Saskatchewan that are absolutely turned off by the very fact 

that you're involved in this discussion.  There are people across 

Canada . . . or across Saskatchewan that believe that you are 

doing something wrong.  You're going to devastate their 

businesses.  And you have absolutely no wish to go out and 

talk with them. 

 

Why don't you go out to the chamber of commerce meetings in 

Prince Albert?  Why don't you go out to the business coalition 

in Davidson?  Why don't you go out there and meet those 

people?  Because you, sir, haven't got the courage to do it.  You 

haven't got the courage to go out there . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that's all before the fact.  For the member from 

Elphinstone, that's all before the fact.  Put the labour legislation 

on hold and travel around this province this summer and you 

will 

see, Mr. Minister, you will see that the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan don't like it. 

 

And again I ask you: will you do that for the people of 

Saskatchewan?  Do that for the constituency that you represent.  

Do that for the people of Saskatchewan.  That's the kind of 

thing that you need to have and put some sand in your back and 

go out and visit with them.  That's what you need to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have a question for the member 

from Moosomin.  You said from your seat of Roger Phillips, 

the president and CEO (chief executive officer) of IPSCO, you 

paid him money.  How much did you pay him?  I wonder if the 

member from Moosomin would like to expand on those 

comments from your feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you provide to this Assembly the areas in 

the Sears deal for the people of Saskatchewan to see all of the 

impact that they have had and that you have had and the special 

concessions that you gave to Sears of Canada to come to 

Saskatchewan so that they could move all of the people out of 

the rural Saskatchewan and put them in Regina?  Will you give 

us an idea of what you did in those deals in order to provide a 

backdrop for a guy like that to say these kinds of things in the 

paper? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder if the member from 

Moosomin has the courage to repeat his comments from his 

feet or is he going to hide in a craven fashion in his seat. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, when are you going to answer, 

when are you going to answer to the statements that you have 

made.  Mr. Minister, when are you going to respond to the 

demands of the people of Saskatchewan that ask you to come 

out and talk to them about the kinds of things that you are 

doing to their business.  That's what I'm asking you to do -- go 

out and legitimize the actions that you're taking.  You haven't 

done that yet.  You haven't done that at all. 

 

Mr. Minister, if the kinds of things that you said in Swift 

Current are any indication of what went on in Saskatchewan, 

then you, sir, have a lot to answer for because they were not 

impressed -- if that's the kind of meetings you held.  Why don't 

you take under a new-found energy, and a new-found desire to 

have the people of Saskatchewan become involved in this 

legislation?  Why don't you take it out there?  Why don't you 

give them an opportunity to say exactly what they think of what 

you're doing?. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We intend to pass the legislation at 

the present session. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well maybe we can sit here until July and 

then we will see who has the determination.  Is the business 

community going to have to boycott you?  Are they going to 

have to do that, and then translate that into votes in the next 

election? 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

Is that what they're going to have to do?  Because you know the 

sign that stands on Bay Street in Toronto.  It's got a picture of 

Mr. Bob Rae on it and says, "How do you like socialism so 

far?"  It's a stunning question.  That, Mr. Minister, is a sign of 

labour legislation that is as serious as this, and this is even 

more serious.  And that, Mr. Minister, is why we ask you to go 

out to the people of Saskatchewan to represent yourself, and to 

the people of Saskatchewan and allow them the opportunity to 

tell you what they think of this legislation.  Why don't you do 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I've answered the question 

repeatedly. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman.  I've 

listened with some interest now for what seems like for ever to 

members of the official opposition and to the Leader of the 

Third Party earlier tonight.  It was my hope that at some point 

the opposition might come to some point of substance and 

might have some justifiable reason for their filibuster.  I 

thought that after endless hours of a filibuster -- even as inept 

and incompetent as they are -- they could stumble upon some, 

one point that makes a difference.  I thought one point of 

substance on this, The Trade Union Act, would have been quite 

in order. 

 

Mr. Chair, I've sat long enough.  There are some things that I 

wish to share on behalf of my constituents.  I've made some 

considerable notes and there's a number of things that I want to 

deal with on this Trade Union Act.  But you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I listened to the Leader of the Third Party earlier, as 

she described having spent a wild weekend in Ottawa with the 

eastern corporate leaders and the Liberal premiers -- the 

remaining Liberal premiers in Canada.  And I was wondering 

whether that born-again Liberal, Ted Yarnton, was also there.  I 

suspect he was. 

 

And I wonder if the Leader of the Third Party took Ted 

Yarnton's advice on The Trade Union Act.  Clearly she has 

bought -- hook, line, and sinker -- the eastern corporate 

leadership view: that view that Saskatchewan should be turned 

into a third-world province, that this is a province where we 

have to beggar ourselves for jobs, that this is a province where 

we cannot have minimum labour standards, much less what 

we're talking about tonight -- that is a trade union Act that 

fairly represents working people and businesses across this 

province.  That's what this is about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I heard the member for Saskatoon Greystone, the 

Leader of the Liberal Party, say that what we were doing was 

fulfilling a political agenda.  Well you're darned right, Mr. 

Chair.  We're fulfilling a political agenda, and it should come 

as no secret, even to the member for Saskatoon Greystone, the 

Liberal leader, it should come as no secret at all that we New 

Democrats would be making amendments to The Trade Union 

Act, especially in light of the fact that the last amendments to 

this Act were made in 1983. 

The member for Estevan was then premier.  Those amendments 

to The Trade Union Act made it lopsided, took away what 

efforts . . . it took away much of the fairness for workers in this 

province.  It mounted all of the load, if I may describe it that 

way, with the corporate entities, ignoring working women, 

working men, the working people of our great province.  That's 

what that legislation did. 

 

I have sat as a member since 1986.  I campaigned in that 1986 

election.  For 18 months I campaigned before I was elected, 

talking about The Trade Union Act, talking about labour 

standards legislation, talking about things that affect the 

working women and men in Regina North -- at that time; now 

Regina Albert North -- because I campaigned in 1991 on many 

of the same things, talking about fairness for Saskatchewan 

working people, fairness for all my constituents. 

 

Mr. Chair, in my constituency office . . . I say this simply, I 

guess, to try and point out to the members opposite who are 

fond of trotting out letters that say we should do nothing with 

respect to The Trade Union Act; we should do nothing but 

consult.  And the members all know, the Leader of the Liberal 

Party and the members of the official opposition know full well 

that for us to at this point go out and consult widely in the 

manner they're talking about is a recipe to do nothing -- an 

absolute recipe to do nothing and the Leader of the Liberal 

Party should know that. 

 

I'm wondering if the Leader of the Liberal Party can tell us 

what consultation Prime Minister Chrétien did before he 

cancelled the Pearson Toronto international airport deal.  I 

wonder how much broad consultation Prime Minister Chrétien 

did.  Or I wonder how much broad consultation the Prime 

Minister did before he shut down many of the armed forces 

bases across Canada.  I wonder how much consultation the 

Prime Minister, the Liberal Prime Minister of Canada, did 

before he cancelled the helicopter deal.  Wide consultation. 

 

Well I think the Leader of the Liberal Party should be talking to 

the national Leader of the Liberal Party and perhaps even 

having a little chat with her own colleagues here in the 

legislature about consultation.  Consultation, Mr. Speaker -- the 

Leader of the Liberal Party is fond of saying that the Minister 

of Labour has not consulted on The Trade Union Act.  Well I 

think the Leader of the Liberal Party needs a dictionary. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I saw on my television set 

one night not long ago, the Liberal leader saying, I wasn't 

consulted about the new Lieutenant Governor.  Then I saw an 

announcer make a short little bridge and I see the same Leader 

of the Liberal Party say, well when I talked to the Prime 

Minister about it, I told him this was not going to be an easy 

appointment and that there might be some trouble with it. 

 

Mr. Chair, this consultation . . . I mean how can you satisfy the 

Leader of the Liberal Party in her cry, her plea for consultation, 

when she clearly demonstrates 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

she doesn't have a sniff what consultation means.  And 

consultation is not even an eight-syllable word. I invite the 

Leader of the Liberal Party to come to my office, borrow a 

dictionary, and she might then learn what consultation is. 

 

That's what the Labour minister and his staff have gone out far 

and wide . . . I've had the pleasure of being at a few of those 

consultation meetings, although I confess it's been precious few 

in comparison to the broad number that the Minister of Labour 

has been at, and I see the Associate Minister of Finance saying 

I've been at a half a dozen, and now my colleagues are all 

chipping in that they have been consulted and acted in this 

consultation process. 

 

So let's not, Mr. Chair, get confused about a lack of 

consultation.  What we are seeing is simply and clearly a call 

from the official opposition, and from the Liberal leader -- and 

I assume the other two of the Three Musketeers -- what we are 

seeing is simply a plea, a call, a cry to do nothing, to not pass 

The Trade Union Act which will enhance fairness for working 

people throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Chair, I only wish that this Act would do half 

of the things that I've heard the opposition member say it does.  

I wish it would do a quarter of the things I've heard the Leader 

of the Liberal Party purport The Trade Union Act is going to 

do. 

 

If it did half or a quarter what they claim it would do, would I 

be pleased.  And I say would I be pleased because it's no secret 

to opposition members of either party and I don't think it's any 

big secret to the general public who may be following this 

matter and matters in the legislature, I support working women, 

I support working men, and I think it's very important that our 

young people have job opportunities.  Those are some of the 

major reasons I chose to seek public office in the first place. 

 

Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Liberal Party said that labour laws, 

when we pass them in Saskatchewan, stay right here in 

Saskatchewan.  And you know she's absolutely right on that 

count.  I was astounded. There was something I could actually 

agree with.  Labour laws stay right here. 

 

What she was trying to get across was that we should somehow 

lower the threshold of what our labour laws will do, lower the 

protection that labour laws will provide for the sons and 

daughters of opposition members, and of government members, 

of our neighbours, our friends; the very people that all 66 

MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) are charged to 

represent.  They would have us lower the protection that's 

provided under the Trade Union Act, and I'm going to mix in, 

throw in The Labour Standards Act but only in passing.  That's 

what they want. 

 

Well when the Leader of the Liberal Party says that 

Saskatchewan legislation stays right here, labour 

legislation deals right here, she's right.  But I want to tell the 

Leader of the Liberal Party a little tidbit I picked up from a 

SaskTel employee less than a week ago. 

 

In France there is a telephone company that installed two major 

switchboards and they couldn't get them to work.  And you 

know who they called upon to make that switching equipment 

work?  SaskTel employees.  Some of the highest trained, best 

dedicated employees from right here in Saskatchewan, who 

operate under Saskatchewan labour laws, who had to go to 

France to make part -- a significant part -- of their telephone 

system to work. 

 

France wasn't looking for who will do this work for $4 an hour 

or who will do this work for $3.75 an hour or who will do this 

work for 16 hours a day or who doesn't want weekends off.  

What the telephone company in France needed was 

competence.  They needed highly trained people that 

understood telecommunications equipment. 

 

That's where SaskTel entered.  And I can tell you that the 

SaskTel employee or people who went over . . . Sasktel 

employees who went over to France to get their switching 

system up and running weren't paid $4 an hour.  They worked 

under Saskatchewan labour legislation and they are paid quite 

well and paid quite well for what they know. 

 

We have a workforce in Saskatchewan that is very highly 

educated.  It is highly motivated.  We have got some of the 

finest working women and men that you could find anywhere 

in the world.  We have people with great educations, ready, 

willing and able to take on ever greater challenges. 

 

That's a tribute to the working people, the working people of 

this great province.  What we have to do in this instance is to 

provide a framework, a Trade Union Act that will help to make 

their working careers and working lives a little bit better. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Chair, I heard the Leader of the Liberal Party talking about 

our radical new labour laws, and that's a quote -- radical new 

labour laws.  Well it's pretty radical all right. 

 

You know one of the things . . . and I'm going to share with my 

colleagues . . . One of the things that I wish we had been able to 

address to a little more of my satisfaction was that of anti-scab 

legislation.  Anti-scab legislation is absent from this Trade 

Union Act.  It's absent completely, despite the fact that over 50 

per cent of Canadians work in provinces where they have 

anti-scab legislation.  We didn't do that. 

 

And anti-scab is a double-edged sword.  It's not all down, that 

we chose at this time not to proceed further, not to bite off 

more than we could get passed in the legislature.  Where there 

is anti-scab legislation, there is also a problem, or at least I 

view it as a problem, that you then have a very significant 

number of workers that are placed into what is called essential 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

services, and those workers give up the right to strike.  And that 

is the flip side of anti-scab, in my opinion, Mr. Chair. 

 

But the Leader of the Liberal Party calls this Trade Union Act, 

quote, "radical new labour laws", and I've just pointed out an 

area where over 50 per cent of Canadians have got a provision 

in their Trade Union Act that we didn't introduce in this one.  

Reflecting upon what has transpired and the vehement 

opposition of the official opposition and the Liberal Party, I 

must say that the Minister of Labour made the right call on this.  

I'm not at all sure that we could withstand the onslaught that 

might have come had we introduced anti-scab in this Trade 

Union Act. 

 

Mr. Chair, what I'm seeing here is the Liberal leader who's 

joined the Conservative Party, and joined them hand in hand in 

fighting, in fighting -- I hope not to the death because it would 

be a shame to see those parties disappear - 

_ but fighting vehemently any changes to a trade union Act.  

Fighting vehemently, opposed to the progressive changes that 

help make the collective bargaining process work better. 

 

The minister has very ably and capably told us what is in the 

Act.  There is hand-outs that have been sent out, certainly 

aplenty.  Anyone who hasn't got them can simply contact the 

minister's office or any MLA's office.  I know I would be only 

too pleased to send out what is in this Trade Union Act. 

 

But as I look at the opposition, Mr. Chair, I'm reminded of 

some of the things that have taken place in Saskatchewan over 

the years.  I'm reminded of 1944 when there was some major 

changes made.  The CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) formed the first government.  My grandmother was 

part of that; one of the proud moments in our lives.  And there 

was naysayers, the forebears of the members opposite.  There 

was naysayers who said, oh heavens, you've elected these CCF, 

it's communism, it's communism, it'll never be the same. 

 

And you know, Mr. Chair, fortunately things never have been 

the same in Saskatchewan.  Fortunately we had labour 

legislation introduced; we had minimum wage legislation; The 

Trade Union Act introduced then.  We organized school 

divisions on a larger basis.  I look at the Crown corporations 

that were set up as a result of that.  Things are not the same.  Of 

course it culminated, and everyone knows that it's the 

CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party) that brought in medicare.  I'm not trying to 

dwell on that, but those are some of the things, Mr. Chair, 

where the members opposite were right.  Things are not the 

same and they're much, much better for all Saskatchewan as a 

result of it. 

 

In 1971 the Blakeney administration changed The Trade Union 

Act and The Labour Standards Act, and I remember vividly the 

then opposition, the Liberal opposition, predicting doom and 

gloom because here is The Trade Union Act being amended.  

Here's going to be these powerful union bosses running the 

province.  That's what they said in 1971. 

 

Well, but for the fact that the faces have changed . . . certainly 

the face of the Liberal leader has changed, but so too have the 

faces on this side of the legislature changed.  Life goes on.  

Acts such as The Trade Union Act require amendment from 

time to time.  The last amendment was made 10 years ago.  It 

should come as no surprise to anybody in this province that we 

have a government committed to introducing fairness to the 

working people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I've heard members opposite talk about the 

multitude of letters.  We've heard virtually every letter that has 

been written to a member read into the record here, and 

questions resulting from that -- all these letters about The Trade 

Union Act.  The member for Maple Creek is telling me there's 

lots of them.  Well I can tell the member for Maple Creek I've 

gotten many of those same letters that you have.  But I want to 

be absolutely crystal clear.  My office, I have received more 

than 200 -- that's a 2 followed by two extra zeros, for the 

member from Estevan who I know always has great difficulty 

with math -- more than 200 letters of support for The Trade 

Union Act amendments. 

 

And those 200-plus letters come from my constituents in 

Regina Albert North.  Full stop.  Period.  More than 200 letters 

from my own constituents.  That's the level of support.  These 

are the very people I went out, talked to door to door, before 

the election.  I meet them at every opportunity. And certainly 

my office is advertised in the phone book; there's no problem 

for people to get hold of me and to express their views on this. 

 

But I just want members opposite to understand, those letters 

don't come to you.  Those letters come to their sitting MLA.  

Those 200-plus constituents expect me to stand up and speak 

out on their behalf.  They're asking me to stand up to 

congratulate the member for Churchill Downs, the Minister of 

Labour, on thinking this through, on consulting as widely as he 

has before he introduced the legislation.  And they're telling us 

very clearly, pass it and pass it this session.  And pass this 

Trade Union Act and pass it this session, we will.  Rest assured 

of that. 

 

I have heard opposition members talking about The Trade 

Union Act adding costs to employers.  Well, Mr. Chair, it only 

takes a very, very basic understanding of labour laws and 

labour legislation to know that where there's a collective 

agreement, the collective bargaining process deals with cost 

items such as salaries, such as benefits.  In fact if an employer 

has a union shop, that employer cannot introduce, for example, 

a pension or a dental plan without negotiating that through the 

union.  That's the law of the land.  That's the way it is.  The 

collective bargaining process is where the costs potentially can 

be escalated or decreased. 

 

The Minister of Labour used example of Chrysler and one of 

their plants where they negotiated some decrease in benefits 

when Chrysler was experiencing 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

what can only be described as severe and massive fiscal 

problems.  Chrysler has apparently come through that very, 

very well.  They build the most successful miniwagon in the 

world.  They have a relatively new line of vehicles.  They're 

now building first-rate vehicles.  But I realize, Mr. Chair, I may 

be accused of digressing if I go on and talk too much about 

Chrysler. 

 

But I want the opposition to understand very clearly as they 

filibuster that the collective bargaining process deals with cost 

items.  The Trade Union Act does not.  I want the member for 

Maple Creek to understand that The Labour Standards Act may 

deal with some cost items.  This Trade Union Act does not.  To 

claim in some manner that The Trade Union Act, the passage 

or the non-passage, is going to put a solitary business in 

Saskatchewan out of business is absolute bunk.  It is hogwash.  

I just cannot believe, as positive as I am about the limited 

intelligence of some members opposite, I cannot believe how 

often you prove just your depth of understanding about a trade 

union Act. 

 

It may seem a tad personal, but you're darn right it's personal.  I 

represent 13,000 men, women, and children in Regina Albert 

North.  You're attacking legislation that's going to help them -- 

those 13,000 of my constituents -- to enjoy some fairness and 

some equity.  You're attacking a Bill that doesn't affect one job, 

won't put one business out of business. 

 

Businesses may choose not to come to Saskatchewan.  To that 

extent, you're talking fair; that's fair enough comment.  

Businesses choose to go and establish wherever they want 

every day of the year.  Some of them we get to Saskatchewan, 

and we welcome those.  But we don't have all of the businesses 

in the world, and we never will have all of the businesses in the 

world. 

 

The businesses that establish in Saskatchewan do so for a 

reason.  There's a genuine opportunity for them to make a 

profit, to get established, and I'd like to say that the quality of 

life in Saskatchewan adds something for them as well.  Those 

are the things that bring companies. 

 

Labour peace will bring companies as well.  This legislation -- 

this Trade Union Act -- goes a great deal, a great distance to 

labour peace.  What we've got here is strengths in the 

administration and the enforcement, that the Labour Relations 

Board has got some additional ability to make their rulings 

stick.  We've got a chair that's now going to be appointed for a 

five-year term, and a couple of other members for a three-year 

term -- that in a genuine attempt to minimize the political 

interference with the office of the Labour Relations Board. 

 

We have, in this legislation, a mechanism for workers and 

employers to work out their problems, and we've got some help 

available through the Labour Relations Board as an 

advice-giving . . . and working through disagreements. 

 

We've updated rules on strikes and lockouts in this 

legislation, updated them.  The last time the legislation was 

touched was 10 years ago, okay, simply update that. 

 

Collective bargaining is strengthened.  And yes we've changed 

the definition of scope; integral to management, which was put 

in in 1984, has been removed.  So the question of who is 

in-scope and who is out is strengthened a little bit. 

 

(2145) 

 

I have already spoken, Mr. Chair, about the anti-scab portion of 

the legislation, which is not there.  There's clearly other areas 

where this legislation could have gone further but overall this is 

a wonderful piece of legislation for which the Minister of 

Labour should be commended. 

 

You know, Mr. Chair, I looked at the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

on Saturday and I see a full-page ad and I'm sure that the 

member for Morse is wondering why in the world would I pull 

out this full-page ad.  Mr. Chair, this ad is, to put it mildly, 

somewhat derogatory, and it says: 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will powerful labour unions be 

guaranteed freedom from future wage concessions or other 

necessary constraints -- i.e. existing, non-competitive union 

contracts will never expire and can never be terminated 

unless the union bosses say so. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people who paid for and put together 

this ad I think can rightfully expect not to enjoy an absolutely . 

. . a free run. 

 

I want to deal with the powerful labour unions.  Who are trade 

unionists in Saskatchewan?  I expect that there's even some 

members of the opposition who have at one time or another 

belonged to a trade union, not necessarily all, but some. 

 

Trade union members, Mr. Chair, are all of our constituents.  

There is not one constituency in Saskatchewan, of the 66 

constituencies, not one that doesn't have trade union members 

in their constituency.  These trade union members are our 

families, our neighbours, our friends, our relatives; they're 

people often that we don't know personally. 

 

These trade unionists are people who work side by side with 

volunteers at the food bank.  Trade union members work side 

by side in all walks of life.  You'll find trade union members 

volunteering to coach minor sports.  You'll find trade union 

members in literally every walk of life.  The difference:  they 

happen to belong to a trade union; they happen to have a 

collective agreement to work under. 

 

With respect to this ad talking about existing non-competitive 

union contracts will never expire and can never be terminated 

unless the union bosses say so, of course what this ad is 

referring to is contracting out.  And you know, Mr. Chair, for 

the life of me I can't see how a business can hold their head 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

high and promote that what we should do is hire people on 

starvation wages, pay them less, pay them less to do the same 

job, and somehow expect that this minimum-wage earner is 

going to go out and buy one of these new Chrysler miniwagons 

that I was talking about or any other make of vehicle.  No, 

minimum-wage earners will tend to drive more like my 1988 

Colt that's parked out in front with a hundred and seventy-some 

thousand kilometres on it.  Yes, I'm still driving that and a good 

little car it is. 

 

But you know the way to business prosperity . . . I'm reminded 

of a conversation I had with the member for Turtleford, and the 

member for Turtleford tells me that nobody can seriously doubt 

this.  There's one town in the constituency of Turtleford, one 

town with a significant union operation.  One town, Big River, 

and Big River has got the most prosperous business community 

of any of the towns in the Turtleford constituency. 

 

Why?  Because the trade union members receive a fairly 

regular pay cheque and it's a fairly decent pay cheque, and 

because of the benefits that they have come to enjoy through 

their union and the contract negotiations, the workers at that 

Big River saw mill aren't afraid to spend their money.  And 

spend a very significant portion of it right in the Big River 

community is exactly what they do, and that's why the business 

community in Big River benefits from the Big River saw mill 

and the trade union members there. 

 

And I think when business owners, or anyone else wants to 

pooh pooh attempts to provide fairness for Saskatchewan 

working women and men, I think before they try and stop the 

wheels of change, stop the motion of time, I think they should 

think a little bit about Big River and the other towns in the 

Turtleford constituency. 

 

And I think, Mr. Chair, it would be very useful if some of those 

business owners were to ask themselves, who is it that's going 

to buy my pizza?  Who is it that's going to buy my sporting 

goods?  Who is it that's going to buy my vacation packages?  

Who is it going to buy my automobiles?  Who is it going to buy 

my fine furniture?  Who is it going to purchase my services, 

whatever they are, be they accounting, or legal, or you name it?  

Well it's people that have the money by and large that make the 

big-ticket items, item purchases. 

 

So I am astounded the more time goes on.  I'm astounded to see 

the opposition so vehemently opposed to a Trade Union Act, a 

Trade Union Act that clearly does not increase cost to 

employers; does not do that.  Other legislation deals with some 

of those areas. 

 

Mr. Chair, we have the Leader of the Liberal Party saying, me 

too, me too, me too, I'm with these guys, I don't like this 

legislation one iota.  Me too, me too, you're going to put all the 

businesses out of business, according to the Liberal leader. 

 

Well it's not a vision that I share; it's a vision that has been long 

held by the 

Liberal Party; long held by the Progressive Conservative and 

other right-wing parties.  It's a view that if you have minimum 

labour legislation that somehow we'll be open for business and 

the businesses will come. 

 

Well you know you can't fool Saskatchewan people very much.  

We in Saskatchewan had nine and a half years of that open for 

business, that let's not raise the minimum wage, except for the 

time that the member for Churchill Downs embarrassed the 

government into a miserly two-bit increase. 

 

But we had a government, a free enterprise government, that 

removed some of the benefits of The Trade Union Act in 1984.  

What was the result?  We went from a province that had an 

unemployment rate of less than 5 per cent to a province with an 

unemployment rate of about 9 per cent in that time.  We went 

from a province that had $139 million surplus -- according to 

the Conservative first minister of Finance, Bob Andrew, who 

was elected out of Kindersley -- $139 million surplus, he 

signed for, turned that, parlayed that into a $16 billion -- not 

million, billion with a "b" -- debt. 

 

So we had a right-wing, free enterprise government that 

lowered labour legislation thresholds wherever they could, 

slashed government programs wherever they could, and said, 

come on in, we're open for business.  And you know, it didn't 

work.  The proof of that, you need look no further than your 

own neighbourhood or your own community.  It didn't work.  It 

simply did not work.  It was a recipe of sharks feeding on 

sharks. 

 

Mr. Chair, I want to close by saying how very proud I am of 

the minister, of the Premier, of the cabinet, of my colleagues 

for working as diligently . . . for working as diligently as we 

have in getting this Trade Union Act to the position it's at -- to 

the position where we're about to pass this progressive 

legislation, this progressive legislation that will make the lives 

of working women and working men better, that will improve 

the lives of our relatives, of our neighbours, of our children 

and, yes, even of the children of the opposition members, as 

those children migrate to the city and take their jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Chair, The Trade Union Act is going to 

reduce costs for good employers and it's going to reduce those 

costs -- nobody on the opposite side's ever talked about this -- 

but it's going to reduce those costs by providing clearer rules 

and methods of resolving conflict.  That's what a large measure 

of this Trade Union Act is about. 

 

Mr. Chair, I am more than a little honoured to have had the 

opportunity to stand up and say some of the things that I have 

in my heart about this Trade Union Act.  But I certainly ask 

opposition members . . . I understand where you come from a 

different perspective.  But you had nine and a half years of an 

open for business, or hoping for business, or praying for 

business, however you want to describe it.  You 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

had nine and a half years of an emasculated Trade Union Act.  

Clearly that direction did not work. 

 

This Trade Union Act, along with The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act that we passed last year, along with The Workers' 

Compensation Act we passed last year, along with The Labour 

Standards Act that we're going to be passing this year, those 

four major pieces of labour legislation, I think, deserve the 

opportunity to work.  They deserve the support of this 

legislature.  And they most assuredly will have my support. 

 

Minister of Labour, I again congratulate you and urge that you 

keep pushing this legislation for fairness for Saskatchewan's 

working people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to not take a 

great deal of time in the Assembly tonight.  I know that the 

hour's getting late.  But there's a few things I want to say 

regarding this Act. 

 

Now the first thing I'm going to say is, to be as diplomatic as 

possible, I think that this Act falls a fair bit short of what's 

needed in this province, and what is wanted in this province, 

and what has been demonstrably proven by history that 

becomes a necessity in this province.  And I'll be very brief in 

outlining those things in those areas I think that the Act falls 

short, that the Act falls short. 

 

(2200) 

 

But I want to say, before I do that, before I enumerate those 

shortcomings, that once again the province has been 

demonstrated to the real nature of political organization in 

Saskatchewan.  That labour legislation in this province has 

once again proved to be the acid tests of where people stand in 

regards to what constitutes fair treatment for the people who 

really create wealth in this province, that is the working people 

of this province.  Whether they work in the city or whether they 

work in the land, the transformation of our natural resources, 

the productions of goods and services, and the transportation of 

that rests solely in the hands of those who do the labour in this 

province. 

 

This government, this government has put forward a package 

of reforms to labour legislation which says to the workers of 

this province that it is on your stand that we . . . that is on your 

side that we stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And once again the mouthpieces of capital, 

those hired political gunslingers of the ruling class in this 

province, the Liberals and the Tories, have jumped to the 

defence -- have jumped to the defence of those who would 

stand in the way of fairness for working people, would stand in 

the way of progress for working people. 

 

Once again we have seen the spectacle of Conservatives and 

Liberals, as has been their wont since their foundation as 

political organizations and 

political representatives of capital, once again their true colours 

have been shown and shown widely in this province. 

 

The colours of the Tories and the colours of the Liberals are 

dollar green because these people -- far from agreeing that 

working people should have rights and should have a 

democratic say in how the economy is organized -- these 

people have made it clear, have made it clear to everyone in the 

province that like their political forebears, like their political 

predecessors, they stand not on the side of the great majority of 

this province.  Not on the side of the people who really create 

wealth in this province, but of those whose sole interest is in 

lining their own pockets and those whose sole interest is to try 

to hold this province to economic blackmail. 

 

Mr. Chairman, time and time again we have heard Liberals and 

Conservatives stand on their feet and say, listen to what capital 

is saying.  If you do this, they will leave the province.  If you 

do that, they're going to shut down their business.  If you do 

this, they are going to pack up and go somewhere else.  I say, 

Mr. Chairman, I say to them we will not succumb to economic 

blackmail.  Neither the CCF in 1944, nor did Woodrow Lloyd, 

nor did Allan Blakeney, and neither will this government 

succumb to the kind of economic blackmail that the Liberals 

and the Tories have peddled from time immemorial. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, from the point of view of history one 

has to only go back into the 1800s to listen to the speeches of 

the Tories and the Liberals.  In the 1800s, with the passage of 

the Corn Laws, what did we hear?  Business is going to fold.  

Trade will be done away with.  The country will come to ruin.  

When child labour legislation was passed, outlawing the 

employment of children in the mines to act as dray animals, 

what did we hear?  We heard the Liberals and Conservatives 

say the same thing.  The country is going to ruin.  The economy 

will fold.  Good businessmen will pick up and go somewhere 

else. 

 

What did we hear in 1944?  What did we hear in 1948?  What 

did we hear in 1960 . . . during the early 1960s?  What did we 

hear in 1971?  The same old Liberal and Tory story, that 

somehow, somehow labour legislation, somehow laws 

protecting the right of workers to organize collectively, that 

somehow that is going to bring the economy to a halt, that 

somehow what is going to happen here is that the world and the 

sky will fall because working people have got some legal 

protection. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, it is nothing new.  It's nothing 

new and it's to be expected.  And it's nothing new to hear the 

ideological rantings of some of the business community in this 

province who, after all, have an ideological bent.  I don't think 

that Sonia Prescesky, for example, is totally political neutral.  I 

don't think that Les Dubé doesn't have political leanings.  I 

don't think that other business people in this province are 

somehow devoid of the political culture which surrounds them. 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the last 10 years in this province has 

proved precisely how political people are in Saskatchewan.  

And it's okay, Mr. Speaker.  There's nothing wrong for business 

people to have ideological and political leanings, just as there's 

nothing wrong for working people or for farming people to 

have ideological and political leanings.  That's the nature of 

society.  In fact not only is it the nature of society in the 

abstract; it's the nature of society in reality, because the 

structure of society, the very structure of society produces those 

ideological and political responses. 

 

If you are a business person and you employ employees, and 

the profits of your business depends upon you keeping as much 

surplus value as you possibly can, as opposed to paying it out 

in wages, obviously your world viewpoint will be to do those 

things and say those things and support those laws and support 

that political thrust which will maintain your profit levels.  Isn't 

that what we've been hearing in this legislature since the 

introduction of labour legislation? 

 

Let's talk about what the Liberals and the Conservatives have 

said.  Business must remain competitive.  Business must 

remain competitive.  That's the slogan these days.  That's the 

slogan these days -- that they must remain competitive.  But 

what do they mean by that statement? 

 

What is the content of the statement, business must remain 

competitive.  Very simply, very simple, Mr. Speaker, it's this.  

Is that there must be an acceptable rate of profit; that's what 

they mean.  That's what all the economic gibberish, all the 

right-wing philosophies . . . and all those who stand over there 

on the side of capital, they use those kind of phrases like global 

competitiveness.  Right?  Business must remain competitive. 

 

Well I don't know.  If I was running a Pizza Hut in this 

province, if I was running a Pizza Hut in this province, I want 

to know who I'm going to be globally competitive with.  Do I 

have to be globally competitive with, for example, Heavenly 

Pizza in Minot, North Dakota?  Is that who I have to be 

globally competitive with?  Perhaps I have to be more 

competitive with a pizzeria in Hong Kong.  Is that a question of 

global competition?  Do I have to worry about that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

I don't think so; I don't think so.  What we have seen over here, 

what we've seen over here in this debate are slogans -- 

sloganeering, no analysis, no content but nothing more than 

sloganeering put forward by those right-wing parties -- we have 

to be globally competitive. 

 

I'm going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that any 

pizzeria in Saskatchewan has to be globally competitive with 

any pizzeria outside the borders of this province.  And I don't 

think that anybody can prove to anybody with any kind of 

reasonable common sense, with any kind of common sense that 

it has to exist in that fashion. 

Now let's talk about, Mr. Speaker, global competitiveness if 

you run an automobile repair shop.  Let's take an automobile 

repair shop in Luseland.  Right?  Now we have to be globally 

competitive with the automobile repair shop in Luseland.  Now 

if I lived . . . maybe if I lived in Santiago, Chile, maybe I'm 

going to drive my car up to Luseland because I know I can get 

an economically and globally competitive price for the labour 

there as opposed to Santiago, Chile.  Or maybe we don't have 

to go that far afield.  How about Guadalajara, Mexico.  Maybe 

I'll drive up to Luseland because I'll be globally competitive, 

right, globally competitive with those people in Guadalajara.  

What do you think, Mr. Member from Estevan?  Is that how 

global competitiveness works?  Is that what we're talking 

about, global competitiveness in the service industry? 

 

Of course not.  Of course not.  Even the member from Estevan, 

even the member from Estevan, befogged as he is, wrapped in 

that ideological blanket of global competitiveness, even he 

dimly perceives the fact that maybe pizzerias and automobile 

repair shops in Saskatchewan aren't really worried about global 

competitiveness.  That's not what they're worried about. 

 

What they're worried about, Mr. Speaker, is pretty clear.  It's 

pretty clear from the statements that those political members of 

the business community, the Liberal and Tory organizers like 

Dale Botting, those type of people, it's pretty clear that what 

they're more interested in is not the content of the labour 

legislation, not the content, not what it says, and not what the 

implications are, but it's pretty clear that what they're interests 

are is to make a political statement, to organize around their 

ideology and their political organization to try to set the stage, 

to defeat this government come the next election. 

 

I think that that's exactly what this is about, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what the filibuster by the right-wing parties on that side 

of the House is all about.  This is nothing more than a political 

operation. 

 

This so-called rally that's coming up, as an example.  Well it 

seems to me, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, watching from the 

inside of the government, at least from the inside of the caucus 

and watching what's going on, that there has been more, there 

has been more than ample access to this government by the 

Dale Bottings of the world.  Let me tell you, in my mind, in my 

mind there has been too much access given to people who have 

a political agenda, who use their situations, who use their 

situation, non-elected, non-elected, their paid lobbyist 

situations as nothing more than to operate on a political agenda, 

right.  And I defy, Mr. Speaker, anybody in this province to 

dispute the fact that people who operate as paid political 

lobbyists are not operating on some kind of political agenda.  I 

think that anyone who believes opposite of that is either being 

terribly naïve, or being meaningfully obtuse, or both. 

 

So what we've seen in this debate is not really debate about the 

content of the Bill.  We haven't seen 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

anything of that other than a political operation being organized 

by -- out in some of the rural areas -- by the Tories, and in the 

cities by the member from Greystone and her political 

operators in the business community. 

 

And I think it's pretty clear to anybody that's lived in this 

province for more than 30 minutes that that's what's going on.  

So let's not get into all kinds of silly remarks as we've heard 

from the opposition.  You may as well stand up and say it.  

Stand up and say what you mean.  Stand up and say we oppose 

this labour legislation because our business friends aren't going 

to make as much money as they should have.  That's what you 

are saying in code, in slogans, in economic rhetoric, in all kinds 

of gibberish.  That's basically what you're saying. 

 

But it's very, very interesting, Mr. Speaker, it's very, very 

interesting that what they're not saying is: hey, as political 

representatives shouldn't we stand up for working people.  

Have you heard one member of those right-wingers over there 

-- and it doesn't matter which coating they have, whether it's a 

grey coat, or a blue coat, or a green coat, or red coat, it doesn't 

matter, they're the same kind of cats -- have you heard one of 

these cats express one iota, one iota, of a need for sympathy, 

and compassion, or understanding of the need for progressive 

labour legislation in this province? 

 

Has anybody in this debate heard any one of those 

right-wingers stand up and say one thing in support of people 

who belong to trade unions or part-time workers.  Have you 

heard anything, members of this Assembly?  Have you heard 

one thing?  I'm asking you the question.  I haven't heard one 

iota, not a thing.  Now from the point of view of the 

Conservatives, because they've made their super right turn to 

try to become the Reform Party of Saskatchewan, hoping that 

somehow they'll take up a little space up there on the right, well 

I can see that obviously they're not going to do that because 

their political base won't allow them to express one bit of 

sympathy for working people, because that's not who they're 

aiming their politics at. 

 

(2215) 

 

But I'm amazed -- I want to say, I'm amazed -- that somebody 

like the member from Regina North West, a member who 

represents thousands of trade unionists, thousands of people 

who don't belong to a trade union but who work for wages, 

stand up and say nothing; nothing in their defence.  Stand up 

and say not one word on their rights, their democratic rights to 

organize.  Right?  This is extremely hard to believe, Mr. 

Speaker, this is very hard to believe.  Right?  This has got 

nothing, nothing, to do with the political reality that she 

represents -- instead their longer-term political objective, which 

is to organize a significant section of the so-called business 

community around their political party. 

 

That's where their opposition to trade union legislation and to 

labour standards legislation . . .  

Right?  It comes down to the buck.  It comes down to the buck, 

it comes down to if they don't stand up in opposition to The 

Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union Act, their friends 

in the business community, their political . . . their masters in 

the business community, won't supply them with the necessary 

funds come next election time.  They will not fill their coffers 

come election time. 

 

They have to prove, and the member from Greystone . . . 

because the member from Greystone does not have a great deal 

of trust out there in the business community.  They think that 

she's a bit of a flake, right? And I predict in fact that at some 

point very near on in the future that there will be a move, in 

fact, to dump her, should they think that the Liberal Party will 

be coming closer to gaining the government of this province.  

This is a bit of personal speculation but we'll do it, just throw it 

out there for maybe those out there in TV land to agree with. 

 

Let's find somebody like Mr. Botting who will be moving in to 

fill that vacancy on the Liberal side.  Why, because they don't 

show her.  So what do we see here?  We see the spectacle of 

the member from Greystone, the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

standing up, mouthing every outworn cliché, every reactionary 

bit of business propaganda, right?  Trying to embrace it, 

wrapping herself in the flag, in the good old capitalist flag, to 

prove, to prove that she can be a trustworthy representative -- 

their trustworthy representative, should in fact they by some 

miracle form a future government in this province. 

 

Right? Some people have asked me, why has the member from 

Greystone been so politically stupid and so politically 

one-sided as to come out four-square opposed to both labour 

standards and to The Trade Union Act? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I've listened with interest to the member 

and I want to remind the member that the language we use in 

this Chamber should be temperate and worthy of the place and 

worthy of the discussion.  And we should not descend into 

name calling or use adjectives which denigrate other members. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For stupid, let's say 

I'll substitute the word ill-advised. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  The member repeats a word which 

I don't think is appropriate, and the member is compounding 

the problem that he creates in his use of language.  Without any 

further artfulness, I encourage the member to continue and not 

to repeat his mistakes. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Why has the member from Greystone been so 

politically ill-advised?  People ask me that, because it's not 

really a smart thing to do, right?  It's not really a smart thing to 

do when you're trying to set yourself up as the middle road, to 

hop over on one side.  Right?  But I think it's very clear, I think 

it's particularly clear to people why she's doing that because 

they don't trust her.  They think, they know, that she's a little bit 

of a political flake, and they're not 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

prepared to give their wholehearted support to that kind of 

operation until they see her go through the test of fire, so to 

speak. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that's going to work either, 

because I think that in this whole debate that's unfolding in this 

province the true colours of the political parties are coming out.  

And we've seen, and the people of this province have once 

again seen, who stands where, who stands where when it comes 

to protecting civil liberties and democratic rights, because that's 

after all, Mr. Speaker, that's what this is about.  It's about 

democratic rights. 

 

The Trade Union Act ensures the democratic right to organize, 

for workers who have the right -- not a privilege, not a whim, 

not something that comes and goes with the government, but 

something which is guaranteed in the charter of the United 

Nations, which is recognized by international organizations like 

the International Labour Organization, a fundamental human 

right -- and that is to organize.  Even the American constitution 

recognizes that, and the right of assembly.  And the Wagner 

Act, for those of you who know a little history will know that 

the Wagner Act recognized that.  In fact one of the major 

arguments used in the formation of the Wagner Act was in fact 

the right guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States -- 

the right to assemble. 

 

So what we've seen, Mr. Speaker, what we've seen is that both 

the Liberals and the Tories have stood against, have stood 

against the deepening and strengthening of democratic rights in 

this province.  It's not just an economic question; ultimately it 

boils down to a question of the rights of individuals to exercise 

some say in their society. 

 

And for most individuals who spend eight hours of their lives 

every day at a workplace, one-third of their life at a workplace, 

it does not seem to me too much to expect that a society which 

counts upon itself as civilized will guarantee to its citizens a 

right to exercise some kind of democracy and some kind of 

democratic say over those eight hours that they give to their 

employer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, fundamentally we've seen, as I said earlier, 

the Liberals and the Conservatives stand to the deepening and 

strengthening of those democratic rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've got about seven minutes left, so I want to 

switch my focus, make a few comments about what I think is 

the inadequacy of the Act themselves. 

 

The member from Albert North has already mentioned that it 

doesn't contain what's known as anti-scab provisions.  

Seventy-five per cent of workers in Canada are covered by 

provisions which outlaw the use of replacement workers in a 

strike or lockout -- 75 per cent. 

 

Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, when the members from the 

opposition and their hyperbole and their exaggeration talk 

about this labour legislation being 

on the cutting edge, that they'd better take a look at this.  If you 

want us to pull back from the cutting edge, perhaps you will 

support joining the other 75 per cent of the population, and 

support the introduction of anti-scab legislation in 

Saskatchewan, as is presently in place in Alberta -- or pardon 

me, British Columbia -- Ontario, Quebec. Legislation which by 

the way has already passed the Senate, and the House of 

Representatives in the United States, and will soon become a 

law, a federal law, in the United States of America. 

 

Perhaps the members on the other side would urge the Minister 

of Labour to join that majority, to become globally competitive, 

or at least continentally competitive with the 14 states of the 

United States which presently have anti-scab legislation.  

Perhaps that's the kind of competitiveness that we can both 

agree on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there's a couple of other areas where this 

legislation is deficient.  One, it doesn't deal with sectoral 

bargaining.  And one of the things that's going to happen as the 

new economy becomes more service oriented is the need for -- 

particularly because of technology in home-based industry . . . 

there is going to be some kind of mechanism will have to be 

put in place to ensure that workers who work in those 

home-based industries will have some kind of mechanism by 

which they can bargain their position; by which they can 

bargain their wages, and salaries, and working conditions.  

Otherwise we end up in a cottage industry situation which was 

going to be nothing more than industrial chaos; nothing more 

than industrial chaos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill I think falls short in the area of first 

contract legislation.  The amendments that have been 

introduced in the House which would limit first contract 

legislation to two years, I believe undermines the very concept 

that that first contract legislation was intended to do -- that is to 

force employers, but more particularly to force their agents, to 

force those who go to work and bargain on behalf of 

employers, to bargain collectively, to ensure that a collective 

agreement is reached, and not to try to go around the collective 

bargaining process, not to try to use the collective bargaining 

process as a stalling tactic, which presently occurs. 

 

The third area, Mr. Speaker, that I think that the Bill is 

defective, is in the area of automatic certification.  The trade 

union movement in this process, as it has throughout the 

country, said: where employers interfere with the right to 

bargain, where they interfere with the civil liberties of workers 

-- where employers interfere with the civil liberties of workers 

-- they shall suffer the penalty of automatic certification.  

Because the onus is on employers to know what the law is.  

And if they knowingly and willingly try to interfere with the 

rights of workers to organize, then the Labour Relations Board 

of this province should have the power to in fact grant an 

automatic certification. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I've raised this matter with the Minister of 

Labour in private.  He knows my views, I 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

know his views on this.  I'm raising it before the House not to 

embarrass the Minister of Labour, but to point out to the people 

of Saskatchewan that what is before this House is by no means 

a radical labour document.  It is a piece of mildly reformist 

legislation which deals with some of the problems faced by 

working people in this province.  And that those who get 

themselves in a big dither, those who've been jumping up and 

down, shouting and yelling about how this will bring the end of 

civilization in Saskatchewan as we know it, are engaged not in 

a debate around the content of the Bill but are engaged solely in 

a political exercise designed to discredit the government, and to 

strengthen one of the other right-wing parties. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at that point in time I'll wait for a response 

from the Minister of Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:29 p.m. 

 


