




















































Hansard: March 21, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1017 

 March 21, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, today is International Day for 

the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.  It was declared by 

the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1966 and 

introduced to Canada in 1988.  Mr. Speaker, if ever there was a 

day of commemoration that should not have to exist, this is it.  

Racism is so obviously a poison to society, so apparently a 

deadly sin, that its existence should be a puzzle to us rather 

than a sad fact. 

 

Unfortunately, racism does exist.  Until it is gone, this day will 

be necessary to remind us that we all should consciously be on 

guard against acts of racial intolerance and prejudice. 

 

I think we will eliminate intolerance bit by bit, step by step.  

When we think of racism we think of the big events that have 

marked our century: Hitler's plan, Sharpeville, Bosnia, and so 

on.  And these big examples of our inhumanity to each other 

are staggering, but we all tell the jokes, we all use the 

unfortunate phrases, we all have the little traces of prejudice 

that added up and multiplied can lead to the big ones. 

 

Perhaps on this day we should all pledge to take a small step 

against intolerance; then some day the big ones will be 

unnecessary.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a week with a heavy burden of 

responsibility.  It has also been proclaimed by the Minister of 

Agriculture as Agriculture Week in Saskatchewan.  It is an 

opportunity provided by the community-minded Saskatchewan 

weekly newspapers association for each of us to focus on how 

agriculture benefits all of us in Saskatchewan.  Agricultural 

accounts directly for more than 10 per cent of the GDP (gross 

domestic product) of the provincial economy.  There are 

thousands of direct and indirect jobs and economic spin-offs in 

both rural and urban communities, and in a very profound 

sense, Mr. Speaker, the social and cultural life of our province, 

the very fabric of our provincial existence, is tied to agriculture.  

If you meet a Saskatchewan person anywhere in the world, 

regardless of how long he's been away, the first question will 

always be, how are the crops? 

 

The last decade the farmer has been under siege.  We must take 

this week to renew our determination to strengthen and develop 

our agricultural sector.  

Governments at all levels, agricultural organizations, and 

individuals are coming together in a spirit of cooperation to 

find ways to a bright and promising future. 

 

I ask all members to join in saluting Saskatchewan farmers and 

farm families.  They have been, are, and will continue to 

provide the backbone of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Francophone Week 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In order to show 

Saskatchewan's support to the Fransaskois community, I'm 

pleased to announce that the provincial government will 

officially launch the National Francophone Week on March 21. 

 

Merci, Monsieur le Président.  Pour démontrer l'appui de la 

Saskatchewan envers les communautés fransaskoises, c'est 

avec plaisir que j'annonce que le gouvernement provincial 

lancera officiellement la Semaine Francophone Nationale en 

Saskatchewan le 21 mars. 

 

Pour commémorer cette semaine importante, il y'aura un plein 

programme d'événements spéciales en travers la Saskatchewan 

toute la semaine.  En plus le drapeau Fransaskois sera placé sur 

le balcon du bureau du premier ministre toute la semaine alnsi 

que sur plusieurs hôtels de ville en travers la Saskatchewan. 

 

M. le Président, je pense qu'il est très important que notre 

province participe à cet événement national.  Blen que la 

communauté francophone de la Saskatchewan soit petite, il est 

encore essentiel que nous faisions un effort pour comprendre la 

culture et la langue des canadiens français.  Le français et 

l'anglais sont les deux langues officielles de tout le Canada et 

non seulement dans certaines régions désignées.  Notre pays 

subit présentement une crise dû en partie à la question du 

français et de l'anglais.  Je crois que plusieurs de ces problèmes 

pourront être résous plus facilement si les deux cultures et 

langues prennent le temps de se connaître. 

 

En terminant, M. le Président, je veux encore une fois vous 

laisser savoir que le gouvernement annoncera officiellement le 

lancement de la Semaine Francophone Nationale en 

Saskatchewan le 21 mars.  Merci. 

 

(Translation:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To demonstrate 

Saskatchewan's support for Fransaskois communities, it's with 

pleasure that I announce that the provincial government will 

officially launch National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan 

on March 21. 

 

To commemorate this important week, there will be a full 

program of special events across Saskatchewan throughout the 

week. In addition, the Fransaskois flag will be placed on the 

balcony of the Premier's office 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

throughout the week as well as on several town halls across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is very important that our province 

participate in this national event.  Although the francophone 

community in Saskatchewan is small, it is still essential that we 

make an effort to understand the culture and the language of 

French Canadians.  French and English are the two official 

languages of all of Canada, and not just certain designated 

regions. Our country is presently undergoing a crisis due in part 

to the question of French and English.  I believe that several of 

these problems would be more easily resolved if the two 

cultures and languages took the time to get to know each other. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I wish once more to let you know 

that the government will officially announce the launching of 

national Francophone Week in Saskatchewan on March 21.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Senior Curing Championship 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 50 

minutes from here, all this week, some of the best curling in 

Canada is taking place right smack dab in the middle of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, at the Hillcrest Sports Centre in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Canada's top 12 senior men's and top 12 senior women's 

curling teams are engaged in daily competition three times a 

day until the championship game on Saturday at 1 o'clock. 

 

These teams are made up of curlers 50 years and older, but 

when I was at the official opening on Saturday, I was able to 

see enough curling to know for sure that there is nothing 

second rate about either their skill or their energy. 

 

Spectators can come and see some of the best women's and 

men's curling in Canada and then relax at the gathering spot 

which is appropriately named "the Moose Patch." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in congratulating Moose 

Jaw organizers of this national senior curling championships 

and encouraging Saskatchewanians to take in this most 

important event and welcoming to Saskatchewan, Canada's best 

senior curlers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Multiculturalism in Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, today I would like the 

Legislative Assembly to recognize the work of three Prince 

Albert promoters of racial harmony -- Marge Nainaar, Grant 

Nicklin, and Roberta Burns. 

 

Marge Nainaar was the recent recipient of a certificate of 

commendation for her long-time work promoting  

multiculturalism.  This award was issued by the Baha'i 

community of Canada and it recognizes the selfless and 

determined work of Marge Nainaar and what she has 

contributed to multiculturalism. 

 

Grant Nicklin and Roberta Burns, co-chairs of the race 

relations committee of Prince Albert, have been fighting racism 

and contributing greatly to the community. 

 

Marge Nainaar is a long-time proponent of multiculturalism.  

She has worked at the local, provincial, and national levels in a 

continuous effort to keep Canada united.  She is the designer of 

the multicoloured bow and a tireless promoter of 

multiculturalism. In Prince Albert she continually promotes 

interracial harmony in general and an understanding of the 

native community specifically.  She's also well known for her 

innovative work within the P.A. (Prince Albert) penitentiary 

where she is responsible for creating the Phoenix Multicultural 

Council. 

 

Grant Nicklin and Roberta Burns, along with the race relations 

committee, have many events planned for the elimination of 

racial discrimination this week.  They kicked off the Baha'i 

new year and include many seminars and performances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's through the efforts of people like Mrs. 

Nainaar, Grant Nicklin, and Roberta Burns that will lead to the 

eradication of all barriers to unity between peoples of the earth.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Education Bureaucracy 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  We want 

to this afternoon continue, as has become our practice, to ask 

the government questions that come from the public.  And I 

trust that the government will respond with the same good faith 

and sincerity with which the citizens of Saskatchewan have 

asked these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the first question comes from Mr. Sam. J. Dyck from 

Warman, and he phrases his question like this.  My question is 

addressed to the Minister of Education.  As a school trustee, I 

am aware of the many layers of bureaucracy a student's concern 

has to go through to reach your attention -- from the principal 

to the district board to the division board to the director of 

education to I don't know how many more layers before the 

issue reaches your desk. 

 

Will the minister start to cut layers of bureaucracy instead of 

cutting the funding to the future of Saskatchewan, our students? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In response to the question on 

bureaucracy, most of the money that we spend in the province 

of Saskatchewan goes to third party.  That's about 96 per cent.  

We were at approximately 4 per 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

cent therefore last year in regards to expenditure on the 

Department of Education.  When you look at the overall costs, 

we made some savings again this year and it is approximately 

three and a half per cent.  So indeed as a government we are 

doing our part and showing leadership in this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Institutional Health Care 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier as well.  And the question comes 

from Mildred Norheim of Kyle. 

 

Mr. Premier, why are there such severe cuts on the long-term 

institutions?  These people are the most helpless and vulnerable 

of our society.  They are also the people who worked all their 

lives to build this province.  A majority of them even helped to 

bring about the formation of your party.  We realize cuts must 

come, but not at their safety, comfort, care and expense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question and the person who wrote the letter to the hon. 

member of the basis of the question.  I say in response two 

things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to think that if this government was flush 

with money we would be undertaking the renewal of the health 

care system roughly in the form and the fashion that we have 

undertaken.  The health care situation has greatly changed in 

the 1990s from just a few years ago; increased medical costs, 

technology, means fewer stays in the hospital.  We can only 

imagine what the next five years technological breakthrough in 

medicines will lead to.  And we need therefore to restructure.  

And I'd like to think that we'd be doing that even if we were 

flush. 

 

The second point that I'm getting at, and I'll take my chair on 

this point, is that we do have none the less a very serious fiscal 

problem.  I'll spare the hon. member my speech, correct as it is, 

an inherited fiscal problem which necessitates new and 

innovative solutions to Saskatchewan's society.  We think we're 

building for the 21st century and we're going to end up with a 

more caring, more responsive health care system, one which 

preserves the health care system and home care for future 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to you, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, I want to know . . . 

And Mr. Alan Brown from Regina here, 6010 Wadge Street, is 

asking this question. 

 

Mr. Premier, I want to know what you intend to do with SPC 

(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) superannuation which now 

stands at 423 million.  Mr. Premier, I want to know why we 

cannot get an increase to cover the inflation rate when our 

pension  

is fully funded and does not require any monies taken out of 

general revenues.  And, Mr. Premier, I want to know: when can 

we expect an honest answer from you? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 

answer that question.  When the public service pensions were 

put in place, they were not indexed.  And most of the pensions 

that exist in Canada today are not indexed.  Only 18 per cent of 

pensions are indexed. 

 

So for us to index pensions to the rate of inflation would be 

conferring a new benefit on people.  In order to do that, we'd 

have to do it fairly.  We couldn't just do it to SPC employees; 

we would have to do it to employees across the government.  

And I've calculated the cost of doing that over the last 10 years.  

Let's say over the last 10 years our pensions had been indexed, 

the cost would be about $150 million to taxpayers. 

 

Our view is, we understand their concern; we're sympathetic to 

it.  But we also have an obligation to protect other people such 

as people in Saskatchewan who don't even have the benefits of 

pensions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Middle Class Tax Burden 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

comes from Mrs. Heidelore Winkelmann of Regina.  And she 

says: Mr. Premier, I want to know why do governments seem 

only to listen to the poor and the rich and ignore the taxpaying 

middle-class people?  We as the middle-class people haven't 

got enough time to make ourselves heard because we are 

working our butts off just to pay our taxes. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, in dealing with our 

financial problems we took what we thought was a balanced 

approach.  That is, some cuts, but also some tax increases.  

We've also been very honest with people.  That is, we have 

called taxes, taxes. 

 

You could compare us to Alberta where they do not call taxes, 

taxes.  They do not.  They say there are no tax increases in their 

recent budget.  Well of course there are.  People in Alberta 

have a 20 per cent increase in their health care premium, which 

means they'll be paying about $800 per family per year for 

health care premiums.  People in Alberta will now 

unfortunately have to pay to send their children to kindergarten. 

 

A recent study out of Saskatoon points out that property taxes 

in Edmonton and Calgary are already higher than in Saskatoon.  

And because of the changes with respect to the cuts to cities, 

where cities will be cut right off of provincial funding, they can 

expect their property taxes to go up. 

 

So we've had to face difficult decisions across the piece.  What 

I'm proud of is that in Saskatchewan we have been upfront and 

we have called a tax a tax.  We 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

haven't hidden tax increases in things like making people pay to 

send their children to kindergarten. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tax on Child Support Payments 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too, Mr. Speaker, 

have a question.  These questions we received are essentially 

the same so we put two together.  These are from two women, 

Ms. Bonnie Durette from Wilkie and Ms. Catherine Grayson 

from Prince Albert.  And with their approval, Mr. Speaker, I 

am asking this question for both of these women. 

 

Mr. Premier, why do mothers have to claim child support as an 

income on their income tax while a father gets to use it as a 

deduction? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this raises a very good 

point.  One of the disappointments I had with the federal 

Liberal budget was that while they were reviewing 

everything -- in fact there are 26 different reviews, I believe, in 

that budget -- the one thing they are not reviewing is the tax 

system.  The only thing they've committed to is some kind of 

quick fix on the GST (goods and services tax). 

 

We believe that you have to ask fundamental questions of the 

tax system.  That is, is it fair, because we believe it isn't fair.  

We also know that it's only the federal government that can 

make the kinds of major changes in the tax system to make it a 

fair system. 

 

So I can assure the women asking this question that we will 

continue to press the federal government for a thorough review 

of the tax system in which these kinds of individuals can have 

their point of view heard and we can come up with a fairer tax 

system all across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister of Gaming.  Mr. Minister, I don't know if you 

realize it but there is a ground swell of opposition mounting 

against your government's approach to gaming in 

Saskatchewan.  And that's not against gaming itself but against 

the way in which your government is handling it. 

 

Every day I get calls from another group or an individual who 

is losing money because of the lack of planning that's gone into 

the decisions that are being made.  Bingo charities are upset, 

hospital foundations are concerned, and this time, Mr. Minister, 

it was a call from the Standardbred horsemen who race at 

Queensbury Downs in Regina. 

 

In a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) interview 

recently you said that there was absolutely not going to be 

VLTs (video lottery terminals) installed at race tracks.  Will 

you confirm that there will not be video lottery terminals 

installed at Queensbury 

Centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand that the expanded casino hours, in addition of 200 

slot machines, will take place in Regina and Saskatoon after the 

Easter weekend. 

 

Now if you visited the facilities at the Regina Exhibition you'll 

know that people walk from the casino directly into the main 

racetrack pari-mutuel betting area, which is simply through an 

open door.  VLTs and horse-racing are going to be in exactly 

the same building, Mr. Minister.  But you said no slot machines 

at the racetrack.  So how do you explain the fact that there will 

indeed be 200 slot machines on location at Queensbury Centre, 

just a few feet from the pari-mutuel machines where people 

line up to bet on the horses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me clarify 

one thing.  Indeed we are expanding VLTs into the existing 

casinos at the two exhibition sites; we intend to do that. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that she is correct in my comments 

that we were not going to be putting video lottery terminals in 

the areas where the pari-mutuels are taking place.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I am quite sure that the member is well aware of our 

casino policy and what we intend to do in that it has over the 

past number of months gained a lot of exposure in the province 

and in the media. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, given her vast knowledge and 

her background with respect to the horse-racing industry, I'm 

quite surprised that when we sent some months ago a paper, a 

discussion paper titled, Encouraging Stability & Innovation, 

that this member who is so intimately involved in this sector of 

gaming would not even choose to respond with some 

suggestions as to how we should handle changes, Mr. Speaker, 

to protect the industry. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, it's quite clear that the member opposite 

determined that there are good forms of gaming and that there 

are bad forms of gaming.  It's not the principle, Mr. Speaker, 

that that member is interested in -- it's the politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

with all due respect, you really don't know what you're doing.  

For years, the exhibition boards have asked the Gaming 

Commission to allow for more days of casino gambling at the 

exhibition casinos.  I mean for years and years and months and 

months they've been asking you to do this.  And obviously you 

had some reason to say no because you repeatedly ended up 

refusing their requests. 

 

Now suddenly, in your great haste to fill the provincial coffers 

with gambling money, your government has 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

flung open the doors of these casinos seven days a week up to 

16 hours a day.  Now, Mr. Minister, this decision is obviously 

part of your government's intention to proceed at some point 

with full-scale casinos for Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

So will you tell us this today, please: who are the partners in 

these proposed ventures; have you tendered any plans for the 

design of the building; and will you table a copy of the 

partnership agreement today in this legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as I've 

indicated, the member, if she isn't aware of the casino policy in 

Saskatchewan, she should be making herself aware.  She stands 

in the House on a regular basis asking questions.  And I'll send 

her again another copy of the casino policy that we've 

announced.  But I ask the member of the third party to do some 

research. 

 

The other day in the legislature, she is indicating that the video 

lottery terminal program has had a severe impact on bingo 

revenue in the province.  Not once did she ask the Gaming 

Authority for any numbers or any figures.  She just stands in 

the House and fearmongers and grandstands. 

 

So let me say to the member opposite that from April 1 to 

February 28, the amount in bingo revenue was up some $25 

million to $141 million.  Last year it was in the neighbourhood 

of $120 million.  And so I say to the member opposite, instead 

of fearmongering and casting misinformation, what she might 

want to do is take some time to acquaint herself with the facts.  

And I want to tell you that the Authority and my office are 

more than willing to share with her information that seems to 

be maybe not a concern of principle but a concern of politics. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

people are not afraid of what I've been saying; they're afraid 

about what you've been doing, and they're completely two 

different things. 

 

Mr. Minister, based on what you are telling me, I don't have a 

great deal of confidence that you have any plan at all, at least 

not a plan that anyone has agreed to willingly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm very interested in knowing who gets the 

money from the slot machines and the extra days and hours of 

gambling at Queensbury Centre and the Saskatoon Prairieland 

Exhibition casinos.  Can you tell us today whether all of the 

increased profits from the expanded casinos will indeed go to 

the exhibition boards, or is this money going to be held in trust 

for the partnership in the mega-casino projects in Regina and 

Saskatoon?  What exactly are the details of the revenue sharing 

on the casino expansion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, let me make this very clear.  She may not 

be aware of government's plans on a day-to-day basis, and I 

think that's unfortunate, because I wish she would spend a little 

time acquainting herself with the facts. 

So let me share with her, with respect to the expanded VLTs in 

the existing casinos, we've made a commitment to the 

exhibition associations that we would try and achieve 

maintaining the revenue that they already have in place.  We 

have installed -- we have installed, but they're not operating, 

they shall be shortly -- some 200 video lottery terminals in each 

one of the exhibitions, as she will know if she takes some time 

to acquaint herself with the facts. 

 

The exhibition associations, the aboriginal community, and the 

government are partnering in the expanded casinos, so let me 

say to her, if she has some concerns, that the money will be 

held in trust pending revenue-sharing discussions that will be 

completed we hope over the course of the next few weeks.  So 

if that answers her question, I'm very pleased; and if it doesn't 

answer, I'm certainly willing to share more information with 

the member because I do think that she should be working from 

a position of knowledge as opposed to where she apparently is 

coming from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges' Salaries Recommendation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, today 

marks the fourth deadline you have set aside to announce a 

decision on the issue of judges' salaries. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you have made this decision, can you tell us 

what your decision is, or are you going to continue to break 

your own law by extending this deadline yet again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this not a 

question of breaking our own law so much as it is extending or 

working . . . being past the deadline which we had included in 

the Bill for the . . . so that the judges would have some way of 

bringing this process to a conclusion within a reasonable time.  

And the judges have made no complaint about the fact that it's 

taking as long as it is. 

 

In direct answer to the member's question, we are considering 

the matter at our regular cabinet meeting tomorrow morning 

and we expect to be in a position to announce the decision 

tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we'll be 

looking forward to your response tomorrow -- your answer 

tomorrow -- or wondering whether there is another deadline 

that has been put forward and missed. 

 

Another question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

White Bear Casino 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, last week in Carlyle Provincial 

Court, Chief Bernie Shepherd testified that 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

high-ranking government officials, including yourself, assured 

him that the band would be allowed to open the casino without 

interference. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you in fact did give this assurance, that's a very 

serious matter.  That would mean, Mr. Minister, that you were 

encouraging people to break the law. 

 

Mr. Minister, did you give Chief Shepherd the assurance that 

you would not interfere with the White Bear casino? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member knows 

perfectly well that I cannot answer that question considering 

this matter is before the courts right now. 

 

And I just simply won't accept that kind of groaning from the 

opposition on a point which they know as well as anyone 

knows cannot be commented upon.  How would it sound if 

evidence is happening in a courtroom in Carlyle and I'm in here 

giving evidence on the same point?  That would be impossible 

and the member knows that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister may have a point in 

suggesting that that opposition doesn't have a right to bring up 

the questions, but it would seem to me that the real court in the 

land, the court that sets the laws, is right here and that it's 

appropriate for the opposition to be raising such questions. 

 

Mr. Minister, Chief Shepherd believes he received that 

assurance from you and the deputy minister of Indian and 

Metis affairs. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The Speaker has no way 

of knowing whether this is before the courts but I heard the 

minister say that this is before the courts.  And I think all 

members know if it is before the courts -- order -- if it is before 

the courts, questions on a matter that is before the courts are 

simply not allowed in this Chamber and never have been in any 

Chamber across Canada or the British domain. 

 

So I will ask the members, if it is before the courts, to refrain 

from asking a question on a matter that is before the courts. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the question we're raising today was 

raised last week in one of our local papers.  And it's a question 

of very serious concern that we are asking of the minister, 

bringing it to the minister's question.  And, Mr. Speaker, it 

would seem that . . . is it appropriate for the opposition to be 

asking the minister questions when this is indeed the 

law-making body of the land?  And we're asking the minister of 

a question, did he give the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, did the minister give any assurances 

to Chief Shepherd?  He laid those questions out in a court last 

week and that's a decision that's already been taken . . . or a 

court proceeding that's already taken place.  Did the minister 

give those assurances? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have no way of knowing whether it 

is before the courts or not.  Order.  If the minister knows it's 

before the courts, I assume he will not answer.  He'll refrain 

from answering.  Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're bailing him out. 

 

The Speaker: --   If the member from Arm River has anything 

further to say, I wish he would rise on a point of order after 

question period. 

 

If the member from Moosomin is aware that this is before the 

courts, he knows that the question is out of order.  I will have to 

take the word of the minister that it is before the courts and he 

is not answering the question.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Shepherd brought a question to our matter and to our attention, 

and he assures us that . . . and we're assured by people in the 

area that when the casino was set up back, I believe it's a year 

ago, that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) were 

really involved with the security involved at that casino.  He 

said arrangements were made with the RCMP to do security 

checks on everyone involved with the casino and to photograph 

and inspect the operation. 

 

Mr. Minister, what he would like to know and what we would 

like to know -- and maybe people across the province would 

like to know -- was this encouraged by yourself and your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member knows, 

probably better than anybody in this Chamber, that this matter 

is before the courts.  I think it's in his constituency.  I think it's 

in his constituency; if not it's very, very close to it. 

 

And it's my understanding that all of the matters that he's raised 

have been the subject of evidence and are the subject of 

evidence in this court case.  And whether or not the former 

premier recognizes it or not, it is not possible for a Minister of 

Justice to stand in this Chamber and comment upon evidence 

given in a court case that is going on while we speak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to Gross Revenue Insurance Program 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In 

recognition of the fact that this Agriculture Week in 

Saskatchewan, I'm going to address a question to the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Furthermore, Mr. Minister, I want to 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

warn you ahead of time that my question deals around the topic 

of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), and so that you 

may be able to abscond from the answer and just simply say it's 

before the courts, I'm not quite sure. But you can make that 

determination.  Because, Mr. Minister, the concern that farmers 

are having right now is that they're going to have trouble 

putting their crops into the ground for lack of money. 

 

We used to have a program called GRIP, and under the old 

GRIP those farmers would have had 43 extra million dollars of 

money in their pocket -- 300 million extra for this year -- had 

we had that GRIP.  Now we are finding out now that they are 

going to be not receiving any of this money.  You've got a 

windfall, Mr. Minister, in your government of 300-some-odd 

millions of dollars. 

 

Are you now going to share that money legitimately with the 

farmers of this province so that indeed they will be able to put 

their crop into the ground? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we do have a 

program called GRIP.  There is a projected surplus in the 

program.  That's the way the agreement reads, that we make 

pay-outs based on grain prices; grain prices having moved up, 

the pay-outs have dropped.  Many farmers in Alberta and 

Manitoba are also not getting a pay-out out of this program.  

And we would never have had the same program that was in 

'91, because it was changed by the agreement that was set up at 

that time in any case. 

 

If there is surplus left in this program when we're out of it in 

one year's time, this government will certainly commit to 

getting back the farmers' share of the premiums, out to the 

farmers.  And we already are talking to the federal government 

with regards to this agreement and what would happen if there 

is a surplus at the time of the wind-down of the program.  

Again I would remind the member opposite that that is 

speculation.  We could well have a deficit if grain prices were 

to drop next year, so that's certainly based on speculation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Agriculture Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, and Members of the 

Legislative Assembly, as members are aware, I have 

proclaimed this week as Agriculture Week in Saskatchewan.  It 

is fitting therefore that today our government takes another step 

in following the road-map of Agriculture 2000, our industry's 

long-term strategic plan. 

 

One component of that strategy, Mr. Speaker, is the review and 

updating of provincial legislation and regulations.  In doing so, 

our goal is to help create an environment where diversification 

of our agricultural industry has government and community 

standards 

and regulations that do not needlessly impede, but responsibly 

facilitate, growth in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is considering 

the preparation of legislation that would provide protection to 

farmers from unwarranted nuisance lawsuits.  Saskatchewan is 

one of the few jurisdictions in North America that does not 

have this type of legislation. 

 

In the next few weeks the government will consult with 

producer organizations and other stakeholders to determine 

whether legislation is needed, and if so, what form it might 

take.  Agriculture development and diversification are 

cornerstones of the recently released strategic direction, Ag 

2000. 

 

The proposed legislation may provide one of the necessary 

elements in creating a favourable climate for diversification.  

The proposed legislation would also establish a mechanism for 

resolving rural nuisance disputes. 

 

A discussion paper has been prepared which outlines the issues 

and presents a possible framework for legislation.  This 

document is now available for public review.  The paper raises 

a number of questions that should create a thoughtful 

discussion and debate. 

 

For example, the first question the paper asks is: is specific 

legislation required to protect Saskatchewan agricultural 

producers from nuisance lawsuits?  Other questions that will be 

asked: what types of nuisance should be covered in the 

legislation?  What types of agricultural production should be 

afforded coverage under the legislation?  Primary production? 

On-farm processing? Other farm-based enterprises? 

 

Will the legislation as proposed in the discussion paper aid in 

the further development and diversification of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan?  Beyond nuisance complaints, what 

impediments to agricultural development could be resolved 

through changes to legislation and regulation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, those questions are only a sample of the issues 

that should be considered by stakeholders in discussions prior 

to any development of this proposed legislation.  The proposed 

legislation is for presentation at a future session of the 

Legislative Assembly, so there will be ample time for 

discussion and consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my sincere hope that all interested parties will 

obtain copies of the discussion paper and will let their opinions 

be known.  All ideas are most welcome.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not quite sure what the 

minister was saying.  We had a very, very difficult time hearing 

him and I did not get a copy of his statement.  So I will assume 

that he was talking about Saskatchewan Agriculture Week that 

we're embarking on from March 21 and some of the 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

wonderful things that you're proposing to do for the farmers of 

this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

And simply, I think, a good demonstration of what you're doing 

for the farmers of this province was demonstrated during 

question period when a very legitimate question was asked of 

you:  what are you going to be doing for farmers?  And we find 

out that we're not quite sure what's going to happen for farmers. 

 

Mr. Minister, tonight is Oscar night.  And I say that to you 

simply because I very distinctly remember the act put on by the 

now Premier of this province prior to the last election when he 

went around beating his chest and saying, if you elect an NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government the farmers' problems are 

going to be solved, because I'm going to go to Ottawa and I'm 

going to come back with millions and millions and millions of 

dollars. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, he does not say that any more, because we 

have yet to see one shred of evidence of what your government 

is prepared to do in terms of going out and marketing 

Saskatchewan to the eastern government so that we indeed can 

gain the benefit of some of these programs -- or for that matter, 

what you are able to do as the Minister of Agriculture in this 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you get up in a ministerial statement 

and start talking about Ag 2000, well pardon me, and excuse 

me, and I think the farmers of this province are echoing this 

word. 

 

Because what is Agriculture 2000 that you're getting up now 

and beating your chest about going to do for the farmers of this 

province?  And the sorry side of this, Mr. Minister, is that if it 

doesn't do anything for agriculture in this province -- we are 

primarily an agricultural province and as goes the economy of 

agriculture, so goes the economy in Regina and in Saskatoon 

and in the other urban centres, Mr. Minister.  Ag 2000 doesn't 

do one thing, I submit to you, nothing. 

 

Now you have a producer group that went around and they 

made recommendations to you.  And do you know what, you 

will get up now in Ag estimates, when I ask you about Ag 

2000, you will say those recommendations are going to form 

the basis for further discussion.  That's what you're going to 

say -- that they will form the basis for further discussion. 

 

Mr. Minister, the farmers are telling us, we want now, we need 

something now; not a basis for further discussion. 

 

And there is something that you can do for the farmers, Mr. 

Minister, and that is what I expect you to do and the farmers 

are expecting, for you to go and actually access that $300 

million, that $300 million that is lying in your Premier's bank 

account that he could withdraw, which is legitimately the 

farmers', and present that to them so that in fact they will have 

the resources to put their crops in the ground. 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member has taken considerably 

more time than the minister had in his statement.  Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too hope that 

what I was able to get in bits and pieces that the minister was 

saying in his ministerial statement is in fact . . . what I'm going 

to be saying is going to be reflective of some of what he was 

trying to say. 

 

Unfortunately I too could not hear what the minister was saying 

specifically.  I'm assuming in fact that much of it is related to 

the fact that we are acknowledging farm families this week 

with Agriculture Week, which has been sponsored throughout 

the province by the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 

Association. 

 

We know that our province is the fifth largest province in all of 

Canada and that our agriculture land base here exceeds 66 

million acres, which is 41 per cent of our entire province.  

Saskatchewan farmers -- farm families -- actually cultivate 50 

million acres, Mr. Speaker, which is 44 per cent of all the 

cultivated land in Canada. 

 

We know what farm families have done to try to cope with the 

significant changes that they have been faced with, in part 

brought on by government policy and regulations, at both 

different levels of government, and most of them have turned to 

alternative and specialty crops to bolster their income.  And 

more and more farmers are turning to changes as far as 

livestock as well, even game farming, for diversification. 

 

Cottage industries have been developed, and it's been 

surprising the numbers of things that have taken place, 

including children's toys to jams and jellies and so forth.  So we 

really do have a lot of credit to hand over to the people of this 

province for their innovation. 

 

We've made extraordinary advances in biotechnology in this 

province, at developing micro-organisms that can serve as 

effective control agents as far as insect pests and so forth.  

Vaccines have been developed, that have never been developed 

anywhere else in the world, to combat diseases as far as cattle 

and swine.  And these advancements in biotechnology are also 

helping plant breeders put new crop varieties into farmers' 

hands far more quickly.  And this is something that we can look 

forward to, in fact, within a very short period of time in our 

province with canola. 

 

The future competitiveness of our industry, Mr. Speaker, 

depends on our ability to be able to adapt to all the changing 

global economic environments.  And I think what we need to 

be seeing is a way of promoting that, Mr. Speaker.  And one 

can only hope that the government comes on side with this, 

rather than impeding through government regulation and 

policies, the ability of farm families in this province to actually 

make the changes that they are trying to make; that they are 

trying to take the initiative in doing.  So . . . 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member has had 

sufficient time to respond. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- With leave, to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I notice sitting in your gallery a 

gentleman from our community -- he just walked 

in -- Reverend Vic Greenlaw, a United Church pastor in the 

community of Kipling.  He's just seated here; he came to 

observe what's taking place.  I trust he's learned a little bit.  He 

shared a tremendous message with us last night at Lent.  I'm 

not sure if what he's seen so far would have added to that 

message or not, but I trust his time here is educational and 

informative.  And I'd ask the members to welcome him to the 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, after 

my remarks I'll be moving second reading of The 

Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 

1994. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You want me to keep up a running 

commentary on yours now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I have a note for you, for the member 

from Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we are all aware, a sustainable future for our 

province relies on a healthy environment, economy, and 

lifestyles.  The Environmental Management and Protection Act 

is the primary piece of regulatory environmental legislation in 

the province.  The amendment to this Act demonstrates the 

government's commitment to the principles of integrated 

resource management, stewardship, and public involvement in 

planning and decision making. 

 

The amendment addresses two issues.  It addresses the age-old 

problem of mines in our province being closed or abandoned 

without proper decommissioning or reclamation.  This will 

enable us to develop regulations that will ensure financial 

assurances are in place prior to the start-up of a mine and 

sufficient resources are available to clean up the mine site at the 

end of its life. 

 

We are working closely with the mining industry to  

develop a regulatory framework that will put in place a mine 

reclamation policy that is acceptable and is effective.  We will 

continue working with the industry in pursuit of our common 

goals.  First, for the best possible environmental protection; and 

secondly, for ensuring environmental sustainability of our 

economic development. 

 

The amendment also expands an existing permit-granting 

section of the Act.  This allows for better regulations of our 

water and fisheries resources.  It enables us to regulate the 

protection of fish habitat in fish-bearing waters.  Previously, 

federal regulations which were administered by the province 

regulated these issues.  The federal government has 

implemented changes to the federal fisheries regulations that 

have created the need for this amendment. 

 

The amendment to this Act is a major step in harmonizing 

federal-provincial legislative responsibilities and eliminating 

any duplication or confusion.  Mr. Speaker, I now move second 

reading of The Environmental Management and Protection 

Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just a few 

comments before I would move to adjourn the debate on Bill 

No. 36. 

 

Possibly one of the major concerns that we would have, that 

any organization would have, and even the mining association, 

Mr. Speaker, is that in knowing what the regulations are 

specifically going to set out.  It's easy for us to sit here and 

discuss the specific piece of legislation, but if the legislation 

leaves the regulatory process a lot of latitude, then that creates 

some confusion not only in the industry but it certainly creates 

confusion for everyone involved. 

 

And so we would trust that as we enter into the debate on this, 

and the minister has indicated that they've been talking to the 

mining association and there's . . . all the information we have 

is that the mining association themselves are willing to look at 

ways and means of protecting their industry and protecting the 

environment. 

 

At the same time, they just want to know that they've got a 

level playing-field that they can work with; that at the end of 

the day the legislation will be passed and the legislation will 

look fairly healthy and harmless.  And yet as the regulations 

start to come down all of a sudden we find everyone put in a 

very difficult and tenuous position. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to allow for a little time, for more time of 

discussion, my colleague the opportunity to do some more 

research, I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The State of the 

Environment Report Act 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- A little enthusiasm, eh?  Mr. Speaker, after 

my remarks I will be moving second reading of the amendment 

to The State of the Environment Report Act. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the state of the environment report 

is like a report card indicating the health of Saskatchewan's 

environment.  The report demonstrates the important linkages 

that exist between our activities and environmental conditions.  

This amendment will allow us to release a state of the 

environment report every two years instead of annually. 

 

Most other provinces, Mr. Speaker, that prepare a state of the 

environment report allow between two to five years for 

research and report preparation.  This change to a two-year 

cycle will help current efforts to harmonize data collection and 

reporting among provinces. 

 

Many departments and agencies contribute material to the 

report.  Issuing a report every two years provides the necessary 

time for extensive research and data collection, to prepare a 

comprehensive provincial report.  Environmental trends 

generally do not change that much in one year.  Trends can 

only be identified and studied based on longer time frames. 

 

Preparing a report every two years will give us a clearer picture 

on the state of our environment as well as making us more 

consistent with other provinces.  This change will give people a 

better informational tool to make decisions about the 

environment, understand environmental issues, and evaluate 

the impact of human activities.  The next state of the 

environment report is expected to be released in 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of the amendment of 

The State of the Environment Report Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 

would like to take a little more time to review the Bill 

somewhat more closely. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the minister suggested 

that we move from a one-year report to a two-year annual 

report, a report on the state of the environment.  And 

considering the fact that the members opposite when in 

opposition were quite emphatic about the fact that we should 

have a yearly review, one would begin to wonder, is why we're 

changing. 

 

The minister would argue that he's changing this or brought this 

regulation in place or change in place to harmonize the 

environmental reporting with other jurisdictions across the 

country.  Now if we're talking about harmonizing maybe there's 

another form of harmonization that he could bring forward to 

his colleagues and that's harmonizing the taxes.  And  

maybe we could lower them and simplify the whole process if 

we're indeed looking at simplifying environmental reporting for 

the benefit of the taxpayers and everyone involved. 

 

Mr. Minister, as we have a number of questions and would like 

to review this a little more in depth before we get into the 

greater discussion, I move now to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will be 

moving second reading of The Parks Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

The purpose of these amendments is to better protect and 

represent important ecosystems within the province.  The 

amendments will also introduce efficiencies in administration 

to reflect the changing needs within Saskatchewan's provincial 

parks system. 

 

The Clarence-Steepbanks Recreation Reserve will be 

designated as a provincial wilderness park, adding an additional 

17,500 hectares of land to the parks system.  Public 

consultation has shown that there is strong support for this 

recognition.  The provincial wilderness park designation will 

allow more effective management of this area for protection for 

present and future generations.  A steering committee has been 

established to ensure the local community is involved in the 

management of the park.  The government remains committed 

to respecting traditional rights on this land. 

 

A new protected area will include water courses within lands 

acquired by Canada and the Grasslands National Park.  The 

designation of this protected area is required under the 1988 

Federal-Provincial Grasslands Agreement to ensure that the 

province retains control of the beds of water courses within the 

national park. 

 

Several housekeeping provisions are included in the Bill.  

Cannington Manor and Fort Pitt Provincial Historic parks and 

Saskatchewan Landing Provincial Park are each being 

expanded on a small scale.  Errors in existing legal descriptions 

will be corrected for Douglas and Makwa Lake provincial 

parks. 

 

These amendments ensure that Saskatchewan's provincial parks 

provide a better representation of our natural ecosystems and 

heritage resources and they support the government's 

commitment to an enhanced park system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Parks 

Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on the 

surface it would seem that Bill No. 38, The Parks Amendment 

Act really doesn't have anything that we 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

could really stand up here and oppose.  I think some of the 

suggestions that were made by the minister certainly will be 

beneficial and the public in general will appreciate it. 

 

I think it would be appropriate that we certainly review what 

the full intent of the Bill is to make sure that it's not just a 

wilderness area or wilderness park that really will not have a lot 

of access by the public.  But I know that the minister mentioned 

a number of parks that are going to, if I understand it correctly, 

like Cannington Manor, is going to be expanded somewhat. 

 

A number of these parks, certainly in our area, are used on a 

daily basis by the residents of our area and certainly people 

coming in from outside of our province, outside of our country.  

I think one of the most important things we can do is to 

promote the parks across Saskatchewan we do have.  We do 

have some of the most picturesque and beautiful land and 

parks, certainly, from one side of the province to the other.  

And I think we need to do more to promote the use and let 

people know that there's more to Saskatchewan than what they 

see either side of either Highway No. 1 or Highway No. 16 as 

they go through the province. 

 

So I think from what we see on the surface, the Act appears to 

have some very solid suggestions and affirmative action.  We're 

going to want some more time to review it a little more in depth 

and therefore at this I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

The Chair: -- Before we proceed to clause-by-clause 

consideration, I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

The officials, seated to my right, Neil Yeates, the associate 

deputy minister of Social Services; behind Neil, Bonnie 

Durnford, senior policy analyst; and behind me, Madeleine 

Robertson, Crown solicitor with Justice. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, it was asked last day if I could table the list of 

consultations between the task force and the community 

groups.  And I would be pleased to do that at this point and 

then take any further questions, if that's okay. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'm 

just wondering if we could have a copy of that 

information -- there might be some questions pertinent to 

it -- before we finish our questions on the piece of legislation 

before us today. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government appointed a task force to 

examine options for child and youth advocacy 

about two years ago.  I'm just wondering first of all, Mr. 

Minister, if you'd have a copy of that, if there was a report put 

out by the task force.  Maybe you could fill us in as to who was 

part . . . or who the members were of the task force. 

 

And what I'm basically doing I guess is giving you three or four 

questions at once.  But maybe while you're discussing it you 

can get us the rest of the answers. And did you use many of the 

recommendations of this task force when writing this 

legislation?  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, did you use many of 

the recommendations of the task force when you were writing 

or preparing this legislation that we have before us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I could go 

over the names individually on the task force or I could table or 

send them over to you, whichever you prefer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Table them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: --  Just send them to you?  Okay.  Be happy 

to do that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Secondly, the report was made public.  If you'd like a copy, we 

could send one over to you.  But it was a public report at the 

time and we'd be happy to send you a copy of that.  We don't 

have one right now.  We could send you one later today, if 

that's okay. 

 

And with regard to whether we accepted the recommendations 

of the task force, I think it would be fair to say that the basis for 

the model that we've established, that is the child advocate, was 

the essence of the . . . the fundamental essence of . . . rather 

than the Ombudsman model, was one of the fundamental points 

made by the task force.  And so we've adopted that approach. 

 

The second major point they raised was to ensure there is 

independence from the minister.  That's the second major, I 

guess, principle.  And we've incorporated that into the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  With regards to the 

report, the reason I'm asking for a copy is, I'm not exactly sure.  

Generally when reports are handed out, we usually receive one 

in our caucus office and we generally put it up so everyone has 

access to it.  For some reason if one did come out, whether it 

got misplaced or not, I'm not sure.  So we'd appreciate 

whatever you have regarding this report, and if you would 

submit it or send it to our office we'd appreciate that. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us some detail 

as to what specific recommendations you have accepted, and if 

there are any recommendations made by the committee that 

you didn't accept, and why or why you may not have accepted 

a number of the recommendations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Possibly 

several hundred copies were released, but 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

we will make sure you get one later today.  All of the groups on 

that consultation list, and many others, received a copy of the 

report but we'll make sure you get one later today. 

 

I guess the best way to answer your questions in terms of the 

recommendations -- because there were a number of them -- is 

I could give you some of the themes which were the basis for 

the recommendations and let you know what we've opted for if 

that's acceptable to you. 

 

One of the themes was, as I said, a strong preference for a child 

and youth advocacy model over the Ombudsman's model.  And 

of course what we've done is recommended the Children's 

Advocate model. 

 

A second major recommendation was the need for a separate 

legislative mandate for child and youth advocacy.  And we 

recommend here, and incorporated, amendments to The 

Ombudsman Act to establish the Children's Advocate, to define 

it in a proactive, preventive manner.  We've outlined the duties 

in that way, which was a clear recommendation of the task 

force. 

 

A third recommendation, the need for the advocacy process to 

be independent of the control executive branch of government, 

which we've done, as you know, by making that office 

accountable to the legislature here. 

 

A fourth recommendation is creating a structure for the child 

and youth advocacy process that reflects a strong community 

base.  And we've recommended an advocate that emphasizes 

the problem solving approach, that sort of model where it 

would be possible and desirable for the advocate to . . . in a 

proactive way, in an outreach way, to reach out to children and 

families in terms of advocacy; to be able to analyse the 

system's issues from their point of view directly from the 

people involved. 

 

And the second thing I suppose with regard to that 

recommendation was to build the child advocate as one part of 

the child action plan, which is community based, preventive, 

and to sort of fit in with the integrative approach that is the 

thrust of the children's action plan. 

 

Another recommendation:  the utilization of youth and citizen 

volunteers to advise or participate where appropriate in the 

process of child and youth advocacy.  And of course we have 

established a children's council which is a broad based group of 

citizens who have demonstrated some interest or concern on 

children's and family matters.  The first meeting of that 

children's council will be held this coming Friday, I believe, in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Another principle is an emphasis on public education as an 

essential component to advocacy.  We've built that right into 

the Bill as an expectation of that individual. 

And of course a final one that I'd comment on, the creation of a 

system that assures children and youth they'll be empowered to 

speak and that they will be heard.  And again, I think we've 

done that by making the office independent.  And as I said last 

time, a child from any one of our institutions could write to the 

child advocate and the letter would be forwarded immediately 

and unopened.  And so that sort of access that the children in 

the system would have to that office as well. 

 

So I think we've captured the model, the essence of the model, 

and the fundamental principles that were in the task force 

report.  And as I said last time too, the chair of the task force I 

think is quite satisfied with this approach at this time.  We'll be 

quite prepared to evaluate it over the course of the year and, 

you know, entertain recommendations as they may be made.  

Thank you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Greetings, Mr. Minister.  Welcome to your 

officials today. 

 

It's been a while since we spoke on this, but continuing the 

issue of why the child advocate is responsible to only certain 

segments of the population of the children of the province.  

You've stated that children who are serviced by 

non-government organizations are only covered by this 

legislation if those organizations receive grants or other 

funding from government departments. 

 

Mr. Minister, since school boards receive grants and other 

monies from government departments, does that mean that the 

child advocate would be mandated by the legislation to be 

responsible to all children enrolled in Saskatchewan schools? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much for the question.  I 

guess I would say at this point is that we do view this as a 

starting point.  I think you raise a question that's very 

legitimate.  We wanted to expand it further than our 

neighbouring provinces in terms of the scope, which we have 

done, as you know.  And we would be very open to any 

recommendations from this office or yourself over the course 

of the year.  If we find that once we gain some experience with 

expanding it beyond what Alberta and Manitoba have done, we 

would be quite open to considering expanding it further. 

 

But we want to make sure that this is successful.  We believe 

that some of the children in care of the department and some 

people receiving . . . families, children receiving government 

services should ensure that there is somebody that can lobby on 

their behalf and play that advocacy role, whereas many of us 

are able to lobby for our own children. 

 

And if we gain experience in this broader scope than our 

neighbouring provinces and we feel we can add another piece 

to it and . . . your school issue may very well be, you know, the 

basis for some expansion.  But we feel we need to get some 

experience with it.  I think that's about the only way I can 

answer your question at this point. 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'm not sure here of what you're saying.  If 

indeed it does apply to non-government organizations which 

get funding, does this legislation then apply to school children? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'll try and 

make myself clear here.  What I was trying to say is that the 

jurisdiction extends into where there are any government 

services provided.  Where we are funding specific NGOs 

(non-governmental organizations), we have a contract with 

them in terms of what the expectations are, including sort of 

what the funding is intended to cover.  And as I tried to say last 

day, the child advocate has the jurisdiction to look at those 

contracts and the terms of those contracts. 

 

With regard to the school system, as you would know, the 

current Ombudsman does not have jurisdiction in the school 

system either.  Basically we're just keeping the jurisdiction the 

same way that the current Ombudsman Act provides for. 

 

However, I would say that the schools and the principals and 

the staff and so on have some accountability to the school 

boards locally.  And so there is an accountability there that isn't 

often or usually with government services.  So that's the 

reasons I think that we've opted to limit it at this point, which 

doesn't mean to say we can't expand it in the future. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Perhaps I'm just a little dense.  I don't quite 

understand the difference between the funding to the school 

boards and how . . . is there another portion of The 

Ombudsman Act that limits it other than what we have in front 

of us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Maybe I'll try and say it this way.  The 

definition of an agency of the government in the Act includes 

departments and agencies like boards, NGO boards that may 

form a contract with to provide a certain set of services.  And it 

excludes locally elected boards like the school boards. 

 

Again, the child advocate will have the same jurisdiction as the 

current Ombudsman.  So this is not a restriction from the 

traditional role that's been played by the Ombudsman.  And I 

might say that it still is broader than the scope of the other 

provinces.  But maybe in the next year or so we can look at 

whether it could be expanded or not. 

 

We think that this is a pretty ambitious scope already and we 

want it to be successful and we want that office to have the 

resources to do the job in what is a pretty big area already. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Some of what you're saying here about the 

limiting really has a lot to do with the budget constraints.  

You're saying that we're just unable to fulfil a bigger mandate, 

that this child advocate is really a child's ombudsman rather 

than advocate.  My impression is that The Ombudsman Act 

itself  

then tends to limit the role of this actor as an advocate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all let me say that I don't 

want to get into . . . or I would hope not to get into a question 

of whether we're not prepared to put the resources there as 

required.  I think we are.  We're already making the jurisdiction 

of the child advocate broader that our counterpart provinces, 

substantially.  So we want some experience with this. 

 

There is a fundamental difference between the Ombudsman's 

office, which responds in a reactive way when people lodge 

complaints as you know, than an office that is proactive, has a 

community education role, has an advocacy role, and is clearly 

spelled in the legislation.  We want it to be something quite 

different. 

 

And I would go back to say that the chairman of the task force 

who met with all these groups where we just tabled a list of 

consultations is satisfied that this is a good starting point and 

that it is more than our neighbouring provinces. 

 

And so I'm proud of that.  This is not a budgetary 

consideration, although obviously we're trying to responsible 

and balance the need for advocacy and the direct service aspect 

to any consideration of services of children and families. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

wouldn't the functions of the advocate be in direct 

contradiction, as you said, to the functions of the Ombudsman? 

 

If indeed the child advocate will have the power to advocate for 

children . . . The nature of advocacy work is in essence to lobby 

on behalf of a group of individuals with the express purpose of 

changing government's ways of doing things or delivering 

programs.  While the Ombudsman mediates between 

individuals or groups as you were explaining, and the 

government, it as often as not takes a side of the government if 

all matters were handled within the context of the law. 

 

What effect will sharing the office with the advocate, what 

effect will that have on his efforts or her efforts to change 

policy and what effect will that have on the respect for the 

neutral mediating nature of the Ombudsman office?  You 

know, the vice versa effect of this advocate who is lobbying in 

an office which is not meant to do that sort of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say 

first of all, the reason that we have put the offices together is 

just for some administrative efficiencies.  And secondly, a 

major part of that I think is to give the public sort of one point 

of access.  Okay, so not to confuse where they would go. 

 

With regard to a potential conflict that you raise, we believe 

that the child advocate role will dovetail nicely with the 

Ombudsman's role in that the child advocate, as you know, is 

responsible and accountable for looking after the best needs of 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

children, and their families obviously.  Where the division of 

labour is that the Ombudsman's primary role will be dealing 

with adults and investigations around concerns by adults. 

 

Now the Ombudsman of course has had a lot of experience in 

investigation, so obviously there will be a working together on 

that cumulated expertise which will benefit, I would suggest, 

the investigative work that could be done by the child advocate.  

So I don't see a problem there as you've identified.  We think 

that those two roles will dovetail very nicely. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Part of what I have some difficulty of 

understanding, I can understand the administrative efficiencies 

and using the expertise of the Ombudsman in investigating 

claims, but it almost sounds in your description like a child 

Ombudsman, rather than a child advocate. 

 

My question is on the nature of what . . . and again I'd like to 

reiterate that I'm in no way opposed to a child advocate.  

Because having worked with young children and children of all 

ages for years, I know there is really an essential need for this 

office.  But I would like for it to be as effective, as you would, 

as it possibly can. 

 

And I'm concerned.  I don't understand exactly why it needs to 

be under the Ombudsman office in order for administrative 

efficiencies.  I understand there's already a model for the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner who has separate legislation, 

works within another office, for administrative efficiency.  And 

I'm wondering why it needs to be under The Ombudsman Act 

rather than standing on its own. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well we might have gone different ways 

here but I think that the essence of it is that we've built into the 

legislation . . . it's an independent role, it's a proactive role, it is 

only housed with the Ombudsman's office.  And there's some 

administrative efficiencies which make sense.  I mean they may 

be physically separated in the same building.  They will operate 

independently or cooperate where it's necessary and possible. 

 

I would say that in drafting the legislation, this was done in 

consultation with the current Ombudsman's office, but it is 

clearly an outreach, proactive, advocacy position.  And again, I 

don't foresee the concern personally that you have.  And I fall 

back to the fact that the chair of the task force is satisfied with 

the arrangement and the model, and that it has the principles 

that he believes will make it work. 

 

So I mean we're going on good faith that he has a sense of 

where everybody is coming from, and that this has the 

principles that need to be preserved and promoted and they're 

in the legislation.  So I'm optimistic about how it will work; I'm 

not pessimistic at all. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- My concern is that the difficulty and the 

time consumed in drafting legislation, in bringing legislation 

forward, expands.  And in terms of revising 

this, should we want to expand the mandate of the child 

advocate, or if it's found that the Ombudsman's role in some 

sense limits what the advocate can do because it's under The 

Ombudsman Act, would involve drafting new legislation. 

 

And given that we know that it takes time for legislation to 

come down into . . . I'm wondering why we aren't doing it first 

rather than working to build that legislation independently and 

with perhaps a delayed mandate, but a mandate none the less, 

to serve all the children and to really make that advocacy role 

strong. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well this is an area where we may have 

to agree to disagree because I'm already saying that the scope is 

broader than the scope of other jurisdictions.  Now obviously 

you would see that as a good step because you're lobbying for a 

broader scope. 

 

So we're broader already, but we want this to be successful.  

We want to make sure that this works.  You have to give the 

advocate a set of legal requirements, which we've tried to do in 

the Act.  You have to identify those, spell them out as clearly as 

you can. 

 

The office is accountable to this Chamber.  It would be quite a 

simple matter, in fact, to make any amendments down the road 

to this office.  And I can give you the assurance that I would be 

quite open to your advice on that, the advice of the official 

opposition, and maybe especially the child advocate -- him or 

herself -- as to whether there should be some changes.  We'd be 

very open to that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I in no way question your personal 

commitment to that.  But given the role of advocacy, there may 

be someone in your position at another time, affected by this 

legislation, who does not have that same willingness and 

openness to dealing with what may be difficulty.  Advocacy 

can stir up some devils.  But it's a concern that I've been 

thinking about a lot. 

 

The two offices would share administrative staff while having 

different mandates.  If the advocate shares administration costs 

with the Ombudsman, does this mean that the advocate's funds, 

as you outlined in what your department is planning to put into 

the advocate's hands, does that mean that those funds 

appropriated by the legislature will be deposited to the account 

of the advocate or the Ombudsman?  Who's in control of that 

budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me assure you that the money 

designated in the budget will be used for children's advocacy 

services, for that office.  The money allotted will be used for 

nothing else but that office. Okay? 

 

The administrative head will be the Ombudsman but the money 

will be designated for the advocate.  It'll be used . . . the 

advocate will have control over that amount of money, 

including who the staff will be and  



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

so on, and what the priorities are going to be.  So there will be 

no way of interfering there.  So I hope that that gives you that 

assurance. 

 

In terms of the advocacy role or the public accountability role 

or whatever you want to say, we have current watchdog 

agencies as you know, like the Ombudsman or the Provincial 

Auditor and so on, who are free to say what they want to this 

Chamber in their reports, as the child advocate will be. And I 

don't think we look at their budget in relation to what they say.  

I think that that's not been the experience and I don't anticipate 

that being a problem with the advocacy role. 

 

I know your point, but I don't . . . like that's why we want that 

office to be accountable to the legislature as a whole, that 

independence, rather than to me as the minister.  Because then 

your point, which is a point that lobby groups are making in 

Alberta and Manitoba, then of course if the minister is in 

charge of the advocate, then you run into the problem that 

you're identifying. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, the 1992 annual report of the 

Ombudsman noted some frailties or difficulties in their office.  

One was the inadequate staff and resources with a backlog of 

complaints and an inability to initiate systemic investigations 

into government departments.  And it also commented on the 

limited jurisdiction of the Ombudsman office. 

 

Have those frailties been addressed and how will these 

difficulties affect the functioning of the child advocate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I guess a couple of points I would 

raise here is that keep in mind we are putting in 350,000 new 

dollars for advocacy accountability measures.  So that's almost 

. . . in fact it's over a 50 per cent increase, or almost a 50 per 

cent increase to the current amount of money that goes to the 

Ombudsman.  So we're enhancing quite substantially the new 

money that's available. 

 

As you know, the current Ombudsman provides services to 

children too, does investigations regarding children.  And as the 

advocate takes some pressure off that system -- and more 

appropriately because it's a child advocate -- then it may free 

the Ombudsman up to sort of provide service to some of the 

areas that he felt that he couldn't in the past. 

 

So I'm hoping that we can reassess that along the way from 

both perspectives, both office perspectives, but we are putting 

in almost 50 per cent new money.  And again we have to be 

open to recommendations by the advocate that the money's not 

enough or that the legislation is too restrictive.  And we'll be 

open to doing that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How will the mandate of the advocate be 

affected by aboriginal jurisdiction over aboriginal children?  

And what about the repatriation of aboriginal children -- how 

does that work into the mandate? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I know that you would appreciate the 

complexities here.  I mean constitutionally it's our opinion that 

the child advocate will have jurisdiction on the reserves.  And 

as you know, we're establishing the first nations' agreements in 

family and child welfare, a progressive step that I think most 

other provinces are involved in and most of us would support 

aboriginal people being responsible for their own children or 

their own families. 

 

And so we're progressing down that path and it's new territory, 

so we're trying to manage it as best we can. 

 

First nations people may not agree that there's some jurisdiction 

there.  I don't know that.  I think it would be important to say 

that the child advocate will need to establish a relationship 

there in a very sensitive way and work out some arrangements. 

 

And in my experience as Minister of Social Services, having 

signed two of those agreements trying to manage this very 

complex jurisdictional question between the provinces and the 

federal government and the reserves, I found that the first 

nations people have been very receptive to our dilemmas, at the 

same time wanting to accomplish their own goals.  And I think 

that . . . I'm confident that they would take the same position, 

because they want to ensure that the services they provide are 

in the best interests of their children and families as well. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Under the task force there was a complaint 

that time constraints didn't allow consultation with FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) or the Metis 

Society, in quotes, which is unfortunate, given that the children 

represented by these two organizations are highly evident in 

case loads of the Department of Social Services, and both 

organizations are building parallel systems of child advocacy.  

How will that fit in with this legislated mandate of the child 

advocate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well in terms of that point, the task force 

did have five months.  There were representatives, as you know 

from the list, from the first nations, the Metis Society, on the 

task force.  How long is long enough?  I don't know. 

 

The federal income support reform, which your party is 

heading up -- I don't mean to be political here and I hope you 

don't interpret it that way -- but they're giving us two months 

basically -- I was at the first meeting -- two months basically to 

go back to Ottawa and redesign social security programs that 

took 20, 30, 40 years to build.  Fundamental decisions have 

been made to the UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) 

program, which have implications for the social assistance 

program and so on, without any consultation. 

 

So I think that five months for the magnitude of that issue 

relative to two months to redesign, across Canada, with all the 

jurisdictions, the income support system, is a much more 

fundamental issue that 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

Saskatchewan people would be concerned about. 

 

So I take your point, but obviously the federal government, the 

federal Liberal government, thought that two months was long 

enough.  We believe that five months was long enough for the 

task force to make their report.  And again it doesn't matter 

what you and I believe, the task force chair is happy about this.  

It's a good starting point.  So I don't minimize your concern, but 

I think that I'll fall back on that at this point. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd 

never accuse you of making a political statement.  I believe that 

the complaint of the task force was that its mandate was over 

the summertime and it was very difficult to get in touch with 

people. 

 

But I am concerned about the level of consultation with the 

FSIN and the Metis Society because of the level of case-load.  

And the original mandate that we're suggesting for this 

advocate affects those children first.  You know, the aim is to 

deal with the children most at risk, the children who need an 

advocate.  And so I'm somewhat concerned just . . . There's 

nothing you can do about that, except I am concerned about 

how it will all fit together with the FSIN and those responsible 

for aboriginal affairs. 

 

Another issue, on section 12.1, the task force 

recommended -- and I refer back to the task force because it's 

the only template that I have for looking at this -- the task force 

recommended a specific structure of the legislative committee; 

that is, three members of government and two members sitting 

in opposition, with one of those five members on this 

committee being a member who represented a northern 

constituency.  And I assume that meant someone who 

represented a large aboriginal population.  Not only that, but 

specific duties were defined.  Can you tell me why the 

legislative committee was not better defined in the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I think the explanation to that is that, I 

guess, we felt that we wanted to review this as a watchdog 

agency.  Like the information of privacy officer, the Provincial 

Auditor, the Ombudsman, and so on, we felt that they should 

all report in the same way to the legislature, have the same 

status, report the same way. 

 

If we decide at some . . . this Chamber decides at some point to 

change the reporting format or the accountability format, then 

it's our view that it should be done for all the watchdog 

agencies.  So that's the rationale. 

 

I mean not that it isn't a good point, but we do have . . . It's 

consistent.  We've made it consistent with the other watchdogs 

and how they report to the Assembly, and their accountability 

here.  So I think that's the answer there. 

 

(1515) 

 

With regard to your preliminary comments before 

your question and the number of aboriginal children who 

interface with, say, our department and governments, that is 

precisely the reason --  I agree with your point -- that is 

precisely the reason why we're working as hard as we can to 

transfer over child and family services to aboriginal people and 

the Metis Society for their children so that they can best 

manage their own affairs.  They want their kids back to their 

families, back to their communities, and so that's why we're 

moving with that agenda there. 

 

And it is our belief and interpretation that the child advocate 

will have, constitutionally, will have jurisdiction on reserves 

and . . . But that has to be managed.  You can't prescribe that 

fully because that's been the nature of this new territory that 

we're trying to map out. 

 

But it's been my experience, and I have frequent meetings with 

the FSIN and the Metis Society on these issues, that they have 

been . . . and our experience with them is that they've been 

very, very cooperative in pursuing their own objectives and to 

cooperating when it's required with the provincial systems in 

order to ensure that people get the services that they need. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the 

reason that I press this issue is because having worked with 

children, I know that the children's perception and children's 

needs are different from most of what those other watchdog 

people are responsible for.  And I would say that forming a 

particular committee that came to understand the needs of 

children through work with the advocate, would be beneficial 

to not only the legislature and the people of Saskatchewan and 

this body, but to children. 

 

And so I ask that question because I think that may have been 

some of the intention behind the recommendation of a specific 

structure that is not at the . . . You're a very open minister and 

you're very willing, you express willingness, to consult and you 

do consult.  But there's always the possibility there'd be another 

minister who was not that open.  I think in some sense that 

would be a safety mechanism to provide a more balanced view 

to the advocate and interface with the legislature. 

 

It was stated the advocate should not interfere with or replace 

the natural advocates but should supplement, empower, and 

support the efforts of those natural advocates.  How do you 

envision the child and youth advocate being able to -- or I 

should say the child advocate being able to -- do this if the 

mandate only applies to those children affected by government 

agencies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well the advocate will of course have a 

public education role generally and has the ability to look at 

systemic systems issues, and I think that most children at risk 

and their families come to the attention of government anyway 

under the Act. 

 

Now you may not agree with that but, you know, last year we 

conducted, 1993, something like 5,500 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

investigations across the province in our department.  That's a 

pretty hectic workload, and I think that that's an indication 

likely that we get to our attention, we get most of the serious 

cases.  And of course everybody is required under The Family 

Services Act to report issues of suspected abuse or neglect, as 

you know. 

 

So we believe that the child advocate, by supporting other 

advocacy efforts, it just sort of adds another capacity to the 

systems to ensure that the advocacy overall is strengthened. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I go back to the example I used the first time 

with the young man who was arrested and very traumatized by 

his experience with the police.  And you spoke of the police 

commission.  He has his natural advocates, his parents.  But if 

that child does not get satisfaction through the police 

commission or whatever appeal procedure they have set up, 

and I've looked at that, why . . . 

 

My concern is that this is just the tip of the iceberg -- and I'm 

sure that's the overwhelming part of this -- this is the tip of the 

iceberg of concerns of children that will not be met by this 

legislation.  Because they are not covered under the mandate 

and their natural advocates aren't. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I get the sense that you're not going 

to give up until we expand it totally. 

 

But I just want to reiterate that we . . . I mean we want this to 

be successful.  We want to make sure that the scope is . . . We 

want to experiment, that it's broader than Manitoba and Alberta 

but yet it doesn't jump into every place, that it basically starts 

where there's a critical need, which we believe we've 

addressed -- that is, any services by government. 

 

We've already talked about the fact that there can be some 

jurisdiction extended to NGOs.  You're concerned about the 

school; there's accountability to the school board; the parent 

can go to, or someone can go to. 

 

With regard to the police and the example you used there, if 

any person feels that they've not been treated fairly by the 

police now, they have an appeal procedure in that system by 

going to the public investigator's office who can review that 

decision.  Now since the provincial government appoints that 

individual, the advocate, I'm advised, the advocate could 

actually look at the basis upon which that decision was . . . 

(inaudible) . . . because we appoint those individuals. 

 

So we're trying to start to make sure that all children who 

receive any government services have that protection as a 

starting point.  And that includes a lot of children.  So we want 

to be successful there, and I've said that we would welcome 

ideas around expansion, if that's felt necessary.  And I think 

that any person following me would do that as well.  The child 

advocate has the power and the authority to report to this 

legislature any time he or she wants to.  And that's been done in 

the past on special occasions.  And I 

think that any government that would ignore that would be . . . 

it would not be a wise decision for any government to ignore 

that individual's report, which you would have an opportunity 

to speak to as well. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple more 

points and I won't wear you down too much longer. 

 

The task force emphasized the need for community guidance of 

the advocacy process -- participation in the design, delivery, 

monitoring, support, and direction of the process.  How will 

this legislation ensure this community guidance, or does the 

legislation lend itself to a top-down process, which means a 

tendency to minimize the community base? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well if you're wondering about top down 

from that office to the community, I guess my response would 

be that we clearly would want to recruit someone who, first of 

all, has a strong interest and a recognized interest in the 

province on children's issues, and secondly, someone who has 

an interest and is recognized to be concerned and to have 

experience in community involvement.  And I think that those 

would be sort of critical elements in any hiring process. 

 

We certainly want this to be a community involvement kind of 

a role, and their public education, public advocacy and so on 

ensure that there is going to be that interaction with the 

community.  So I think that the individual, like any office, to 

some degree the individual tailors how the office functions.  

Dave Tickell was a very proactive Ombudsman and in child 

matters, as you know; Mr. McLellan was more of a reactive 

Ombudsman.  So those were just two different styles, two 

different interpretations of the office. 

 

It is very clear in this Bill that this a proactive position and we 

would expect that to mean that the outreach, the education, and 

all of the things that we talked about.  So again, I personally am 

not concerned that the child advocate will be a top-down kind 

of individual and that that office will be top down and it'll be 

very much connected to communities across the province. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I hope that's how it works too.  And I think 

my sense of what the task force was doing was trying to 

provide some structure such as the commission, such as the 

involvement of the youth, such as the involvement of 

volunteers in their proposed legislation to not only hope that it 

would happen, but to try to structure it into the legislation. 

 

And I'm wondering why some of the structures they suggest . . . 

particularly the issue of community involvement.  As you say, I 

mean different people have different styles of . . . Things can 

change but I feel it's critical to this that community 

involvement, individual . . . from the wide range of community 

involvement around the province is critical to this.  And I think 

that's what the task force is trying to do in its recommendations, 

and I'm wondering why it was 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

simplified down to leave out many of these structures. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I think one of the things that we're trying 

to do through the action plan for children is to empower 

families, to empower communities, to keep in the community 

the primary responsibility and interest for the best interests of 

children and families.  We want healthy communities and 

healthy families so that they reinforce each other.  And 

structures are evolving all the time. 

 

I hope you're not suggesting that there are no structures that 

this office can relate to.  We've established the Children's 

Council, which is a new initiative, at the first meeting this 

week.  No doubt the child advocate will want to meet with that 

broad-based body where all the individuals have track records 

and interests in children's concerns. 

 

Both these initiatives, the child advocate and the Children's 

Council, are initiatives of the child action plan.  So we want to 

. . . the new family service and child agreements with 

aboriginal people, the negotiation with the Metis Society 

around their child welfare issues, those are new structures that 

are evolving all the time. 

 

So some of the structures aren't even in place yet in the 

communities that will have to be related to.  The child advocate 

may very well want to go and meet with the West Flats 

Community Association of Prince Albert, which would be a 

good idea.  Because the West Flats group, as you know, has 

taken control pretty well of the development of their services in 

the best interests of their neighbourhoods and their community 

of P.A. 

 

And so there are many forums at the grass-roots level open to 

the child advocate or structures, as you say, that will be 

accessible to that individual and to that office.  And I would 

think that the child advocate would be most anxious to meet 

with people of those structures. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I appreciate what you're saying.  I mean the 

government is building the Children's Council, and there are 

other aspects of government which have children's interests at 

heart.  Not all of them agree on the basic principles underlying 

children's needs, but in forming the advocate's office, indeed 

the advocate will want to consult with them but the advocate 

will also be responsible for keeping them accountable.  So you 

know, there's a complexity of role there. 

 

And I'm still somewhat concerned about accountability to the 

public.  I'm not sure if I can explain it better than that, except to 

say that there is . . . somehow there's a lot of hope in this 

legislation.  You know it's evident that this is what we'd like it 

to do.  I'm concerned that at times it may not be able to 

accomplish that with how it's structured. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Again I don't mean to minimize your 

concern because I know it's a sincere concern. 

All I can say is that that office will report to this Assembly.  

You will have the opportunity to review the report, like you've 

done with the current Ombudsman, and make comments, ask 

questions on that report. 

 

The independence has been preserved unlike our neighbouring 

provinces.  So we've learned from that; we've learned from 

those experiences.  We've broadened the scope beyond our 

neighbouring provinces.  And I'm not being critical of them; 

we've learned from them.  We're broadening the scope beyond 

our neighbouring provinces. 

 

And so the individual's accountable to us, to the people of 

Saskatchewan, in terms of the function of that office and, I 

would suggest, to individual youth and children on the 

casework problem-solving that's being satisfactorily done or 

not done. 

 

So I would suggest that we set it up, we experiment with it, and 

then we be very open to meeting with the child advocate on 

how things are going and make adjustments if required. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I appreciate the efforts that your officials 

and you have put into explaining and answering my questions 

on this.  And I'd like to thank you for this afternoon. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, in your second reading remarks you said that the child 

advocate would be appointed in the same manner as the 

provincial Ombudsman.  And, Mr. Minister, this may or may 

not be a good thing. 

 

But I'd just like to bring to your information some of the 

information we're receiving and get some responses.  We've 

received a number of phone calls regarding the process of 

choosing the provincial Ombudsman.  For instance one 

individual was one of four individuals short-listed for a similar 

position in Ontario with a budget of over $200 million a year.  

He was short-listed out of approximately 240 applicants. Yet 

the same individual, qualified as he was, applied for the 

provincial Ombudsman in this province and wasn't even 

short-listed out of 70-some people applying.  Obviously, Mr. 

Minister, this individual is questioning the method in which 

applicants were short-listed. 

 

My question here would be, what is the use of holding a public 

competition for the office if you don't have a non-political, 

non-partisan selection committee in place to review 

applications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do not 

know of the circumstances you're talking about, but I would 

reiterate what I said the other day is still true.  The process will 

be similar to the way in which the Ombudsman's position will 

be filled.  In other words, there'll be a public competition.  The 

Public Service Commission will be involved, the chair, as is the 

case now.  I gave, I think, a commitment that I 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

would consult with you and with the member from the third 

party with regard to the process.  I still make that commitment 

today, and you'll be consulted as to the outcome . . . or the 

candidates.  So I hope that satisfies your question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just to clarify it, Mr. 

Minister, the process we're talking of is . . . Certainly the 

Minister of Justice had chatted and sent letters to the leaders of 

the two opposition parties regarding the official Ombudsman.  

The unfortunate part, the way the Minister of Justice laid out 

the criteria is that once the list had been short-listed, then the 

opposition party . . . or the opposition leader and third party 

leader would be consulted as to the final choice. 

 

What we're saying, Mr. Minister, it would be appropriate I 

think that if there is going to be true consultation, that there be 

some involvement in the overall process.  And you've indicated 

that you're more than willing to consult with us regarding the 

. . . Now I'm not sure if you're talking of the short-listing or just 

consulting with us prior to the final announcement of who the 

child advocate would be. 

 

But if we're going to be really reforming the House and 

changing the House, it would seem to me . . . And I take from 

your comments, Mr. Minister, that you're suggesting, no, you're 

not just talking of just the final two or three individuals that 

may be short-listed, but there might be some involvement or 

input from the other parties in the House. 

 

That's what I'm suggesting.  If that process isn't there, then it 

would seem to me it would be appropriate for us to have 

reviewed the private members' Bill regarding a legislative 

review committee that would look at all these public 

appointments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I want to be clear on what I'm saying 

here.  I indicated that I would be willing to involve you in sort 

of how the competition will occur.  It'll be a public 

competition.  I'll share the proposed job description with you, 

ask for your feedback, your input. 

 

In terms of the competition though, I won't be involved in it 

either.  I won't be looking over the applications.  It'll be, I 

assume, like the other process, it'll be chaired by the Public 

Service Commission chairperson.  So I won't see the names 

either.  I won't be looking at the 50 or 60 or whoever knows 

how many applications.  So I will see the list that is priorized 

around the criteria based on objective education, the experience 

background, and the interviews. 

 

So I have no inside track here that you don't have.  When I get 

a list I will share that with you and invite your input.  So I'm 

not privy to anything that you're not, in terms of the actual 

screening out of people.  I make that commitment to you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, the point we're trying to make is, 

fine, and I appreciate the commitment you're making, but who 

specifically will be  

committee?  You mentioned the chair will be the Public 

Service Commission.  Now who's going to appoint the other 

two individuals?  Is it an order in council? 

 

Just for example when we look at the commission that was 

reviewing the Ombudsman, one of the former assistants to the 

member from Regina Dewdney, Lois Thacyk, I believe is how 

you pronounce the name, was appointed to the committee, I 

believe, when the Clerk who was unable to fulfil her role on 

that committee. 

 

And what we're saying, Mr. Minister, that's all fine and dandy.  

You're saying that you don't have privy to that information and 

I'm not saying you would or you wouldn't.  In fact I'm not 

exactly sure you'd really have the time to go through that whole 

process.  It's a matter of the committee that's put in place, who's 

on the committee that's bringing forward the recommendations, 

that at the end of the day you're going to seek some input from 

the other parties in the House.  And that's the question we're 

raising, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say the process for the 

Ombudsman's competition, as I understand it, was that the 

chair of the Public Service Commission was involved, which I 

would view as an independent person.  The Clerk of the 

Assembly was involved, which obviously is an independent 

person.  And the process will, I assume, be the same -- we 

haven't even got that far yet -- but I assume it'll be the same 

process. 

 

But while I appreciate your point, I won't review for you, 

because you remember -- and I could name the positions if you 

want we to -- where your administration before, appointed 

watchdog individuals without any competition or without any 

consultation with the opposition.  So I'm not going to do that, 

but I could if you want me to. 

 

I'm saying that we're going to go a public competition route and 

we're involving respected, recognized, independent people.  

Now you didn't do that in some of your appointments.  Now 

I'm not saying they were bad appointments, but you didn't do 

that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I thank you, Mr. Minister, for the way you use 

"you" because it seems to me I never had any input in it 

neither. 

 

But I would suggest, Mr. Minister, though, if we're really going 

to change the system, and if, as you've indicated to me, for 

some of these public appointees we're really going to be open 

with the public, there's another process. And maybe you need a 

process that expands beyond and possibly, I believe, there may 

even be a suggestion coming, an amendment coming forward, 

that is laying out a format which talks about men and women 

from this Assembly.  Number one, you get away from 

additional salaries by appointing people to certain committees.  

But I think, Mr. Minister, the public in general are looking for 

something significantly different.  They're looking for 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

changes. 

 

(1545) 

 

And I think I can stand here quite assuredly and let you know 

that you may look back at the former administration, but quite 

frankly I had very little input into it, and what took place in the 

'80s and what took place in the '70s and what took place in the 

'60s was strictly politics.  And I think we want to move away 

from the politics per se and move into a more open and 

competitive format. 

 

And I would ask the minister if he would give some serious 

consideration to supporting the private members' Bill before 

this Assembly that brings forward the make-up of legislative 

review committees, regarding the public appointment of such 

officials as possibly even the child's advocate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I agree with making the process 

more objective and more fair.  And I think that we've gone a 

long way to doing that.  As I've indicated, the chair of the 

Public Service Commission and the Clerk are on that 

committee.  Those are pretty independent people.  I think it's 

unlike the previous situation, but we won't get into that. 

 

So I agree with you; we're moving into a fairer process.  I won't 

see the names; I don't know who the people are going to be.  I'll 

get my list after the process has been worked through. 

 

And I guess the other point I would add is that by introduction 

of the position itself and the new money and the principles that 

we've entrenched in the legislation, we want this person, this 

office, to have the independence and the objectivity and the 

freedom to do things that not even our counterpart provinces 

are allowing their child advocate to do.  So again, it's a move in 

the direction that you're advocating, and that is a fairer process.  

So I think that we've made some strides on those two fronts 

with regard to your points. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we certainly could stand here 

and argue whether it is fair.  Certainly I would have to say that 

the process I'll take for granted is somewhat more open and 

more available to the public. 

 

And you mention the Clerk of the Assembly.  Now I'm not sure 

the Clerk of the Assembly, aside from being involved in the 

appointment of the Ombudsman, whether it was . . . I don't 

remember the process, but there was an appointment of another 

individual -- actually I've got them indicated -- a staff person 

who used to work for the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

And what we're saying, if indeed they're public officials that 

are not . . . like the Clerk of the Assembly we wouldn't perceive 

as being a political appointee or the Public Service 

commissioner.  And I just don't remember who the third person 

was on the other committee.  But the more we can do to make it 

public and at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, when the 

breakdown comes and you want some input, I'm sure  

that we'd be more than willing to offer our objective input and 

then as you say, as the legislation requires, comes before the 

Assembly for final approval. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think the other day I asked about the budget 

allocated to the office of the child's advocate, and if I'm not 

mistaken you had responded there were five staff people at 

roughly $250,000 with $100,000 for administration.  Just a 

couple of questions here.  I'm wondering is . . . I take it that 

that's $350,000 right now you're anticipating to the child 

advocate.  Do you think that funding will be enough to address 

the needs of the five staff people, administration, when you 

realize that there will be annual reports and probably a number 

of other reports that will be coming to this Assembly?  I just 

would like your comments on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, you're correct.  The 250,000 is for 

salaries and the 100,000 is for the administrative budget 

relating to public education, travel, preparation of reports, and 

so on.  We've tried to cost that out, I'm advised, as best we can.  

If that proves to be insufficient, then we would have to be open 

to that consideration. 

 

But based on the relative budgets of our counterparts, we feel 

that that's a good starting point, and that that should be able to 

handle the costs as anticipated at this point. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you also indicated that the child 

ombudsman would be appointed for a five-year term with the 

possibility of reappointment for a second, I take it, for an 

additional term of five years -- that's another five-year term.  

And unless that person resigns, dies, or is removed from office, 

who decides whether the person or the individual is reappointed 

for a second-year term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- On your first point, you're right.  We're in 

a five-year appointment.  In terms of any potential 

reappointment, we would obviously consult with you, with the 

official opposition, with the third party, to see whether we're 

satisfied with the performance of the individual.  It would 

require, as you would know, the reappointment would require a 

resolution through the Assembly.  And so that is the process 

that would be considered for any reappointment, as I 

understand it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you also pointed out that a child's 

advocate may have their position terminated for . . . and there 

were a number of reasons given.  I believe as well . . . and that's 

by an order in council which would be, I would take it, the 

cabinet body. 

 

However if a termination should take place outside of session, 

the sessional period, if I understand it correctly, the Lieutenant 

Governor through an order in council then would appoint 

someone to fill in for that until the next session before the 

Legislative Assembly then is reconvened to have a 

reappointment.  Is that true? 

 

And secondly, in that the appointment of a person that  



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

would just be filling in a period of time, would there be the 

same consultation process you've given to us?  Would you 

make that offer or what do you suspect or expect that as 

minister you would make a recommendation to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council regarding that fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I think you raised a point that we 

did talk about and I think that we'd have to use our best 

judgement if the session was about to come in.  That would be 

quite different than if we didn't anticipate coming in for three 

or four or five months. 

 

But I think the basis . . . the spirit would be the basis of the 

appointment process would be that I would reach out and 

consult with you in the same way as we are proposing now or 

committing now on the short list.  So I would say that if it were 

a three- or four-month period, just for example, that I would 

want your opinion on replacement on an acting basis, the acting 

basis, because we'd have to go through the same formal, 

independent advertising process again. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, there's no 

doubt in my mind that in your position I believe we can expect 

that what you've indicated to us, that you would make every 

effort to communicate.  Should I ask what happens if for some 

reason someone else is put into the position of Minister of 

Social Services, do we get the same assurances?  Can you make 

those for colleagues down the road?  Or the someone else is . . . 

one of the other members of the Assembly is saying, or for 

another party.  Now I guess that's maybe drawing a long bow.  

I'm not sure if they're anticipating that there may be a change 

come the next election.  I don't know. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, in 12.31(1) of the Bill, it states that: 

 

The Children's Advocate may appoint the employees that 

are required in order to carry out the duties and 

responsibilities of the Children's Advocate effectively. 

 

I would take from one of our previous questions we're talking 

of about five staff people.  We're talking of about $250,000 

dollars.  What I'm wondering is once this person is appointed 

you're saying, under the Bill then, that person then would 

appoint the individuals that would work in the office to be their 

support staff?  And, Mr. Minister, does the Bill have a cap?  

You indicated there would be five staff employees. Is that what 

you're saying is roughly the cap or the staffing of the office, the 

number of people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I think on your first question, I could give 

you assurances that . . . I mean whether it's me or somebody 

else that gets . . . If this place is going to work effectively, if the 

place is going to work effectively, you involve members of 

other parties, and I think that the vast majority of work that 

goes on in here is done by consensus and consultation through 

agreement.  Just a few times that that isn't the case and they get 

all the attention.  So I think that would be the general approach 

of likely any minister in a temporary replacement. 

With regard to the five staff, we're just sort of basing the 

budget on our initial analysis that this would be the staffing 

complement required.  If the child advocate decided to 

reorganize or rearrange the staff in some other 

complement -- which may very well be possible; I don't know 

that -- the individual would have to have the ability to manage 

that office and those employees in a way that makes sense 

along the way. 

 

So I don't think we're committing there are going to be five 

staff; we just worked the budget out on that basis.  And 

obviously the individual will have the freedom to manage that 

budget, that staffing budget, as he or she sees fit.  But those are 

the amounts that we're allocating at this point in time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If I could make one 

comment.  One of the reasons for the question is the fact that 

you indicated that the child's advocate is going to have the 

ability and responsibility to staff their office and have a certain 

amount of money to work with.  You've made the comment 

that if they needed more, then they would have that ability.  I 

would think that possibly the Assembly should lay out some 

guidelines so that you're not left at the end of the day finding 

out that all of a sudden this bureaucracy has grown a little bit 

beyond what you originally intended. 

 

I think we want to set some guidelines in place so that we don't 

have another bureaucracy and another administrative body 

growing to the point that it isn't really fulfilling the goals, the 

real goals that were laid out for the child's advocate.  And I just 

toss that out as a suggestion, Mr. Minister. 

 

Another question, Mr. Minister, in section 16, 31(1), I talked 

about the Assembly making rules for the guidance of the 

Ombudsman or Children's Advocate in the exercise of his or 

her powers on their performance, etc.  Will these 

recommendations be made by an all-party committee, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I just want to be clear on your first point.  

Just to make sure I'm clear here.  I did not intend to say that the 

advocate, child advocate can expand the budget if the need 

arose.  The budget is set in the Assembly.  It'll be a prescribed 

budget and you will be able to speak to whether you think that's 

enough or it isn't enough. 

 

So your concern about an expanding bureaucracy unbeknownst 

to the legislature wouldn't be possible because the budget is 

struck here and it'll be approved here, and I invite your support 

in the final vote on the budget because this is a key part of the 

budget. 

 

The section you're talking about is already an existing section 

in The Ombudsman Act where we're just adding the advocate 

to that section as well.  So this is not a new section that you're 

referring to. 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, just 

before we move on to going clause by clause, I just wanted to 

make a comment that, as I've indicated earlier and my 

colleagues certainly have indicated, and my colleague, the 

member from Rosthern, on his position as being a former 

minister of Social Services had given us a lot of serious thought 

to, this position unfortunately didn't quite reach the point of 

being able to bring forward the type of legislation you're 

introducing today. 

 

We believe it's appropriate and it's certainly good that there is a 

voice for children and youth in crisis.  There's a role in the 

community for education, prevention, that it's . . . that we've got 

a voice, the child advocate that is, we hope at the end of the 

day, totally independent of control and influence of any 

government department or minister and is an agency that will 

be visible and accessible to the community.  And I think at the 

end of the day, Mr. Minister, as we've indicated in our debate, 

whether in second reading and certainly in committee, in 

general we're quite in favour and . . . (inaudible) . . . we 

commend you for bringing forward this Bill to this Assembly. 

 

The one thing that, as I've indicated earlier and I'll say again, is 

I think we need to be very careful that the child advocate is 

certainly an individual who's willing to listen, willing to sit 

down and assess the situation -- the particular situations and 

cases that come before him -- versus being an individual or 

body out there, that as soon as a suggestion of an accusation 

may come before them, that they're acting without really 

looking at the overall parameters. 

 

Because I think it's important that we not only listen to the 

voices of children or teenagers or young adults that are facing 

some problems, but we listen to the other overall community, 

be it a parent, be it an educator or whoever in society that may 

face a situation where someone raises a concern about their 

conduct.  I think it's most appropriate that we respect the rights 

of individuals, but as well, letting people know that with the 

rights they have, they have a responsibility to our society as 

well. 

 

So I thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think unless there are further 

questions, we're certainly prepared to move into 

clause-by-clause debate. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

That clause 6 of the printed Bill be amended by: 

 

(a) by renumbering section 2 as being enacted therein as 

subsection 2(1); 

 

(b) by adding immediately after subsection 2(1) therein the 

following new subsection: 

  "(2) In performing the duties, discharging the 

responsibilities or exercising the powers set out in this Act, 

all persons, bodies or groups of persons upon whom those 

duties or responsibilities are imposed or in whom that 

power is entrusted shall aim to secure the objectives of this 

Act in the context of the recognition of the following rights 

and commitments: 

 

  (a) Children and youth have rights, notwithstanding their 

minority, including: 

 

   (i) the right to be heard and participate, wherever possible, 

in the making of decisions that affect them; 

 

   (ii) the right of access to information about them that is 

held by governmental or non-governmental 

organizations, agencies or departments; 

 

   (iii) the right to be informed about legislation and 

government policies and procedures that affect them; 

 

   (iv) the right to privacy and confidentiality in their 

dealings with governmental or non-governmental 

organizations, agencies and departments; 

 

   (v) the right to maintain connections with their biological, 

cultural, religious and linguistic heritage; and 

 

   (vi) the right to have society make every effort to provide 

them with continuity of relationships in a permanent 

setting; 

 

  (b) Children are the highest priority of a society and their 

needs and concerns must be addressed as a matter of 

priority; 

 

  (c) Children are entitled to an advocacy process that 

supplements the primary role played by parents, family 

members, teachers, social workers and others and that only 

supplants those persons when they are ineffective, 

neglectful or abusive; and 

 

  (d) Children are entitled to the development of preventative 

measures to protect individual children and classes of 

children. 

 

I am proposing this amendment because I think it gives to this 

Bill a set of principles that underlie the interpretation of the 

Bill.  And I'm pleased to move that amendment today. 

 

The Chair: -- The amendment to clause 6, as proposed by the 

hon. member for Regina North West, is out of order because it 

is beyond the scope of the Bill which is An Act to amend The 

Ombudsman Act.  The purpose of the Act is to amend The 

Ombudsman Act in certain particulars, notably to provide for a  



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

Children's Advocate.  The amendment as presented seeks to 

amend the interpretation clause of the Act by providing for the 

rights of children and youth.  I find such an amendment beyond 

the Bill's scope. 

 

In support of this decision, I would refer members to 

Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th Edition, 

citation 698(1): 

 

 An amendment (and I read it in part) is out of order if it is 

irrelevant to the bill, beyond its scope . . . 

 

Further, I would add that an amendment is out of order . . . or 

that the amendment is out of order because it is a substantive 

amendment, introduced as a modification to the interpretation 

clause of the Bill.  This is out of order, and I would cite 

paragraph 698(10), on page 208 in Beauchesne's, 6th Edition: 

 

 A substantive amendment may not be introduced by way of a 

modification to the interpretation clause of a Bill. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 7 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I move: 

 

 That clause 12 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

the words "on the recommendation of the Assembly" where 

they occur in subsection 12.1(2) as being enacted at page 3 

therein and substituting the following: 

 

 on the recommendation of the Special Committee of the 

Legislative Assembly on Children. 

 

The Chair: -- In looking at the amendment, the amendment 

makes reference to another amendment which is proposed to be 

also put by the member for Regina North West later on in this 

clause.  As such though, this amendment is inadmissible, and I 

will refer members to Beauchesne's, paragraph 698(4)(a): 

 

 An amendment is inadmissible if it refers to, or is not 

intelligible without, subsequent amendments or schedules 

. . . 

 

The way I propose that we proceed with this is that we have the 

agreement of the committee to deal with the subsequent 

amendment first and then go back to this one.  If that's agreed 

then we'll take your later amendment, deal with that first.  If 

that's carried, then this amendment would make sense.  Is that 

agreed? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Agreed. 

 

The Chair: -- You have the agreement of the committee to do 

that.  So if you want to move your second amendment, we'll 

consider that at this point. 

Mrs. Bergman: - 

 

 Amend clause 12 of the printed Bill by striking out 12.61 as 

being enacted at pages 6 and 7 therein and substituting the 

following therefor: 

 

 Special Committee of the Legislative Assembly on Children 

  "12.61(1) A Special Committee of the Legislative 

Assembly on Children is established and consists of: 

 

   (a) three members of the Legislative Assembly who are 

government members; and 

 

   (b) two members of the Legislative Assembly sitting in 

opposition to the government. 

 

  (2) One of the members of the Committee shall be a 

member of the Legislative Assembly representing a 

northern constituency. 

 

  (3) The Committee shall: 

 

   (a) make recommendations to the Legislative Assembly as 

the need arises concerning the appointment of persons 

as the Children's Advocate; 

 

   (b) review estimates and forecasts, analyses of revenues, 

expenditures, commitments, and other data pertaining 

to the operation of this Act, and assess the results of 

those reviews; 

 

   (c) advise upon in relation to any matter that the 

Committee considers necessary for the efficient and 

effective operation of this Act; and 

 

   (d) receive and review reports of the Children's Advocate. 

 

The Chair: -- I find the amendment in order.  So at this point 

comments should be directed to the amendment that's before 

us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe just a couple of 

points.  As you will know, we've talked about this and we 

probably agree to disagree on this point.  I guess the couple of 

points I'd like to stress here is that we think we've demonstrated 

our commitment to democratic reforms by changing the way in 

which the Ombudsman is . . . the selection process to the 

Ombudsman in the current competition, namely the chair of the 

Public Service Commission; we had the Clerk in that 

competition.  That is a significant improvement to the selection 

process, as the member from Moosomin has agreed to or 

acknowledged a few moments ago. 

 

The advocate will be publicly advertised.  I'll invite you to be 

consulted, to consult . . . to have input 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

into the job description; you'll have a chance to look at that.  

The process, you'll have the opportunity to look at the names 

that are brought forward.  And I believe that, as we've said 

earlier, that is more independent than any other jurisdiction in 

Canada, including the independence to the legislature. 

 

So I think that we've gone above and beyond what other 

jurisdictions have done in this appointment.  So I do not 

support your amendment at this point. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- You speak of dealing with it now and 

dealing with hiring an advocate.  But what the law does is go 

on in the future and it deals with the operation, the link between 

the legislature, the advocate, and the children.  And I think the 

point of this is to give an ongoing structure for informed . . . an 

informed committee in the legislature to deal with the advocate 

both coming and going.  And for that reason, that is why I 

propose the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just one quick point here.  I would say 

that we already are ensuring by this legislation that the 

advocate is accountable to the legislature.  That is unlike 

Manitoba and Alberta.  That's a strength that the task force 

appreciates of this particular legislation and this model, and so 

we're preserving that.  So your concern about ongoing 

involvement, I think the ongoing involvement has got to be 

with the people out there in the communities because we want 

this to be a community-involved person and to support 

communities in the areas of advocacy and education that we 

talked about. 

 

So I appreciate your point, but I think personally that we have 

safeguarded that by the independence of the position. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I really don't argue with the steps you've 

made beyond the current models.  But I would again argue that 

this amendment helps structure . . . strengthens the Bill in terms 

that it helps a committee be formed that deals with the fact that 

children are different from the population dealt with by the 

Ombudsman.  It's a different orientation and I believe . . . and 

it's also non-partisan.  The issue is the non-partisan nature and I 

recognize that you're very open to that.  But the legislation goes 

on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I would just say that of course the 

position is non-partisan.  That's why the public competition; 

that's why the individual or the office reports to the Assembly.  

We've preserved that, unlike other jurisdictions.  So it is an 

independent person. 

 

So I agree with you, but all of the watchdog agencies deal with 

different spheres.  And yes, the child advocate deals with 

children, which is very, very important.  But we were keeping 

the same process in place for accountability of the watchdog 

agencies to the legislature.  And we have not established a 

separate process or a separate accountability mechanism for 

this office because the Provincial Auditor's office is also very 

critical to the use of taxpayers' money. 

So we're not defining how watchdogs report by what they do, 

but we're treating them all the same.  And hopefully there's 

good accountability by reporting to the legislature, by being 

able to file a report at any time.  We think that that's a 

significant safeguard in this case. 

 

(1615) 

 

The division bells rang from 4:18 p.m. until 4:24 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

Toth Bergman 

Britton  

-- 9 

 

Nays 

 

Thompson Renaud 

Simard Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Shillington Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Kowalsky Roy 

Mitchell Cline 

Cunningham Scott 

Hagel Wormsbecker 

Koenker Kluz 

Pringle Jess 

Lautermilch  

-- 27 

 

The Chair: -- Are there any further amendments to clause 12?  

Yes, bring the officials back. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to: 

 

 Amend clause 12 of the printed Bill by striking out clause 

12.6(2)(b) as being enacted at page 6 therein and 

substituting the following: 

 

 (b) receive, review and investigate any matter that comes to 

his or her attention from any source respecting a child; 

 

The reason I'm moving this amendment, Mr. Chairman, is that 

I'm concerned that the mandate of the Children's Advocate is 

limited to a small portion of the children of Saskatchewan and I 

would like to see it extended for all children of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: -- I might say that I find the amendment in order so 

that any debate at this point would be on the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Well we spent quite a bit of time on this and as I tried to say, I 

appreciated the member's point 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

and don't necessarily disagree with it except the scope of this 

legislation is already broader than Alberta, Manitoba, in the 

area of all services provided by government to children. 

 

We've gone over also the contracts with the NGOs, the status, 

as we understand it, of the jurisdiction in the Bill with regard to 

the agreements for establishing with the first nations people . . . 

potential agreements with the Metis Society.  So we believe 

that the Bill encompasses, unlike Manitoba and Alberta, 

already a broad range of children who are the most at risk. 

 

And we want to start, gain experience, and as I indicated 

earlier, we're willing to consider any recommendations of the 

child advocate for potential future expansion in scope.  But 

we're . . . And then there's the school board issue and there's a 

number of other considerations here that require other people to 

be involved and consulted with on this particular amendment. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now I don't know if you've consulted with the school boards on 

this or not, but I've tried to discuss with you how that has some 

implications for the accountability of schools to the school 

board.  I've tried to outline to you how there is a safeguard with 

regard to any complaints about the police involvement.  And 

those other accountability systems are in place.  So we're 

willing to consider the individual's recommendations a year 

from now, or leading up to the next year. 

 

And I would say in conclusion that this is already broader than 

anybody else has it.  We believe that some experience gained 

with this scope as it is would be in order over the first year and 

we'll make adjustments if we need to, and support the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, on a further clarification on 

12.6(2)(b), it says: 

 

 receive, review and investigate any matter that comes to his 

or her attention from any source . . . 

 

Now if there was a period there it would mean, any source.  But 

it continues on saying: 

 

 . . . including a child concerning: 

 

Then there are three restrictive subtotals. 

 

Now the way it is being proposed, it says: from any source, 

respecting a child.  What's the fundamental difference between 

what the amendment is proposing and what you are proposing? 

 

I view it as this . . . and if I could just have your attention here.  

I view it when it says, "his or her attention from any source," 

that means what it says -- any source.  And then you're using 

these three subheadings as potential examples, but it does not 

preclude any other source.  Which would then mean  

that I would come to the conclusion that this amendment could 

therefore be redundant, because it's already doing what the 

amendment proposes to do. 

 

Could you clarify that please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, I think what the three 

points do is they define the scope.  And they define the scope 

and are intended to define the scope so that we don't get into 

the situation which the member from Moosomin was concerned 

about, which I think is a legitimate concern, and that is that a 

child who is dissatisfied with his or her parenting can't go to the 

child advocate, so that there's no jurisdiction to get involved in 

parent-child conflict, which he did not want there to be that 

kind of authority, which we agree with.  That's why it was 

designed the way it was. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Mr. Minister, just for my own information 

now, we are being limited to those three areas of concern as . . . 

Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The short answer is yes, we are. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee then is the 

amendment moved by the member for Regina North West to 

clause 12 of the printed Bill, to: 

 

 Amend clause 12 of the printed Bill by striking out clause 

12.6 (2)(b) as being enacted at page 6 therein and 

substituting the following: 

 

  "(b) receive, review and investigate any matter that comes 

to his or her attention from any source respecting a 

child;" 

 

Is the amendment agreed? 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 13 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Mr. Chairman I would just like to take a moment to thank my 

officials for their hard work going into this particular office and 

charting new ground, and to thank them for their support in the 

Assembly here.  Also to thank the members opposite for their 

general support and endorsement of this office and their 

important suggestions and recommendations.  And I feel the 

sincerity there, because I know that the member from Rosthern 

was very concerned and interested in establishing this before. 

 

So we look forward to a year of setting the office up and will 

involve, as I have said, will involve members in the process and 

look forward to an active/proactive role by this office.  And 

again, thanks, members, for your cooperation. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I too  



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

would like to extend my appreciation to the minister and his 

officials.  I thank the minister for being forthright and offering 

to consult with the opposition members and suggesting that the 

legislation that's before us and the consultation process will go 

well beyond his extended period in Social Services.  So we 

appreciate that to any other member or minister down the road. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Minister, as we've indicated, we generally 

supported the Bill and I think we did raise some of the concerns 

very openly, and we thank you for your frankness.  And we 

look forward to this agency in which children or teenagers, 

where they're in situations where they may feel they have no 

one to speak with or speak to, have someone that they can 

voice their concerns through. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'd like to, so to speak, third the thanks to 

the officials.  I'm very pleased with the help that you've given 

in this. 

 

I look to this legislation being not only giving resources to 

children in dire circumstances or feeling that they don't have a 

place to go, but being a larger voice for children in 

Saskatchewan, because this is the role that I see the child 

advocate really growing to be a force for the recognition of the 

role of children in our society. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Assistance Act 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask that the Minister of Social Services 

introduce the officials who will be assisting him in the review 

of the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

With me is our associate deputy minister, Neil Yeates, to my 

right; and behind Neil is Phil Walsh, our executive director of 

income security for the department. 

 

Mr. Chairman, first of all in The Saskatchewan Assistance Act 

amendments we are extending authority to enter into 

agreements for the delivery of social assistance to Indian bands 

and other potential agents.  This change allows the province to 

continue arrangements the federal government has had in place 

for some time with the five northern bands, but has since 

become a provincial responsibility as you recall from last year. 

 

Second, there are a series of housekeeping amendments.  We 

are removing the many references to municipally delivered 

social assistance which are no longer relevant. 

 

The Act has not been significantly amended since its 

introduction in 1966.  We are, however, maintaining the 

authority to enter into agreements with municipalities should 

this become desirable at some 

point in the future. 

 

These amendments will allow us to continue to develop 

partnerships with first nations and to have the flexibility to try 

some new things in line with the new federal social security 

reform.  So I would be happy to respond to any questions, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I 

want to welcome you and your officials.  What we have to go 

through probably won't take more than a day or two.  It 

probably will take a great deal less time if the hon. member 

would help us along by keeping quiet. 

 

The first couple of questions I'd like to develop with you, Mr. 

Minister, is . . . as I read through the Bill I think I know the 

answer, but I think I'll have you clarify it because I want to be 

sure. 

 

In one place here in section 2 under accreditation, it says that 

they can apply . . . oh no, they won't be elected, they'll be 

appointed by . . . Do I understand that right, that all those 

people will be appointed and not elected?  It's section 2. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just to clarify.  We're actually deleting 

that section, so sorry if that wasn't clear.  We're deleting that 

section. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- And you will replace that with what? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, the accreditation committees used to 

monitor the municipal social assistance provided, and since 

we're eliminating that section there's no need for that any more 

because they're not providing the assistance. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We're talking here 

about the municipalities I guess.  You're not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Now there's one more thing down at the 

bottom.  It's section 5, and do I read that to mean that there's 

been no change in the regulations?  Does that go back to 1966, 

I believe, is when they came into effect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Could I just clarify?  Are you talking 

about section 5 in the Act or section 5 in the amendments? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, it's under 

the same heading, accreditation.  Is that whole thing then 

eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, the whole section is being deleted. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, then 

the regulations of 1966, are they still in effect? 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, there are still many regulations 

governing the Act that are still in place.  This one relates 

specifically to appeals only. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, under 

section 6(2) under the heading (e) on page 3, and it's talking 

about making provisions for remuneration of the board 

members.  Do you give them any guidelines as to what . . . or 

does that go back to the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I think you're referring to remuneration 

for accreditation of members, and we're appealing that section, 

so there won't be any accreditation committee; therefore there 

won't be a requirement for remuneration. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- There will be no requirement for remuneration. 

How will these people be compensated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We're actually deleting the section on the 

accreditation committee so there won't be one.  There won't be 

an accreditation committee, so there won't be a requirement for 

. . . yes, there won't be any requirement for any remuneration. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, that 

was some of the things I was going through and I wanted to get 

that kind of cleared in my mind before we started into a few 

general questions. 

 

This Bill 13 to amend The Saskatchewan Assistance Act, I 

think in conversation with you another day, you mentioned that 

it was because of some changes in the federal Indian Act or 

something like this.  Could I ask you on whose request was this 

Bill introduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, actually what I was referring to with 

regard to the federal . . . in a sense it is federally driven because 

with the federal decision last July 1 to no longer provide 

assistance to off-reserve families immediately, rather than the 

one-year waiting period, then we were required to amend our 

legislation to adjust to that. 

 

So the five northern bands had been administering their 

assistance on an ongoing basis for a number of years.  We're 

interested in them continuing to do that and we're doing that 

now just by provincial-federal agreement which allowed us to 

do it on an interim.  But we have to amend the Act to give us 

the authority to allow that to continue in the future. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, did the 

government . . . who did the government consult with when 

you drafted this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, we've consulted with of course the 

five northern bands affected and also the Prince Albert band 

council of which the five bands are part of.  And of course they 

want to continue delivering the assistance, which they've done.  

And of course we've had to consult with the federal 

government as well because, other than by agreement, we have 

no 

authority to allow them to continue doing this. 

 

And so it's partly federally driven because of that decision on 

the change in who provides assistance to people off reserves 

and partly it's the desire of those bands to continue delivering 

the service. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister, you say the five northern bands.  In your second 

reading speech you mentioned five bands.  That was Lac La 

Ronge, Peter Ballantyne, Montreal Lake, Hatchet Lake, Black 

Lake bands -- is these the five bands that we're speaking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- That's correct.  And I'll just mention that 

this Bill is just . . . it's just permissive legislation.  In other 

words, we're still going to . . . This Bill allows us to enter the 

contracts with the five bands.  We're still going to have to have 

the contracts, so the legislation is just permissive, allowing us 

to do that.  We'll still require to enter into contract agreements 

with them to continue. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

just want to pick up on what my colleague has just started 

asking questions on, and that is namely the federal policy 

whereby now it becomes a provincial jurisdiction and 

provincial responsibility for funding of off-reserve Indians 

immediately following their removal from the reserve, 

normally on a voluntary basis.  They prefer to do that. 

 

What's your opinion on the federal move on this aspect?  Do 

you agree with what the feds have done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well no, I don't agree with that federal 

decision.  Of course neither do first nations people, as you 

know.  We believe that the federal government through their 

treaty obligations is responsible for treaty people on and off 

reserve.  So that includes in the social assistance area. 

 

So we agree with the FSIN that this is a federal responsibility, 

but we obviously are not going to see families go without 

assistance so have agreed to pick this up on humanitarian 

grounds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, humanitarian grounds are 

costing the taxpayer of Saskatchewan additional money.  And 

that's why I resent this and I resented Tom Siddon, quite 

frankly, when I was in your position, and the arguments that I 

had with him over this very same issue.  And like is normal 

under these conditions, I guess the federal government is the 

winner and the provincial ministers usually wind up being the 

losers.  But unfortunately in this case, it's the provincial 

taxpayer that is the loser on this kind of an issue -- and to great 

extent as well. 

 

So I want you to give me the best estimate that you can give me 

on a yearly annualized cost, additional cost, that this is going to 

cost the taxpayer of Saskatchewan.  Because quite frankly, Mr. 

Minister, what's happening here is that the federal government 

is abrogating its responsibility, because an Indian is an Indian is 

an Indian and it doesn't matter where he or she lives.  And 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

it's the responsibility of the federal government. 

 

And I can say that and I can use that quote, because it is a quote 

from Chief Roland Crowe; he's used that terminology before.  

And so I don't . . . And I agree with you that the natives of this 

province don't want to become a provincial responsibility.  

They want to remain a federal responsibility under the Acts and 

so on and the heritage and the tradition and the history of how 

this whole situation has evolved. 

 

So two questions then:  what is the cost on the annualized basis 

for this year and what you project, perhaps, for the following 

year; and do you see any way in which the federal government 

can be persuaded to change its mind for the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say that I agree with you.  

I've been concerned right from the outset that this was going to 

. . . it was a jurisdictional question, which I agree with you on, 

and there's a cost implication to the province of Saskatchewan 

of 20 million new dollars -- 20 million new dollars is the net 

cost to us. 

 

And I pressed this with the new minister, Lloyd Axworthy; 

indicated that we believe this isn't fair.  And of course, as you 

would know, we're supporting the Prince Albert band council 

in the reference case to in fact appeal this decision through the 

courts. 

 

So we're working with them to support their legal challenge to 

this in a way that would be supportive to what you're 

suggesting.  And I was kind of hoping that the new government 

would -- with some of the promises that they made to 

aboriginal people during the campaign -- would see fit to 

reverse its decision.  And I still hope that they will. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Does this mean, Mr. Minister, that you are 

now being considered as an intervenor status on a court case 

against . . . that the P.A. Tribal Council is taking against the 

federal government and that you're supporting them?  And if 

so, in what way -- monetarily, morally, legally?  What expertise 

are you providing them in their case against the federal 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I'm not a lawyer so I don't know the 

terminology in terms of intervenor and what not.  But let me 

just say that we are supporting the band council with regard to 

their court challenge by providing some legal advice.  We've 

agreed on a person who is giving all of us another opinion, who 

is sort of an expert in these matters; and we're providing some 

financial support for the actual legal challenge.  So that's what 

we're doing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What's the projected cost of this support, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I don't know if the decision has been 

made with regard to the actual amount of money that we would 

support the FSIN and the band council in terms of the legal 

challenge; I think that's still under negotiation with the Minister 

of Justice and the aboriginal officials.  So I don't know the 

figure.  And we 

would only be one source of funding; there would be other 

sources of funding for that challenge.  Sorry, that's all I can say 

at this point, because I don't know the answer. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


