




















































Hansard: March 09, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 755 

 March 9, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Yes, sir, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 

you and to the other members of the House two people sitting 

in the west gallery there.  They are my wife, Erica, and our 

friend of many years, Mrs. Doris Bradfield, from Woodrow.  

And I'd like you to join with me in welcoming them to this 

legislature.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to introduce to 

you and through you to other members of the Assembly two 

persons seated in the west gallery.  They're here in Regina 

today on behalf of an organization that they're volunteers of, 

Saskatchewan Heart Health.  There's Mrs. Ruth Robinson and 

Lynn Rutherford and they've been here making presentations. 

 

Mrs. Robinson, Ruth Robinson, has been honoured in 

Saskatoon as the Citizen of the Year for her volunteer work and 

commitment to the community.  So I'd like to welcome Ruth 

and Lynn to the legislature today and ask other members to join 

me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Yes, I would also like to welcome Lynn 

Rutherford and Ruth Robinson of Heart Health. 

 

And I would like to point out to members of the Assembly that 

one of the things that they are trying to do is to encourage more 

responsible smoking and to discourage smoking, at all, 

amongst young people.  And it was rather embarrassing to meet 

with them down in the Dome Cafeteria where there were 

clouds of smoke all around. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have the 

honour, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to members of the 

legislature the third tour, during the time this legislature has sat, 

of civil servants.  These civil servants are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are employees of the Department 

of Energy and Mines, Social Services, Labour, Public Service 

Commission, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation), Municipal Government, Finance, Justice, and my 

own office. 

 

So I would like members of the legislature to welcome these 

distinguished public servants to the legislature this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you, sir, and to all 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, sitting in your 

Speaker's gallery, some of the members of the 

1995 -- successful I might add -- Grey Cup bid committee in 

attendance, seated in your Speaker's gallery.  And I'd ask that 

when I introduce them that they stand but that the members 

withhold applause until after I finish the introduction. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that these are very hard-working 

people who have acted on behalf of the interests of not only 

Regina but the province of Saskatchewan, have dedicated hours 

and hours of volunteer work to put together a bid which, as we 

know, has worked out successfully and quite frankly I think 

Saskatchewan people are very excited about. 

 

So with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce first 

of all the chair of the bid committee, senior partner in the law 

firm of Rendek and McCrank, Mr. Richard P. Rendek, 

Q.C. -- please, Dick, stand; the general manager and CEO 

(chief executive officer) of the Saskatchewan Roughriders, Mr. 

Alan Ford -- Alan; Councillor John Lipp, who's a business 

person and very active with the Roughriders as well -- John; the 

president of Cairns Developers and well connected with the 

Roughriders, Tom Shepherd; chairman and CEO (chief 

executive officer) of the Regina Economic Development 

Authority, Gordon W. Staseson. 

 

Barb Pollock is the principal of Polmac Communications and 

Barbara did a wonderful job in putting forward the submission.  

The tenor of the submission, Mr. Speaker, was on the basis of a 

football game.  Regina was making the submission at first 

quarter, second quarter, half-time break and the like, and 

Barbara engineered that and I thought that was marvellous. 

 

Muir Barber is vice-chair of the Regina Economic 

Development Authority; Warren Green is Saskatchewan sales 

manager for Canada Post Corporation; Don Savaria is the 

general manager, public affairs, of SaskTel; Bob Linner is the 

city manager of the city of Regina -- Bob is here? -- and also 

Bob Ellard, president of IKOY Architects (Sask) Ltd. who put 

together the additional 20 seats which are going to be needed in 

order to make this a very large and successful . . . (inaudible) . . 

. What did I say? -- 20 -- 20,000 seats.  If it's 20 seats we're in 

real deep trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the members of the Assembly and 

I'm sure on behalf of all of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, how about a big, warm welcome and a 

congratulations to this group.  They did it for Saskatchewan.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like 

to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly a number of constituents of mine who are down at 

the SARM (Saskatchewan 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

Association of Rural Municipalities) convention and are taking 

in the proceedings here today. 

 

I myself attended the SARM convention this morning and 

heard some reference to downloading.  Well I witnessed the 

worst kind of downloading at noon today; they made me buy 

lunch. 

 

So I'd like to, if I could, introduce them and I'd ask them to 

stand, if I could: Deb Johnson, who is the administrator from 

the RM (rural municipality) of Beaver River; Allan Simpson, 

who is a councillor from Loon Lake; and Victor Lutter, who is 

councillor from Beaver River; Ted Warner, a councillor with 

Loon Lake; Darren Elder, administrator in Loon Lake; and Ken 

Schamber, a councillor from Beaver River as well.  If you'd 

join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to join with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in 

congratulating the bid committee for the 1995 Grey Cup.  I 

think the Premier has expressed the fact that this is a provincial 

football organization, and I think all of the gentlemen and lady 

in the gallery recognize that, that we all have to contribute. 

 

I think it's been historical that governments of all stripe have 

recognized the fact that the Saskatchewan Roughriders are an 

integral part of life in this province.  And we would just like to 

congratulate you for the fine work that you've done, and we 

know that those 20,000 seats won't hold the number of tickets 

that you're going to want in 1995. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to join 

with others in welcoming Lynn Rutherford and Ruth Robinson 

to the Chamber today.  And I wanted to point out, first of all, 

the work they're doing now in connection with smoking and 

health issues, but also just to acknowledge while Ruth 

Robinson is here that she was the Saskatoon Citizen of the Year 

for 1992 because of her civic activities, and I just wanted to 

acknowledge that.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to 

introduce to you and members of this Assembly, seated in your 

gallery, a young man from Yorkton, from my constituency, by 

the name of Bill Larson.  Bill has just currently completed his 

school of broadcasting course, and I see that he's seated close to 

the Regina bid committee for the Grey Cup.  And he's most 

interested in being, Mr. Speaker, a sports announcer and colour 

man.  He may want to snuggle up to them a bit and put his bid 

in early. 

 

I wish to welcome Bill to the Assembly, and ask all members 

of the House to join with me in welcoming him here as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As we 

know, this week has been designated as Education Week in 

Saskatchewan.  The theme chosen for this important week is 

Home-School: Make the Connection.  This is of great 

significance as this also happens to be the International Year of 

the Family.  It is essential that parents and educators work 

together to help provide a quality education for our youth 

across the province. 

 

Realities of this day and age prevent many students from 

getting the proper education they deserve.  Hunger, poverty, 

illiteracy, and family violence all wreak havoc on our society 

and the right to learn.  Therefore communities must work in 

harmony in order to deter these obstacles.  It can only be 

through such actions that the right of education would be 

available for all.  If this can be achieved, then every person in 

this province would have an opportunity to succeed. 

 

Education Week provides communities within our province to 

have their families discuss the skills and knowledge that they 

have acquired and that they have contributed greatly to the 

social, cultural, and economic well-being of our province. 

 

Let us not forget the extremely important theme of this year's 

Education Week -- Home-School: Make the Connection.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to join 

in with my colleague from Saltcoats and make the 

announcement and acknowledgement that the week of March 7 

to March 13 has been proclaimed as Education Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a week that brings community and school closer 

together.  This is a time for us all to reflect upon the importance 

of all aspects of education.  In our rapidly changing world, now 

more than ever we need to give our children the positive 

influence of quality education.  Overturning barriers that hinder 

the ability of someone to receive a valuable education, must be 

our priority. 

 

We all must challenge ourselves to make a difference in our 

communities towards showing the importance of education.  

I've taken the challenge myself this week, Mr. Speaker, and 

with my constituency was able to be a celebrity reader at two 

schools -- Wilfred Hunt and Douglas Park School. 

 

At a time when illiteracy is at a high rate, it is essential that we 

show our youth the importance of being able to read.  We must 

work together as a community in order to defeat such barriers 

as illiteracy. 
 

Once again, I am pleased to announce the week of 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

March 7 to 13 as Education Week in Saskatchewan.  I hope we 

can all do our part to stress the extreme importance of 

education in our fair province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday many of 

us in this Assembly gave heartfelt statements about 

International Women's Day, and equally eloquent, Mr. Speaker, 

was the Minister of Justice giving first reading to An Act 

respecting Victims of Domestic Violence.  Swift passage and 

public acceptance of this Bill cannot happen quickly enough. 

 

For many, violence means leaving your family home in the 

middle of the night with tired and scared children in tow and 

with a few possessions and toys thrown into a garbage bag, 

leaving behind everything that's familiar.  This was also my 

experience when I worked with women in the North as director 

of the Indian and Metis Friendship Centre.  It's a shared 

experience of all races and classes of women and children, 

urban, rural and northern. 

 

Rather than focusing on punishing the offender, this Act will 

provide immediate protection and assistance to the victim, and 

importantly, allow them to stay in the family home rather than 

has so often been the case, fleeing into the night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's an important milestone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   Mr. Speaker, over 

the past few years one of the pleasant tasks I have given myself 

has been to serve as a volunteer at the Royal Red Arabian 

Horse Show in Regina. 

 

This August will mark the fifth year the host committee and 

Regina Exhibition Park have sponsored the show and I am 

delighted to learn that I and the dozens of other volunteers will 

have at least another five years to be part of this spectacular 

show. 

 

The Regina Chamber of Commerce, the Royal Red Arabian 

host committee, and the International Arabian Horse 

Association took part in a formal signing ceremony of a new 

five-year contract for the Royal Red commencing in 1995. 

 

This is very good news for a number of reasons.  First of 

course, is that this show contributes approximately $10 million 

a year to the Saskatchewan economy, which means $50 million 

over the terms of the contract.  And this show not only brings 

horses from all over North America -- from Texas, New 

Mexico, British Columbia, Ontario and so on -- it also brings 

tourists who, in coming to see the horses, will also see 

Saskatchewan.  The multiplier effect I think they call that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a spectacular show of beautiful, 

graceful animals with intelligent, friendly owners.  The 

Minister of Agriculture and his department, the Minister of 

Economic Development and his, and all the bid committee are 

to be congratulated for keeping this show in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The federal 

government has recently overhauled gun control legislation that 

had the potential to severely impact law-abiding gun owners 

and hunters.  Over 1,200 people recently attended a rally in 

Preeceville to protest stricter federal gun control legislation. 

 

The federal legislation does, however, provide the opportunity 

for provinces to accommodate the federal requirements in their 

own legislation.  I am happy to report that we have achieved a 

Saskatchewan-made solution.  We will be expanding our 

existing firearms policies to include the mandatory 

requirements of the federal legislation.  This is in fact a minor 

change from our existing practice and is forced upon us by the 

federal legislation.  We were able to achieve this through 

cooperation and support from groups and individuals including 

hunters, gun dealers and collectors, instructors, and government 

officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, safe handling of firearms is everybody's 

responsibility.  Recognizing this, hundreds of gun owners have 

volunteered their time over the years in teaching hunter safety 

to over 135,000 students in Saskatchewan. 

 

Unlike downtown Montreal or Toronto, owning and using 

firearms in Saskatchewan continues to be a way of life for 

upwards of 100,000 licensed hunters, farmers who may have to 

control predators, and people who live off the land.  

Responsible use and handling of firearms must remain a top 

priority.  This government will continue to work with affected 

stakeholders in maintaining one of the best firearms regulations 

and education programs in North America.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to call attention to an event that happened in my 

constituency about a month ago.  The Nipawin Elks, the Royal 

Purple, in conjunction with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) detachments from across the province, 

sponsored the fourth annual P.E.A.C.E. 100 snowmobile rally. 

 

The purpose of this event is two-fold.  First of all, the donors 

and the riders and sponsors raised over 42,000 for drug 

awareness programs in Saskatchewan schools.  The drug 

awareness committee of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 

Elks foundation and the RCMP will meet together and decide 

where this money goes to different various projects. 
 

The other reason, Mr. Speaker, is we had a ball.  We had a 

great time snowmobiling.  The weather was beautiful, and there 

was even 22 police officers that drove up from all across the 

province.  One participant drove his snowmobile all the way up 

even from  



758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

Regina here, and there was one from Alberta. 
 

They went over 103 miles of trails in the prettiest area of the 

province.  The trails were groomed by the local snowmobile 

club.  They went through Torch River, through the the 

Fort-à-la-Corne reserve, and on to Choiceland for lunch, and 

then back to Nipawin for a banquet where the prizes were 

handed out. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the chairman, Mr. Eugene 

Rawlyk, and I look forward to next year. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  During this Impaired 

Driving Awareness Week, it's my pleasure to acknowledge 

some people who are working actively around Saskatchewan to 

reduce impaired driving to save lives and who have been 

successful. 
 

For 18 years Saskatchewan has had a driving without 

impairment course for convicted impaired drivers.  It is held in 

high regard in jurisdictions throughout North America.  The 

course is offered through 19 DWI (driving without impairment) 

programs in 23 Saskatchewan communities, with some 70 

community-based instructors and at least 150 more community 

volunteers. 
 

According to the Traffic Injury Research Foundation's cold, 

hard evaluations in 1990, this Saskatchewan team of concerned 

citizens has reduced our province's rate of repeat offences by 

half for convicted drivers who took the Saskatchewan DWI 

course. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that's meant both lives improved and literally 

lives saved in Saskatchewan.  And I ask all members to join in 

expressing appreciation to over 200 Saskatchewan people who 

have dedicated their efforts toward the separation of the act of 

drinking from the act of driving, through the Saskatchewan 

driving without impairment program. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Funds 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

might preface my remarks by saying, that in the finest 

Saskatchewan Roughrider's tradition, the Minister of 

Agriculture and I will now butt heads for a while.  I happen to 

have a question, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Agriculture.  

And since, Mr. Speaker, we don't wear helmets, it will be 

relatively tame in here, I can assure you. 
 

But on a more serious note, Mr. Speaker, I direct my question, 

my initial question, to the Minister of Agriculture.  And I say to 

you, Mr. Minister, that due to your government's destructive 

changes to GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), last year's 

pay-outs to farmers were substantially less than the program's 

revenues. 
 

In fact, at the end of the '92-93 fiscal year the program had a 

surplus of $43 million.  And with pay-outs expected to be even 

lower this year, that surplus is bound to be increased. 

 

Mr. Minister, what steps are being taken to ensure that this 

money is indeed paid out to Saskatchewan producers for whom 

it was intended? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To begin with, Mr. Speaker, I hope 

the member opposite hasn't been playing football without a 

helmet too long. 
 

As to his question, yes there's a small surplus in the fund now.  

There's a predicted surplus for the end of this year.  Again, this 

is a very unpredictable fund.  The estimate changed from, I 

think from October to January, the estimate based on national 

grains bureau price moved by $244 million.  So we could yet 

have a drop in prices that would mean that there would be a 

pay-out. 

 

This is the federal-provincial agreement.  And if there is a 

surplus in the fund, the agreement is silent on that.  And we're 

certainly glad that grain prices are moving up because I know 

producers would sooner get their revenue out of the 

market-place.  But it is a good news-bad news scenario in that 

when grain prices move up less revenue is paid out of the fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You were partly right, Mr. Minister, in the 

sense that it is indeed a bad news scenario.  Mr. Minister, the 

GRIP program as it was originally designed gave the province, 

in fact gave provinces, access to federal funds which were then 

in turn supposed to be passed on to Saskatchewan families.  

And that's what's happening in Manitoba, and indeed that's 

what's happening in Alberta, Mr. Minister. 

 

But it's not happening in Saskatchewan under the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) GRIP program.  Because of your changes in 

Saskatchewan, the province is hijacking literally a substantial 

portion of that money and putting it into the provincial treasury 

just like you've done with the municipal infrastructure program 

as another example. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year the NDP GRIP had a profit of over $200 

million.  NDP GRIP took in $200 million in revenues more 

than it paid out to the farmers that the program is supposed to 

be helping. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is the province withholding money that 

rightfully belongs to the Saskatchewan farmer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The answer to that, Mr. Speaker, is 

very simple -- we're not.  The member opposite well knows 

how the program works.  The money is paid into a fund and 

that fund balances are there for future pay-outs or for future 

pay-ins if there's 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

a deficit in the funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to talk about history 

and talk about '91 GRIP, we can talk about that.  We can talk 

about a program that cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers a $178 

per capita and the Ontario taxpayers $6 per capita.  We can talk 

about a program that costs $7 million to measure every bin in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And we can talk about a 

program that was administratively a nightmare.  And we can 

talk about a program that masked markets signals and we can 

have the whole GRIP discussion over again if you so choose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is now negotiating with the 

federal government to introduce a decent program, a good farm 

safety net that's capped, that is adequate, that is affordable by 

both producers and farmers.  And we have given notice to get 

out of GRIP program, which is a legacy left over from the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And as the line of 

questioning progresses, I'm becoming more and more worried 

because indeed I don't have a helmet as the minister appears to 

be growing horns now.  And that is unfortunate . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order.  Personal 

remarks I don't think add anything to the quality of question 

period and I ask the member to refrain. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And I assure you, Mr. Minister, no personal 

accusations were intended. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other night while my colleagues were doing a 

great deal of questioning on Crop Insurance, you gave the 

member from Morse a memo that I don't think that he was 

supposed to see, and certainly not the last page.  This memo 

seems to suggest that you should downplay, as you're doing 

today, the huge profits GRIP is now making because, and I 

quote: 

 

 This could fuel interest around the court challenge to the 

GRIP changes. 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, your changes to GRIP have now 

made the program into a big moneymaker for the province and 

a big money loser for the farmers.  And you wouldn't want the 

farmers to find that out, those same farmers who are taking you 

to court. 

 

Mr. Minister, GRIP turned a profit of $200 million -- a profit 

last year.  How much do you expect it, your version of GRIP, 

to make this year as premiums get higher and pay-outs get 

lower?  How much money are you forecasting that you're going 

to make this year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again the member 

should not be playing with numbers.  I think that 

follows -- people that play football without helmets shouldn't 

talk about numbers because they have a little bit of a problem 

with them. 

 

The projected pay-out for the end of this year is in the 

neighbourhood of $300 million.  That again is a projected 

pay-out based on the latest grain prices. 

 

I point out again to the member opposite that the last time they 

changed the estimate, they changed it by $244 million.  So 

that's still subject to those kind of changes before the end of the 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, this same memo that you gave 

the opposition raises the distinct possibility that there will be no 

new program to replace the old GRIP program.  It goes on to 

say: 

 

 . . . that if there is no new program to replace GRIP, the 

surplus amounts will then go and be returned to participants, 

to governments and producers. 

 

Mr. Minister, this raises a very real possibility that a significant 

amount of federal and provincial funding will never find its 

way into the hands of producers who belong to GRIP and have 

paid premiums over the last three years.  It will probably wind 

up in the treasuries of the federal and the provincial 

governments. 

 

Why would you allow that to happen, Mr. Minister?  Why 

would you allow Saskatchewan farmers to be denied the 

benefits that they have been paying for over these last few 

years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I invite the members opposite to 

help us lobby the federal government for a new safety net 

program that will be in place to replace GRIP.  I have the word 

of the federal Agriculture minister, saying that they believe that 

it's quite possible and we can have a new safety net in place by 

the end of '94.  And the federal minister is on record as saying 

that.  We're working very hard to have a new program to 

replace GRIP. 

 

In the event that we don't have a program replacing GRIP, the 

producers in Alberta and Manitoba will, in all likelihood, have 

a program where they pay premiums in and have no chance of 

collecting anything out of.  That may be not a whole lot better 

than having no program at all. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note that not 

only are the implications expressed on this particular memo 

from the minister, but his answers are also quoted on here, and 

he's answering very closely to script.  So you're doing as you're 

told, Mr. Minister. 

 

But what I have for you is one more question.  And that is that 

this memo says that if there is a program to replace GRIP, any 

surplus will be handed over to that new program that will 

replace the existing GRIP.  This 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

means that producers will be forced to join the new program in 

order to access money that was rightfully theirs on the previous 

GRIP, Mr. Minister.  You are arm-twisting GRIP participants 

to join the new program even though they may not want to. 

 

And I would say conversely, and even worse, is the fact that 

there are people who were not in GRIP, who are going to join 

this new program as such and be gaining benefit from the 

farmers who invested money in the previous GRIP.  Is that fair, 

Mr. Minister?  Or was it simply in your plan all along to make 

huge profits under the NDP GRIP program, profits that could 

be paid out to farmers when it's convenient such as the next 

election year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That, Mr. Speaker, is a very good 

question.  I think it should be directed to his seat-mate beside 

him because if you read the memo carefully or if you have the 

whole memo there, you would find that the reason that we're 

concerned about exactly that problem is the wording of the 

agreement that was originally set up; saying that possibly . . . 

and we don't know for sure the legal interpretation of it -- but it 

seems that the agreement says that funds may have to be paid 

into a new program, and we do not subscribe to that for the 

very reasons that you point out, that it is not fair for people who 

do not want to go into the new program or people who are not 

in this one.  And certainly that's not an option that we choose.  

But if that is the legal agreement that your seat-mate signed, we 

may well be stuck with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, prior to the 1991 election, you made 

the following statement: partisan people, party people, and 

defeated MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 

candidates ought not to be serving on government boards.  If 

we don't succeed in this and continue to appoint party hacks, 

then I've gotten nowhere. 

 

Mr. Premier, do you feel you've lived up to this commitment 

since taking office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that essentially 

I have, and I'll tell you why I have.  If one wants to take a look 

at the history from 1982 to 1991 when the landscape was 

absolutely littered, littered by appointments of defeated PC 

(Progressive Conservative) candidates and PC partisan people 

without any consideration to quality or ability, I think the 

comparison really is black and white, night and day. 
 

The reality is, in a small province of a million people, you have 

to appoint the best qualified people that you can.  Some may be 

New Democrats and some may be even Progressive 

Conservatives.  If I could find a qualified PCer, that would be 

the case too.  Some might even be Liberals.  The point is, in a 

province of a million people, you need to do the best that you 

can, and we have had as much success as any provincial 

government.  And I'll tell you, we are light years ahead of 

anything that took place prior to '91. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Premier.  As always, Mr. Premier, you always refer to the 

former administration.  Now, Mr. Premier, the comparison 

doesn't hold up, simply doesn't wash.  And I'd like to quote to 

you, sir, from the New Democratic caucus document entitled, 

Democratic Reform for the 1990's released just prior to the last 

election, and it says, and I quote: 

 

 Between 1982 and 1990, no fewer than 15 former or defeated 

PC MLA's (or candidates) were appointed to . . . crown 

corporations, boards, commissions or departments or given 

special employment contracts with the government. 

 

Fifteen, Mr. Premier, in nine years. 

 

I have here today, Mr. Premier a list of 37 former NDP MLAs, 

candidates, and candidates for nomination that have received 

government appointments in just over two years under your 

administration, sir.  The bottom line, Mr. Premier, is that the 

political patronage you were elected to stop has continued far 

worse than it was before.  Do you believe, Mr. Premier, making 

these kind of promises and then breaking them is the proper 

way for your government to head? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't of course accept 

the premiss upon which the question is based, mainly making 

these kinds of promises and then breaking them.  I do not 

accept that premiss. 
 

But I want to say to the interim Leader of the Progressive 

Conservative Party, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

I'm going to invite you to be a guest speaker at the forthcoming 

NDP provincial convention in 1994 because they believe that, 

amongst all of the criticisms that political parties and party 

members have, that this government has been so absolutely 

committed to the idea of making as many non-partisan, 

qualified appointments that we were hiring too many 

Conservatives.  And so what I have to do is invite you to the 

convention to give that speech just to show to my party that in 

fact what I'm saying is the fact, the truth. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier . 

. . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Let the member ask his question.  

Order. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, you and I can't change 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

the past.  And your party's predilection for dipping in the 

trough is your problem, not mine.  Okay?  But you and I can 

change the future.  Today in this legislature I'm going to 

introduce a Bill, sir, that would allow an all-party committee of 

this House to do appointments to boards and commissions and 

that type of thing. 

 

Mr. Premier, it would be a an all-party committee of this House 

that would have the majority of your members on it.  And I 

think it would go a long way to restoring public confidence in 

the process, Mr. Premier.  What I'd like to find out from you 

today is, do you support the concept?  I don't say support the 

Bill specifically.  Do you support the concept of doing that very 

thing in order to give the public confidence in our political 

system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for the question, and I say this now with a great 

deal of gravity and sincerity.  I think this is an important 

question because the concept I support is that there should be a 

qualified, independent civil service that advises governments of 

all political ideologies and stripes. 

 

That we have taken unfortunately -- and I know you don't want 

to talk about history -- but from 1982 to 1991 we took a giant 

step forward to the Americanization of our civil service.  We so 

politicized it that the inevitable pressure on the incoming 

government was to rectify the imbalances of '82 to '91.  I think 

I've resisted that, I might say so at some considerable internal 

political price, and resisted it for a whole number of other 

reasons. 

 

But you ask, do I support the particular concept that you have 

put forward.  I tell you that I think that concept is flawed in its 

specifics.  Now let me give you one example.  We have 

introduced major health care reform.  One of the aspects of 

major health care reform is for the interim, the appointment of 

hospital boards. 

 

Now your desk-mate and colleague, the member from 

Kindersley, but your entire caucus has opposed that reform, 

tooth and nail, every step of the way.  How in the world could 

it logically be argued therefore that in the non-partisan way you 

could contribute to the appointment of men and women who 

actually want to support the renewal of health care in 

Saskatchewan?  Can't be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, when 

those people are elected they will have the backing of every 

person in this province.  And, Mr. Premier, things are changing.  

Things are changing.  People expect to have the opportunity to 

serve in this province regardless of their political affiliation. 

 

As a matter of fact the new Liberal Premier of Nova Scotia, and 

I would quote to you, sir, says: 

 

 The process must be more than just a means to reward the 

party faithful for past services.  Government has a 

responsibility to seek out strong and qualified candidates.  

There must be a process where government is held 

accountable for this responsibility. 

 

Mr. Premier, they're on the right track in Nova Scotia, the most 

patronage-rife province in this country. 

 

What we are proposing to you today, sir, is that Saskatchewan 

join the ranks of provinces that are prepared to move ahead and 

do this in a way that the public finds accountable. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you support that process today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in fundamental 

terms and broad concepts, I do not oppose and the members of 

my government do not oppose, what the Leader of the 

Opposition is saying.  I'm arguing that we are making 

improvements and taking giant steps forward to achieving that 

objective. 

 

It is not possible to do it in every circumstance.  And the one 

example that I cite again is the example on the appointment of 

the health boards.  That's the reality.  You people still are 

opposed to it tooth and nail, as are the Liberals.  How in the 

world can we appoint in this kind of a circumstance? 

 

Now look, I applaud Dr. Savage, my colleague, the Premier of 

Nova Scotia.  But you're right.  The Liberals in Nova Scotia, 

this is the most patronage-ridden province in all of Canada.  

He's trying something there which is incomparable to anything 

in Saskatchewan, perhaps with the exception of '82 to '91. 

 

I'm not going to get into a situation either like in Alberta where 

they do away with all the school boards in Alberta, and now the 

government will appoint the school superintendents 

directly -- school superintendents.  Now if that isn't 

politicization of education, I don't know what is.  I'm not going 

to get into that either.  We've got to work toward this 

cooperatively; we need to do more.  I admit that we need to do 

more.  I think we've taken giant steps forward.  You've got to 

put forward proposals which are more specific and, I say with 

the greatest of respect, more sensible on this specific issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sask Forest Products Lease 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the minister in charge of Sask Forest Products.  The 

property on which Sask Forest Products saw mill was built in 

Carrot River some 19 years ago, was owned for a time by the 

government.  Five years ago it was sold to Premier Sask Inc., 

which is a Quebec-based firm.  It in turn leased back the 

property to Sask Forest Products. 

 

Now that lease expired, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, on 

January 1 of this year.  And the people of Carrot River fear that 

the government's inability to secure a lease for the town's 

Crown-owned saw mill could bring economic devastation to 

their 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

community.  Mr. Minister, why has the lease not been 

renewed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In answer 

to the member's question, let me say first of all that we are 

dealing with a number of disasters and problems that were 

created by the former administration, this not the least of many 

of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's true that the land was sold out from 

underneath the Carrot River Sawmill at a price that we would 

not have agreed with, even with respect to market value at the 

time.  I want to say that we are in negotiations with Premier 

Peat to secure the land so that the future of that saw mill will 

continue and it will be an operation that will continue to 

employ Saskatchewan people. 

 

We haven't completed the negotiations yet, but I can to the 

member from Greystone that I have met a number of times with 

town officials from Carrot River, with working people who 

work at that mill.  We have assured them that we are doing our 

utmost to secure the land, to ensure the future of the saw mill in 

Carrot River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister.  I'm sure people will be relieved to know that after 

two and a half years in power and a lease that needed to be 

renewed on January 1, that you're now in consultation with 

them. 

 

The residents of Carrot River tell us that the property needed 

for its saw mill is not secure.  And that given that it's not 

secure, they're very worried that their mill may be relocated.  

And word has it that that may happen and it may go to 

Hudson's Bay.  If that were to happen, the drain on that 

particular community would amount to $5 million a year in 

salaries, just for the mill workers alone.  And that doesn't 

include the loggers, the truck drivers, and all the related 

industries. 

 

Mr. Minister, the workers and the residents in this particular 

rural area have no idea what the provincial government has in 

store for them.  And will their saw mill be retained in Carrot 

River?  That's what they would like to know today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me assure the 

member from Greystone that this government does not operate 

in the same fashion that the previous Conservative government 

did in terms of giving away land underneath a Crown asset, 

underneath a provincial asset, any more than we would go into 

a deal, as the former Liberal operation did, with respect to the 

give-away to Parsons and Whittemore of the pulp mill in Prince 

Albert. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a new way of doing 

business.  We are in negotiations with Premier Peat to secure 

the property.  We are well on the way to doing that.  We will be 

doing it for a fair market value.  I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the people of Carrot River do have an idea, and I say the 

member from Greystone is doing nothing but playing politics. 

 

I indicated to her I met with their town council.  I've met with 

RM councils in the area, assuring them of the process that we 

are embarked upon.  I've met with the workers to include them 

in the decisions, to explain to them exactly what we're doing. 

 

I say to the member from Greystone, instead of standing up in 

this House and grandstanding, why don't you get on board and 

try and help us to repair some of the damage done by her 

brothers and sisters of the Conservative Party who are nothing 

more . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there is only one person who's been grandstanding between the 

two of us.  To the people of Carrot River and this area, this has 

nothing to do with pure politics and grandstanding.  This is 

genuinely a concern to them, Mr. Minister, and you are the 

minister in charge. 

 

As you know, it is far more expensive to try to create a new job 

than it is to try to keep the jobs that already exist.  And if 

Carrot River loses it's saw mill, 133 employees and their 

families will be affected directly.  The cost in salaries, as I 

stated earlier, will be above $5 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you assessed the cost of moving the mill?  

And can you confirm that the additional cost to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer, if this were to happen, will be 

somewhere around $16 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to assure 

the member from Greystone that we are doing everything 

possible to secure the land under which this mill sits. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we don't need a lecture 

from her with respect to doing business in Saskatchewan.  This 

is the member who promised to bring an idea a week to the 

member from Regina, the Economic Development minister, 

and what has she brought to this province?  What has she 

brought to this minister?  Not one single idea.  She stands up in 

this House scaremongering, Mr. Speaker.  I say to her, we 

aren't rushing into the negotiations.  We're going to complete 

them in a very proper fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before moving on the next item 

on the agenda, I do want to remind members that interference 

with other members while they're asking questions, either by 

loud conversation near the member that is asking the question, 

is simply unacceptable and will not be tolerated in this 

legislature in the future.  I ask members to please give members 

the courtesy of asking questions and answering questions in 

question period. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

Furnace Inspections 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I wish to make 

an announcement in the House today.  And I think what 

brought this announcement out finally is that members of the 

House would know that earlier this week five more people 

were taken to hospital with carbon monoxide poisoning.  

Fortunately they were released after a very short period of time.  

In this particular case the furnace was not faulty, the chimney 

was not faulty, but there was a plugged filter and an 

inaccurately installed door on the furnace. 

 

And today I'm announcing that I've asked SaskPower gas 

inspection division to add four temporary gas inspectors to 

speed up the inspection of the propane and natural gas 

chimneys and furnaces that appear to present a safety risk to 

Saskatchewan home-owners.  The number of gas inspectors is 

being increased to respond to recent home-owner concerns 

regarding the safety of type A chimneys and the Flame-Master 

FM series heat exchangers. 

 

In addition, SaskEnergy have stepped up their service 

technicians' efforts to identify possible deficiencies which are 

then immediately referred to SaskPower's gas inspection 

division which is the proper inspection authority under The Gas 

Inspections Act. 

 

I have taken these steps because the severity of the past winter 

has resulted in an above-normal deterioration of these and other 

heating products.  The inspections will be carried out based on 

information the gas inspection division has on file, which if any 

home-owner have these products or are concerned about their 

safety, they should call the gas inspection division in either 

Regina or in Saskatoon.  And outside of those centres, 

customers should call any SaskPower or SaskEnergy office as 

soon as possible.  This increased inspection effort will be 

funded by SaskPower.  We'll be giving the safety concerns of 

Saskatchewan home-owners the highest priority over the 

coming year. 

 

Thank you, sir. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, with regard to the minister's 

statement, we have a few concerns that we'd like to bring to the 

minister's attention at this time.  While on the one hand he's 

increasing the number of gas inspectors particularly in light of 

this problem -- and we agree with that, Mr. Minister -- you're 

also at the same time cutting the number of fire inspectors, Mr. 

Minister, and we think that's of grave concern to the province 

of Saskatchewan, particularly in light of what's going on here 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something the minister might also consider is the fact that 

just -- I believe it was -- a couple days ago, there was a family 

in Regina that had a problem with their fireplace, and they just 

were barely able to get out of their dwelling prior to being 

overcome, Mr. Minister.  And we would think that your 

inspection should move into that concern as well, deal with that 

concern about fireplaces as well, Mr. Minister, natural gas 

fireplaces because that is an area that is certainly dangerous.  

And we've seen in the last days, about the news, Mr. Minister.  

It's something that I think you should be considering as well, 

the problems associated with that. 

 

So while these steps are good, Mr. Minister, I think there's 

extra steps that could be taken, and you should be looking at 

those as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

and members, we are very pleased that the inspection division 

of SaskPower has recognized and acted on the need for more 

gas inspectors in order to ensure the safety of Saskatchewan 

home-owners who heat their homes with natural gas.  As you 

may recall, this was raised by the member from Regina North 

West in question period not long ago, and we are more than 

delighted that you have responded. 

 

We can only assume, Mr. Minister, that you will inform all 

SaskEnergy customers of this change in order to ensure their 

safety and that perhaps there will be a more concerted effort as 

far as educational forms are concerned so that there can be 

preventive measures taken by citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (Appointments Review 

Committee) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that a Bill 

to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(Appointments Review Committee) be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Privilege 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day I wish to make a 

statement on yesterday's privilege question that was asked in 

the House. 

 

In the absence of further statements from members on the 

question of privilege raised yesterday by the member from 

Moosomin, I am prepared to deal with the matter today. 

 

In his question of privilege the member from Moosomin argued 

that an alleged violation of the Board of Internal Economy 

directive no. 4, the communications allowance, by the member 

for Yorkton, constituted a breach of privilege and a contempt of 

the Assembly.  The action of the member was claimed to be in 

contempt of the House because it constituted disobedience to 

the orders of a legislative committee. 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

At the outset I want to make it clear that the function of the 

Chair at this time is not to determine whether the charges made 

are true or whether the actions complained about constitute a 

violation of a board directive.  My sole function at this time is 

to determine whether the case raised fulfils the requirements to 

be dealt with by the Assembly as a matter of privilege which 

means that it is given precedence over other business before the 

Assembly. 

 

I have carefully considered the arguments made by the 

member.  I find the claim that this matter is proper to be 

considered as a question of privilege is based on a 

misunderstanding of the status and nature of the Board of 

Internal Economy. 

 

The Board of Internal Economy is not a legislative committee.  

The board was established by section 68.7 of The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act.  It is a statutory board 

and derives its duties and its authority from that statute, 

whereas committees are creatures of the House and can only do 

what is delegated to them by the Assembly.  Unlike committees 

whose members are appointed by resolution of the Assembly, 

the composition of the board is determined by statute, and its 

members are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

And further, the Board of Internal Economy does not have the 

basic powers of legislative committees, that is, the power to 

call for persons, papers, and records, and to examine witnesses 

under oath.  The board is an administrative body empowered by 

statute to administer the support service to the Legislative 

Assembly and the remuneration of members. 

 

The member is correct, that disobedience to orders of a 

committee, for example refusal of witnesses to attend or 

produce documents, may be found to be a breach of privilege.  

However it is my view that the alleged violation of the orders 

of the board, an administrative body, not an arm of the House 

or a legislative committee, does not qualify as a matter of 

privilege or contempt. 

 

In support of this decision, I refer members to a decision of 

Speaker Lamoureux of the House of Commons, dated April 14, 

1970, found on pages 5519 and 20 of the debates of the House 

of Commons.  In this instance, a member rose on the question 

of privilege to complain that public funds were improperly used 

to pay for some ministers' constituency expenses.  Speaker 

Lamoureux ruled that the matter did not constitute a proper 

question of privilege and refused to put the question. 

 

The finding that this case is not governed by privilege 

procedures of the Assembly does not mean that the issue is 

unimportant.  This case involves the interpretation and 

application of the orders of the Board of Internal Economy with 

regard to the expenditures out of the MLA communication 

allowance.  To the extent that this is an administrative matter, 

the board has the responsibility under section 50 of The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act to determine 

what is proper use of the allowance and whether the directives 

need to be clarified.  And it seems reasonable that the matter be 

considered by the board. 

 

This ruling does not prevent the matter from being considered 

by the Assembly.  The conduct of members may always be 

debated through a substantive motion clearly laying out the 

charge, and submitted with due notice. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Public Health 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Public Health Act.  The existing 

Public Health Act established the framework for the protection 

of health and the prevention of disease in our province.  

Although this overall objective has not changed, we are 

introducing a new Public Health Act.  We are doing so to 

update its provisions.  We will also create a more flexible 

framework that will more effectively protect the health of the 

people in communities in this province. 

 

The existing Public Health Act has been in place since 1909.  

Since then it has been revised many times.  The result is a 

patchwork piece of legislation which is difficult to use, 

cumbersome to enforce, and has many gaps in terms of its 

ability to protect the health of our population. 

 

This Bill protects the health of our communities by ensuring 

that the people of Saskatchewan have access to clean water and 

to safe food and milk.  It continues our ability to control 

communicable disease.  New provisions in the Act will help 

communities assess the risk of health hazards and take steps to 

prevent or remedy them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Canada, this legislation 

recognizes the importance of controlling non-communicable 

diseases as a top priority for a modern health system.  Heart 

disease, cancer, cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes - 

_ these are the killers in today's society.  And to a remarkable 

degree each of these is preventable.  We are learning to place 

more attention on prevention so that less treatment and care is 

needed and so that people can enjoy healthier and happier lives. 

 

This legislation allows us to pass regulations that improve our 

ability to prevent, investigate, and control non-communicable 

diseases and injuries.  It also has provisions requiring 

physicians to report information concerning injuries, deaths, 

birth defects, or other illnesses.  In this way, Mr. Speaker, more 

can be learned about new diseases or those occurring in 

unexplainable clusters.  This should lead to earlier 

identification of the causes of such illnesses and more rapid 

implementation of strategies to prevent them. 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

(1430) 

 

Communicable diseases have not been forgotten.  Around the 

world, more and more people are living with HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) or AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome) and this legislation protects the privacy 

of these individuals, while at the same time strengthening our 

ability to limit the spread of this fatal disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill simply brings the existing Public Health 

Act into step with the 1990s.  We now know a good deal more 

about what needs to be done to protect public health than was 

the case years ago, particularly in the area of 

non-communicable disease and injuries.  This Bill will allow us 

to get on with the job. 

 

And I am therefore pleased to move second reading of this Bill, 

an Act relating to public health.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

colleagues and I want to have more time to review the Bill 

that's been presented to the House. 

 

I would mention though that as I was meeting with some of the 

SARM delegates, I ran into a couple of young ladies from 

home who happen to be public health nurses, who raised some 

concerns with me.  Now I'm not exactly sure if some of the 

changes the minister was talking about today will be related to 

public health nurses that are meeting in Regina this . . . actually 

met yesterday and today to discuss their role in the new 

wellness model. 

 

And I think those are some of the areas we want to research, we 

want to look into, we want to gather some more data on, before 

we proceed further with debate on the Bill, on The Public 

Health Act, and before in fact, Mr. Speaker, we move to 

committee.  Therefore I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No 29 -- An Act respecting the Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading of The Health Services Utilization and 

Research Commission Act.  This Act establishes the Health 

Services Utilization and Research Commission as an 

independent, arm's-length body, capable of providing research 

and analysis to the government, health care providers, and the 

public.  The research is used to identify where and how health 

services can be used most effectively in Saskatchewan. 

 

There are two facets to the commission's responsibilities.  The 

first is to foster the efficient and effective use of health 

services.  The second is to promote and support research in the 

health sciences and health-related social sciences through 

annual grant competitions. 

 

Briefly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill sets out clearly and succinctly 

the objectives of the commission and gives the commission the 

power it needs to fulfil its objectives.  It also makes the 

commission accountable to the Legislative Assembly by 

requiring it to submit an annual report to the legislature. 

 

The commission was first established under The Crown 

Corporations Act in 1992.  At that time a commitment was 

made to the research community and to the members of the 

commission that the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission would be eventually established under its own 

legislation. 

 

By passing this Act we fulfil our promise and ensure that the 

commission will be an independent, arm's length body.  More 

importantly, we ensure that its recommendations and advice are 

independent and autonomous.  Over the past two years, Mr. 

Speaker, the commission has provided over $2 million in 

research grants to support a range of clinical and applied 

research projects.  In addition, the commission itself has 

undertaken a number of studies.  I would like to take a few 

moments to describe some of the activities undertaken by the 

commission. 

 

In November 1992, the commission released thyroid testing 

guidelines to physicians, laboratories, and hospitals.  The 

implementation of these guidelines could result in savings of $1 

million or more annually.  In 1993, the commission 

recommended changes in the use of electrocardiogram testing 

which could save up to $1 million annually when that's fully 

implemented. 

 

The commission has also studied the acuity levels of medical 

and pediatric hospital admissions and stays in base, regional, 

and community hospitals.  This study identified where services 

could be provided more cost-effectively.  Several hospitals 

have already started applying the study's recommendations. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, the commission completed studies 

which set out guidelines governing routine testing practices in 

hospitals and ambulatory settings.  The commission has also 

identified how different methods of organizing surgical 

services such as traditional in-patient day surgery and short stay 

can be used more effectively. 

 

A new study just released examines whether the long-term care 

service is meeting the needs of the province and if current 

classification systems and budgeting and administrative 

policies should be changed. 

 

One of the most important aspects of the commission, Mr. 

Speaker, is the partnership that exists between it and health care 

providers.  The key to its success, I believe, is that the 

commission works with everyday practitioners.  The 

recommendations or suggestions coming out of its studies are 

practical, useful, and can be implemented.  As the results of the 

studies are completed and shared within the health field, they 

will contribute to the improvement of health services 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill, 

The Health Services Utilization and Research Commission Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

colleagues and I certainly aren't opposed to any further research 

or health research in this province.  I think each and every one 

of us as human beings and as individuals living in the province 

of Saskatchewan are looking for even a greater access to health 

care -- not the greater access to health care services, but 

certainly we all support the idea of more research in ways of 

combating the diseases that face us on a daily basis. 

 

And for those of us who are fortunate to have sound, healthy 

bodies and minds, we can be thankful for that as we look at the 

people that are struggling all around us, whether they be young 

children . . . And I think the recent incident of this young girl at 

Rouleau and what has been taking place in the health field to 

give her a new resurgence in life and a new hope in life, is an 

example of what research has done through the years. 

 

The minister talked about another commission being appointed 

and being established.  We would trust that the minister would 

indeed take a serious look in the appointment of members to 

this commission at looking at an all-party function that would 

certainly allow for a group of individuals to appoint members 

that would be beyond the scope of just political partisanism, but 

allow for individuals to be part of the committee, who would 

certainly look at a broad overview and reflect the total interest 

of taxpayers across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to allow for further review of the Bill before us, I 

now move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Pelly on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: -- To ask leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the House, four constituents of mine and very 

good friends of mine too, Mr. Speaker, who are RM delegates 

and an RM administrator down here for the SARM convention 

here in Regina. 

 

And I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Joe Mirva, councillor 

for division 5 of the RM of Clayton, his wife Lorraine, their 

daughter Denise; and the administrator for the RM of Clayton, 

Mr. Doug Ferder. 

 

And I want to welcome them here to the proceedings of the 

House this afternoon.  I hope they enjoy their stay here.  I've 

arranged for a tour for them of the legislature a little later on.  

And I wish them well in their deliberations at their convention, 

and a very safe trip home when they conclude. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 2 -- An Act 

to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 

1993 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

to take part in Bill No. 2, An Act to amend The Department of 

Economic Development Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the key points of this legislation is that 

the government recognizes that trade is vital for the continued 

economic growth of Saskatchewan.  In view of the changing 

global economic situation, an examination of current trade 

development mechanisms was undertaken to ensure and secure 

a competitive position for Saskatchewan exporters. 

 

I take a look at the fishery industry alone, Mr. Speaker, and you 

see the depletion of fish stocks off the east coast and the west 

coast of Canada.  And of course that impacts on other countries 

in Europe and in Asia who come over here to take part in the 

fisheries.  Now they are going to be limited, so there is going to 

be quite a shortage of fish in the world.  And I think that we in 

Saskatchewan have an opportunity here to take advantage of 

what has taken place on the east and west coast through the 

fisheries and through this legislation. 

 

Through a series of consultations in 1993, industry and 

government looked at the options for enhancing the province's 

trade development capabilities.  At the end of the process, it 

was decided that a more formal linkage between government 

and industry was desirable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again, I feel that private enterprise will play 

a major role in the economic recovery of the province of 

Saskatchewan in a number of areas. Forestry, fishing, mining, 

and in tourism, I think are four main areas that private 

enterprise and government working closely together will play a 

major role. 

 

Through the consultations the preferred option was the 

establishment of a trade development corporation to be 

managed and funded jointly by industry and government. 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

Privatization means the selling off of no further involvement or 

control by government.  In this case, government will continue 

to provide funding and exert influences through appointments 

to the board of directors. The government will provide 

continuing support to trade development through provisions of 

funding to the corporation over the long term. 

 

I think this corporation when established, Mr. Speaker, will, as 

I indicated before, play a major role.  And I want to comment a 

little later on, in another Bill, on the fisheries portion. 

 

But I think that when we take a look at what's happening in the 

forest industry, there's a shortage of forest products all over the 

world today, and we have so much forest in this province.  And 

if we handle it properly and we get out and sell it across the 

border, in the United States . . . they're taking a lot of our forest 

products.  And once again Asia and European countries are also 

doing that. 

 

So we have an opportunity here to work together with private 

industry to establish a secure economic base for this province, 

and I think this Bill will do that for the province.  Mr. Speaker, 

in closing, I want to indicate to you that I will be supporting 

this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to add my support to this 

Bill and do so in the context of economic development in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When this government came into office, Mr. Speaker, it was 

faced with a question:  when you're in debt up to your ears and 

then some more, and when some of the systems that you've had 

in place for years have been undermined by things like NAFTA 

(North American Free Trade Agreement) and the Free Trade 

Agreement, and when the megaprojects that have been put in 

place have failed to deliver and what you end up doing is using 

taxpayers' money, what is it that you do?  How do you get 

yourself out of that quagmire?  And the question of course is 

monumental, and the answers are not going to be easy to come 

by.  But this legislation points part of the way that this 

government is using to get out of the economic quagmire that 

we found ourselves in. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill promotes or makes it possible for the 

government to set up a trading corporation.  It does so in 

recognition of the fact that a large part, a very large part of 

Saskatchewan's economy is based on trade.  And a lot of our 

well-being is based on our ability to deliver products and put 

them into all corners of the world. 

 

How do we get somebody from Korea or Japan interested in 

these products?  We have to have somebody that's able to go to 

the populated places in the world and do some promoting.  

Quite often things work out very well, and we do get people 

coming in from the outside and looking for markets, and we 

will continue to encourage that. 

 

At the same time we have a lot of small-business people in the 

province who don't have the whereabouts to make the contacts 

with the large companies.  And I think about the new, opening 

markets, for example.  There would be a follow-up to the 

processing of wild game or wild fruits and berries or 

domestically grown fruits and berries, which are just being 

developed, and vegetables. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very important aspect of the chain 

that is needed to support a complete industry and marketing 

system. 

 

There's one other concept I wanted to mention here, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to how this fits into the total industrial 

strategy of this government.  If megaprojects are not going to 

work, if you're limited in how much you can expand in Crown 

corporations -- you've already got cooperatives in place, but 

they are established to do a certain thing -- you need a new 

ethic.  You need something new to get started on. 

 

And an amazing thing has been happening around the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Local communities have been banding 

together in various ways to try to come up with how to 

establish little industries in their communities and then use that 

industry for their well-being and to be able to continue living in 

Saskatchewan and keep their communities going. 

 

So this government has taken it upon itself to develop an 

economic strategy which is geared towards helping those small 

businesses.  We have lowered the basic small business tax by 

half a per cent per year over four years; it's going to be lowered 

from a 10 per cent level to an 8 per cent level to show our 

positive indication that this is a direction that is very crucial to 

the development of Saskatchewan well-being. 

 

The taxes have actually been lowered even in the time -- for 

that sector -- during the time when the rest of the province is 

deeply in debt and the demands on the rest of the taxpayers has 

been increasing.  So we find, Mr. Speaker, that if can . . . And 

we believe in this sector, the small business sector, and that is 

what this particular Act is designed to do, is to aid that sector. 

 

I have one other person, I believe, who wishes to speak on this 

debate so I will take my place at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

colleagues of the legislature.  It gives me great pleasure indeed 

to take my place here and add a few comments on this 

particular Bill, An Act to amend The Department of Economic 

Development Act. 

 

I think my colleague from Prince Albert Carlton has outlined 

some of the key points to this particular Bill as well as did my 

colleague from the riding of Athabasca. 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

The key initiative of course in this particular Bill is the 

formation of the Trade Development Corporation.  And this of 

course comes right out of our economic development strategy, 

Partnership for Renewal; it's one of the initiatives that was 

outlined in the Partnership for Renewal. 

 

And as we went around putting together the Partnership for 

Renewal document, the economic blueprint for the future of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan business people and 

Saskatchewan residents, Saskatchewan farmers, indicated to us 

that one of the areas that they found some difficulty was of 

course trying to identify and trying to expand and trying to 

cultivate new markets out in the international community.  And 

of course we felt that a corporation of some type, of some form, 

would certainly facilitate or go a long way in trying to assist 

these particular business people and individuals. 

 

And it's important to note, Mr. Speaker, and fellow colleagues, 

that Saskatchewan of course depends very, very highly on the 

export markets, and it's very, very important to the future of 

this provincial economy and to the future of this province that 

we identify and we cultivate these particular markets. 

 

So the Trade Development Corporation will do exactly that, 

Mr. Speaker.  That is its mandate, is to bring in the private, the 

public, the cooperative sector together, to work in trying to 

expand these particular economic opportunities in the world 

market. 

 

And as my colleague from the Prince Albert Carlton so 

appropriately pointed out, there is no doubt that the world 

economy and the world market-place is changing and there's no 

doubt that the Canadian economy and the Saskatchewan 

economy is expanding, is changing, and we need to change 

with those particular initiatives. 

 

And I'm very happy to say and very proud to say that this 

development corporation, this Trade Development Corporation, 

is going to go a long way in creating major economic benefits 

and spin-offs to the province of Saskatchewan and to 

businesses in Saskatchewan.  And I certainly commend the 

Minister of Economic Development on this particular Bill and 

wholeheartedly support it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to adjourn debate now on this particular 

Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- An Act to 

Create, Encourage and Facilitate Business Opportunities in 

Saskatchewan through the Establishment of the 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

colleagues of the legislature.  Again it's indeed a pleasure to 

stand here and make a few comments on this particular Bill and 

this particular Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we went around again in the consultation 

period for our economic blueprint, Partnership for Renewal, 

there was extensive consultation and discussion on the future of 

the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation and the 

role that it had played in the development of the Saskatchewan 

economy and the future of this particular institution. 

 

We felt, based on the discussions and the consensus that we 

came up with, that it would be appropriate in the future to look 

at creating another development agency for the province. 

 

I want to say that the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, has done in the past tremendous . . . 

has brought tremendous benefits to the Saskatchewan economy 

and has expanded the economic base of this province 

immensely.  Yes, there was some problems with the institution, 

but I would suggest to the members of the legislature and to the 

business people in Saskatchewan that the benefits far 

outweighed the downside. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we looked at basically the structure of a new 

economic development corporation, and it was the consensus 

that we should have and the government should play some kind 

of role in economic development.  We all know that that has 

been happening since 1905, and the general feeling was that 

that should continue into the future. 

 

The new Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, which is 

going to come into existence later this year, the basic mandate 

and the role of this particular institution will be to provide 

financial services including lending guarantees and some equity 

to small and medium-sized viable businesses in Saskatchewan.  

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that that is of course breaking away 

from some of the activities that have happened in the past, in 

particular with megaprojects and some of the more high-risk 

ventures.  We are putting the priority on small and 

medium-sized businesses in Saskatchewan, and this corporation 

is going to deliver on that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This corporation will also, because of the changing economic 

atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, this corporation will also take an 

active role in promoting economic development by seeking 

loan and investment syndication with private sector financial 

institutions and venture capital funds to share the risks in 

particular projects.  And again, I think this speaks of new 

strategic alliances which this government has talked about; and 

again, this is going to be another fundamental mandate and role 

of this particular corporation. 

 

Another role of this corporation will be to attempt to attract 

new businesses to Saskatchewan and finance those 

transactions. 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

There has always been a certain level of uncertainty and 

apprehension about the amounts of money that are expended or 

advanced to these particular institutions.  I want to talk briefly 

about the capitalization of this particular corporation. 

 

Under the Act, Mr. Speaker, and fellow colleagues, it states 

very clearly that Saskatchewan opportunities corporations will 

receive an annual allotment of money from this particular 

legislature.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be the same 

each and every year, but they are going to have to come back to 

this legislature each and every year and be accountable for each 

and every one of their loans and explain to the legislature as to 

where these loans were pursued and how they are structured. 

 

It is also important to note that there is a limit on how much 

money will be forwarded to this particular corporation.  The 

total capitalization, as I say, will be fixed and it cannot be 

increased without amending the legislation, and thus making it 

more accountable to the members of the legislature and to the 

people and the business community of Saskatchewan. 

 

Budgeted allocations will again require approval through an 

annual budgeting process.  I would like to say that this 

investment approach, Mr. Speaker, is very important and the 

government supports working with private sectors in trying to, 

again, work in strategic alliances to finance projects. 

 

I would say that there is going to be some restrictions on some 

of the lending.  The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

will not be able to lend to businesses that will compete with 

other, already-established businesses in the province.  We are 

also going to put a high priority on targeting value added, 

export-oriented, and import-replacement industries, of course 

again keeping with the Partnership for Renewal where we 

target export and global markets. 

 

So I think these are all important features of the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation.  And I think that it is going to serve 

Saskatchewan business people, the province of Saskatchewan, 

very well and I think it's again part of the plan, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have for the province, the blueprint, Partnership for 

Renewal. 

 

This is another one of the initiatives that this government has 

announced and is following up.  We are just not speaking about 

particular initiatives, we are actually taking the front, Mr. 

Speaker, and setting them in motion.  And I certainly want to 

say that again I commend the Minister of Economic 

Development and all of my caucus colleagues for this particular 

initiative.  I thank you and I want to adjourn debate on this 

particular Bill at this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the adjournment motion. 

 

(1500) 

 

The Speaker: -- The member can't withdraw an adjournment. 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

to speak on Bill No. 3, an Act to create the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation promoting economic growth in 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, the key points of this legislation is 

to establish, to foster and to facilitate economic development in 

the province of Saskatchewan; the increased focus on value 

added manufacturing and processing, export-oriented 

businesses and attracting new business to the province.  The 

key industry areas are agriculture, value added products in 

forestry, minerals, energy, tourism and information processing 

and communications. 

 

The corporation will work with private lenders to provide a full 

range of commercial lending services, including loans and 

guarantees.  The corporation will focus on developing 

relationships with financial institutions in the private sector.  

This will promote the spread of risk among many investors and 

reduce the amount of funding provided by the province. 

 

Community support will also be critical to obtaining financing 

from the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation.  All 

projects will be subject to commercial viability analysis before 

economic development benefits are considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to what I see as a very 

important part of this legislation, and that is the added value on 

the things that we have and the resources that we have in our 

province.  As I said before on the other Bill, I wanted to talk 

about added value for the fishing industry. 

 

We have millions and millions of pounds of fish in northern 

Saskatchewan that are thrown away every year as the 

commercial fishermen, they fish their fish and they're only 

allowed to sell the fish that the corporation in Winnipeg 

decides that they want it at a certain time.  And usually the ling 

cod and the mullets or the mariahs and the suckers are just 

thrown away.  And there are millions and millions of pounds, 

and I'm not exaggerating on that, that are thrown away every 

year and that they could be used. 

 

They're used in other countries.  The ling cod, or the mariah 

that we have in northern Saskatchewan, is the same ling cod 

that they have in the ocean; it's fished off the coast of Iceland 

and other countries like that and used for commercial uses. 

 

And there are many commercial uses for ling cod and to name 

one is cod-liver oil.  The mariah has a large liver and that can 

be used to make cod-liver oil.  It can also be used for fish meal.  

It can also be filleted and used in commercial restaurants, 

mainly for fish and chips. 

 

And the other species of fish that we are throwing away and we 

are throwing away millions and millions of pounds of mullets.  

Fishermen when they start fishing in the spring, they might get 

a hundred pounds of pickerel or northern pike that they can sell 

to 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

the corporation.  And out of that hundred pounds of fish they 

probably get in some cases 3 and 400 pounds of rough fish that 

they literally throw back into the lake to feed the pelicans and 

the seagulls or, in the case of the winter, is thrown out on the 

ice for the ravens and other animals to consume. 

 

This also could be used and could be used for pet food and for 

making fish meal and fertilizers.  I think we just have to use our 

imaginations and give people the opportunity to get out and 

develop the resources that we are throwing away.  We have a 

world that is starving, is crying for this product that we throw 

away and we just have to stop that. 

 

I think that this corporation here will help individuals who want 

to get involved in finding the markets.  First of all you have to 

establish your markets so that you can get out and sell the 

product and then you have to set up, and I sincerely hope that 

this corporation will do that. 

 

In the forest industry I want to talk about value added products 

too in the forest industry.  As you go into the North and you . . . 

not just in northern Saskatchewan, but you know it's from 

Saskatoon north is where you start running into the forests.  

And we have stands in southern Saskatchewan of jack pine and 

tamarack and poplar, spruce trees, and birch; all can be sold for 

different things. 

 

Tamarack and jack pine -- and we just have so much of it in 

this province -- can be used for railroad ties.  And there is a 

demand out there for railroad ties.  We have large stands of 

small fence posts that farmers are using, and now with the 

cattle prices the way they are, they're going up and the demand 

for fence posts is just increasing in leaps and bounds.  You see 

the small post-peeling operations and treatment plants are 

springing up all over. 

 

And I think that this is an opportunity for Saskatchewan and 

this corporation to get the private enterprise involved and to 

establish more and more of the small-scale forest industries that 

can take advantage of, as I indicated, fence posts for farmers 

and railroad ties for the railroads and lumber for the world 

markets. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the private sector are 

going to play a major part in our recovery.  And I think that we 

have to get away from the large megaprojects that we have seen 

in the last number of years, and I specifically talk about 

megaprojects like Weyerhaeuser and Millar Western . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- . . . in the forest industry where we as 

government give out large amounts of money in the forms of 

grants and guarantees on loans, and what we really get back is a 

few jobs but they're never secure, as we've seen on the east side 

with Simpson Timber -- they work there for so many years and 

then they just take off and then they just leave it.  And I think 

that we have to put a stop to the megaprojects.  Let the private 

enterprise come in, encourage them to develop the resources 

that we have. 

 

I can just think if we were to take the $50 million that we gave 

in an outright grant to Millar Western just to come into the 

province . . . $50 million grant.  Those types of things just 

cannot continue and the taxpayers of this province should not 

be putting that up. 

 

I compare that to private enterprise where they come in and put 

up their own money, and I want to speak specifically of the 

mining industry where they come in and that is private money 

and they create the jobs, the long-term jobs that we're getting in 

this province.  And I think it's so important that this 

corporation, this new corporation, will be able to work closely 

with industry that is prepared to put their own money up and 

come into this province and help us develop our resources, 

create the jobs that we need in the province, and create the type 

of economic growth that will get us out of the doldrums that we 

face in this province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will be created 

under legislation to be brought forward in the spring in this 

session, which we are speaking on it now, and the corporation 

hopefully will be operating on July 1, 1994.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated, I think this is a good corporation; I think if it works 

out the way I see it working out, it will solve many of our 

problems not only just in northern Saskatchewan but on 

Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

In closing, I want to indicate that I will be supporting this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that this 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation which is formed by 

this Act will form a very important part of the Saskatchewan 

government economic policy because what it will do is it will 

be able to provide money to those businesses or corporations or 

enterprises which are developing which are unable to get 

money otherwise, and they will get into a partnership with 

them. 

 

And it forms a part of the other . . . it completes the picture, Mr. 

Speaker.  We have also in the package the development of a 

trading corporation which was dealt with earlier, so we'll have 

that marketing end taken care of.  Saskatchewan has the 

know-how.  It has the people, the desire to work.  We've got the 

raw materials.  We've got to be able to provide vehicles to get 

that to work for us.  And I'm very pleased to support this Act. 

 

I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 6 -- An Act 

to amend The Community Bonds Act 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate on the Act 

to amend The Community Bonds Act.  As we all know, Mr. 

Speaker, the community bonds can be a very valuable tool for 

the economic development here in Saskatchewan, and these 

amendments will certainly make that ability much more easier 

to access and much more flexible, depending on the needs of 

the communities. 

 

This is also a very good tool, Mr. Speaker, in economic 

development as it pertains to rural Saskatchewan.  As I think 

we're all aware, agriculture is going through a rather 

horrendous transition period with the global marketing and 

global impacts that it has on that industry.  And there's a 

growing need and a growing desire by communities all across 

rural Saskatchewan to enter into value added operations that 

will be community-based, will be community-based industries 

that create jobs that will stay within those communities, and 

equally as important, Mr. Speaker, will be the opportunity for 

the revenue and the profits generated from such an economic 

community-based industry that will also stay within the 

communities. 

 

And the community bonds vehicle has assisted approximately 

155 communities and/or groups here in Saskatchewan since it 

was first introduced in 1990.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to 

say that I have had some connection with a group that entered 

into a community-based industry through the economic bonds 

vehicle.  And of course that's Sask-Can Fibre's operation at 

Canora, Saskatchewan, which serves not only the Canora 

constituency but also serves my constituency of Pelly.  It is a 

very worthwhile and positive approach, Mr. Speaker, to 

economic development within this province. 

 

As there becomes a greater and greater market, particularly in 

the Pacific Rim countries, but throughout the world for the 

value added, superior agriculture products proved in 

Saskatchewan, there comes a greater need to assist these 

communities who, through their own initiative, want to benefit 

and capitalize on those ventures. 

 

We see that the Sask-Can Fibre operation in Canora, for 

example, has not only benefited the community through the 

jobs it has created, but it has also benefited the agricultural 

economy around there as is making now a new market for those 

farmers for the use of their flax straw, which normally would 

have simply been a waste product.  And it's created a number 

of opportunities for farmers to earn off-farm income through 

the use in putting their equipment, their tractors and their 

balers, to work in baling this flax straw.  And there's been a 

spin-off benefit to the trucking industry in the area as they now 

have jobs of hauling the flax straw to a gathering point. 

 

That's the type of economic development, Mr. Speaker, that the 

community bonds will assist and initiate in many cases. 

 

Very similar to what took place a couple of years ago with the 

establishment of Norquay Alfalfa Processors Ltd.  That once 

again, Mr. Speaker, is a totally community-owned and 

community-controlled operation.  And that's the hallmark to the 

recovery of Saskatchewan, the rebuilding of Saskatchewan, and 

the rebuilding of the economy of this province.  It's absolutely 

the hallmark that will give to those communities the initiative 

and the ability to invest in their own futures. 

 

(1515) 

 

As I've already said, Mr. Speaker, there's been approximately 

155 communities and groups that have taken advantage of the 

community bonds program.  Their initiative and their forward 

looking by the residents and those involved in those 

committees that perceived the need for a community-based 

industry in their community -- I commend that. 

 

As I was mentioning earlier about Norquay Alfalfa, having that 

operation there in that community, Mr. Speaker, has created 

some 55 jobs that now has a payroll of approximately $1 

million that stays right in that community. 

 

But what is even more important to me personally, Mr. 

Speaker, in this particular project is the fact that those 55 jobs 

for the most part are filled by young people.  It now gives them 

the opportunity to stay in their community, to raise their 

families in that community, and the whole spin-off effect of 

that plant goes much beyond simply the production of alfalfa. 

 

With those children staying in that community it maintains the 

schools and the hospitals and so on and so forth, and the 

business places in that community, and it provides a future.  A 

future for that community that will be not only prevalent to us 

today, but quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it will be there for my 

children and my grandchildren. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the 

Saskatchewan spirit is all about. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what 

the community bonds is going to assist.  It's going to assist that 

Saskatchewan first, the Saskatchewan way, spirit, in meeting 

the challenges of today and securing a secure future for all of 

us in this province.  But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, not 

only for us in our generation, but for generations to come. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it goes without saying that 

Saskatchewan people are renowned for their ability to take on 

adversity, for their ability to meet the challenges of the 

changing times and to have the flexibility to change with those 

times. 
 

I think we see that. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I know I see it all 

across my constituency.  Because five or six years ago there 

was very little thought and very little discussion within the 

chamber of commerce, within the town councils, and within 

RM councils to give much concentration on economic 

development. 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

They were quite comfortable with the number one industry at 

hand which was agriculture. But as agriculture has changed 

over the last half a decade, there has been a growing concern 

and a growing recognition for that need to take agriculture one 

step further, from just a producer of raw material to being able 

to take that raw material and value added right in our own local 

communities and then make available to the international 

market-place a value added product that is not only top quality, 

but is also very much in demand. 

 

And the community has recognized that in order to have an 

industry that is going to be viable and have the ability to stand 

alone in the commercial market-place, there is certainly the 

need to carry out market studies and identify the market 

demands and the market wishes, whether they be in Japan or 

whether they be in Korea or whether they be in Mexico.  And 

the community bonds program, Mr. Speaker, will further 

enhance the ability for the community groups to pursue that 

avenue, that avenue of identifying what the market demands 

are out there and how they can take that raw product that's 

produced at home, value added to meet those demands. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it goes I guess without saying that it is truly 

my pleasure to be in support of this particular Bill to amend 

The Community Bonds Act.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm of the understanding 

that there may be other members who want to contribute to this 

debate.  I'm therefore going to ask that the debate be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 7 -- An Act 

to amend The Research Council Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased 

today to speak to the Act to amend The Research Council Act.  

This is a piece of legislation that isn't going to move earth and 

heaven or move most of the population of Saskatchewan.  But 

for the people of Saskatoon, especially my constituency of 

Sutherland-University, and especially those who are in the 

scientific or technological community and many of those in the 

business community, this amendment to The Research Council 

Act will be very important legislation. 

 

And in this connection I want to give credit to the people at the 

Research Council for the work that they are doing to bring 

innovation and technology to our province. 

 

The simple facts of this legislation are that it basically 

recognizes where the Research Council is going in terms of its 

increased interaction with the private sector.  These are timely 

changes.  The changes to the composition of the board don't 

preclude academic participation in the board, but they do 

recognize the need for full partnership with the client 

community that the Research Council now deals with.  And 

this needs to be reflected in the governance as it is taken care of 

or addressed by the amendments. 

 

The second feature of this legislation is that it allows for 

individuals to give gifts to the Research Council as an agent of 

the Crown, and in fact there is actually one gift for half a 

million dollars that is waiting for this legislation to be passed 

before it can be accepted by the Research Council.  And I don't 

think that anyone in this Assembly would want to vote against 

that very generous gift going to the Research Council to further 

its work.  This will also allow others to make such gifts in the 

future in order to encourage research and development work at 

the Research Council and to facilitate innovation in our 

province. 

 

A third and final provision of this legislation -- and who can 

argue against this? -- is that there would be timely tabling of 

documents in accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act. 

This is part of our commitment to legislative reform, to 

democratic reform, and is consistent with our process that 

documents be tabled in timely fashion so that they mean 

something when they're tabled. 

 

So in summary, these are significant changes to the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, recognizing it as an important 

component of the scientific and technological community in 

our province and also an important community for the business 

community and its evolving role.  And these amendments 

recognize that evolving role of the Research Council. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

few words to make on this particular amending legislation to 

the Saskatchewan Research Council Act.  And I don't think that 

we're going to have major problems with this particular Act, 

not -- I assure you -- that I am assured and reassured by the 

member opposite that just spoke. 

 

And so what I took the liberty of doing is, as we do with all 

Bills, Mr. Speaker, is send out copies of the legislation to all 

third parties that are going to be affected, potentially affected 

by potential legislation, and then ask for response, any 

concerns, any ideas and so on.  And I certainly did get a 

response from the Saskatchewan Research Council, Mr. 

Speaker, from Jim Hutch, Ron McGrath, and Jerome and so on.  

And they were very, very helpful in indicating some of the 

reasons why this Act or this amendment would be something 

that they would look forward to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly as an opposition do not intend to 

stand in the way of a donation of $500,000 simply by 

recognizing the fact that the SRC (Saskatchewan Research 

Council) is going to be an agent of the Crown, if that stands in 

the way.  And the way we understand it, for potential donors it 

does mean a substantial difference in income tax 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

recognition of donations such as this. 

 

And albeit that the Department of Justice -- and we'll get into 

this as we grill the minister -- albeit that the Department of 

Justice has indicated that as far as they are concerned, the SRC 

is already . . . I see that I've got the minister's attention here; 

nothing to worry about here.  The Department of Justice is 

indicating that the SRC, in their opinion, is already de facto a 

member or an agent of the Crown as such.  And what this Act 

will do is simply make it in fact. 

 

I did have some concerns, I must admit.  Any time that the 

members opposite want to make something an agent of the 

Crown, there are a lot of red flags that go up because the 

ideological and philosophical bent of members opposite 

certainly causes that to become a concern potentially. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we're going to facilitate matters this 

afternoon.  And not only will I not ask for an adjournment of 

debate, I'm just simply going to recommend that this Bill go to 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  This is the continuing 

questions of the Minister of Agriculture, and I hope as the days 

go by that we will have productive meetings in the estimates of 

Agriculture. 

 

This is my first opportunity to participate directly in this 

process, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, and I'm looking 

forward to some productive times.  I'm going to start off by 

doing something that's a little bit unusual, and I'll explain to 

you what I propose to do. 

 

One of the best things that I think that we as an opposition have 

come up with in terms of giving the people of this province 

access to their legislature and legislators is the process whereby 

citizens with any kind of concern whatsoever can ask questions 

directly of the Premier.  And you've witnessed some of those 

questions in the House here, Mr. Minister, when we get up and 

ask on behalf of Mr. So-and-so from there-and-there, Mr. 

Premier, I want to know . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

Unfortunately for the people out there, there are so many of 

them that are writing in that this legislature is not going to be 

sitting long enough to be able to ask nearly all of those 

questions.  So as second best, I guess . . . and I'm not saying 

that you're second class, but the Premier is the Premier.  And 

we have to give him due, and I'm sure you understand the 

respect due to that position. 

 

But what I've done now is taken some of those questions that 

were addressed to the Premier that deal with agriculture and 

ask you those questions directly.  I'm not proposing to get into 

a debate with you today.  What I'm going to do is give you the 

name of the individual.  I'm going to read his question, and then 

I trust that you will take some time to contemplate and consult 

with your officials so that you will be able to give a full and 

adequate answer to that question.  And upon your resuming 

your seat, I will ask the next question.  What we're going to be 

doing, I have half a dozen for you today, and then I'll turn it 

over to my colleague. 

 

So with that slight introduction, Mr. Minister, these are 

unabridged.  These are the way the questioners have asked 

them, and you can take the answer from there. 

 

And the first question that I want to pose to you comes from a 

Gerald Smith from Chaplin.  And this is his question, as he has 

asked it:  why is the increase in durum price not being paid to 

claimants in the crop insurance market price option program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well thank you for that question.  I 

would recommend that in question period and in estimates you 

maybe should have all the questions sent in because they're 

very good questions that you have sent in. 

 

Why is the increase in market price in durum not passed on?  

As the member opposite knows, durum is a Wheat Board 

commodity.  The market price option works such that they 

insure their crop for the market price and we aren't able to 

determine the final market price until we know what that is, 

which will be probably December of this year.  We'll know 

what the final durum price is and at that time their payments 

will be adjusted to reflect that final price.  We also have the 

authority to do an interim payment and we are considering that 

at this time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The next question 

comes from Lyle Sletten from Swift Current and he asks:  back 

in 1991, I received an overpayment on GRIP and in 1992 I was 

requested to repay an overpayment, which I did.  I know there 

are some that have not paid this overpayment and I'm 

wondering how the government is going to collect it, seeing 

that the government is going to be out of GRIP this year.  If 

they are not going to be able to collect it back, why should I not 

be reimbursed for my overpayment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Under the 

1991 program there was approximately $32 million in 

overpayments that were made.  We've collected all of that 

except about $2 million which is still outstanding, and we're 

using various collection actions and we intend to collect that 

money if it's at all possible. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The next question 

comes from Ken Williams from Imperial. 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

What are you going to do with the GRIP program when it 

expires this year for Saskatchewan farmers?  Will you replace 

it?  With what?  Time is running out. We need to know now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, that's a very 

good question. The Saskatchewan government, going back to 

before I was minister, appointed a 32-member Farm Support 

Review Committee to look at developing a program that's 

suitable for Saskatchewan farmers.  These are ordinary farm 

folk.  We had 20 members at large on there and 12 from 

organizations in order to give it the balance of actual producing 

farmers. 

 

They have recommended to me giving me three options that 

they think are acceptable.  We are negotiating that with the 

federal government.  Mr. Goodale is on record as saying that he 

thinks it's very possible that we can have a new support 

program in place by the end of '94 for the '95 season.  We're 

targeting that. 

 

We're working very hard with the federal government and farm 

groups to develop that program, and we hope to be successful 

in that and have something to replace GRIP. 

 

I think all the provinces in this country and the federal 

government agree that we need a new safety net, one that will 

not destruct markets, one that will be acceptable under the trade 

agreements that we have signed.  And we are working as 

quickly as we can to develop them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The fourth question I have this afternoon, Mr. 

Minister, comes from Patrick Santo from Whitewood.  Why, 

when you claim to be helping agriculture, do you continue to 

tax our inputs more and more, such as electricity, natural gas, 

and especially gasoline.  Why can I buy gasoline 4 cents a litre 

cheaper at the pumps than I can in bulk?  Don't tell me it's 

because of gas war, because this has been the situation for two 

years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again a very 

good question.  We all know that farmers are struggling out 

there and inputs are high, particularly compared to prices of the 

products that they sell.  I would point out that this government 

does spend something like 10 or 11 per cent of our budget on 

agriculture.   For farm fuel, the farm fuel rebates and the purple 

diesel cost us in the neighbourhood of $120 million this year, 

but also point out that in things like power, telephone, natural 

gas, all of those are somewhat cost subsidized, that rural 

customers and farmers in particular, do not pay the full cost of 

those because they are Crown corporations and they are able to 

cross-subsidize with our large customers.  That is becoming 

more difficult. 

 

Things like SaskTel where we no longer can have the revenue 

of long-distance crossing through the province which we used 

to use to subsidize the monthly telephone rates of our 

consumers.  We're being deregulated by the federal government 

which means that we have to compete in an open market-place, 

and it becomes more and more difficult to provide those 

subsidies to rural people.  But certainly we do the best that we 

can to try to relieve the input costs of farmers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A slightly longer question comes from Earl 

Tysdal, T-y-s-d-a-l, of Briercrest.  And he asks: farming has 

been in trouble since the early '80s.  Since you have come to 

power, you have cut money from farm programs, further 

adding to our predicament.  On top of this, you have raised 

wages for teachers and lowered the portion you give to school 

units.  This will undoubtedly add to our already ballooning 

education tax on farm land.  We have to pay this whether we 

get a crop or not and you know what you've done to our crop 

insurance.  Why can't you take education tax completely off 

farm land and put it on income tax?  This is the only fair tax 

there is.  If people make money, they have to pay the tax. 

 

Will you comment on those ideas, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I certainly would be pleased to 

comment on those ideas for Earl.  Yes, taxes are high.  There is 

certainly arguments that would suggest that there may be fairer 

ways to do taxes.  We need an overall tax reform; there's no 

argument with that.  The question is where do you put it?  We 

now have the highest income tax rate I think in . . . or one of 

the higher income tax rates in the country and we don't see a lot 

of room to tax there. 

 

I would agree with Earl that we have made some cuts in 

agriculture.  I would submit, Mr. Chairman, that our cuts in 

agriculture have not been nearly as deep as they have been in 

things like health care and education.  And we made some very, 

very tough decision in this government, cutting things like drug 

plans and health care and education that were not very 

palatable to us, but we had to do because we were forced into 

that situation. 

 

And the reason that we haven't made huge cuts in 

agriculture -- as many governments do when they get in 

financial difficulty, they start with agriculture -- the reason we 

didn't do that in Saskatchewan is because we realize that the 

way to the future is economic development, and that's how 

we're going to ultimately get out of the debt that we're in, is 

through creation of jobs and through economic development 

and creation of wealth.  And agriculture has always been the 

main and the major economic engine of this province, and we 

certainly expect that it will be again in the future, and that's 

why we do our very best to maintain the agricultural industry. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The next question, Mr. Minister, and the last 

one in this series comes from G. E. Elliott from Rocanville, and 

he asks:  what is your opinion on the suggestion that grain 

handlers be designated an essential service so as to avoid costly 

strikes?  Also, why do you not make it clear when you talk 

about costs, such as demurrage charges, who pays the bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think there 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

is no doubt who pays the bill when there is demurrage charges 

and hold-ups in grain shipment, whether they're caused by 

weather-related items or by labour disputes.  We certainly 

realize that we want to see the grain moving as smoothly as 

possible.  And although we don't control the port workers in 

Vancouver, we certainly want whatever system is out there to 

work, to move the grain through as best we can because that's 

very important to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

welcome to your officials again this afternoon. 

 

I wanted to again discuss the crop insurance conference that 

was held on this past weekend, Mr. Minister.  At that time, you 

mentioned that the provincial government cost-shares the 

administrative costs with the federal government for 

conferences of that sort.  Do you have to get any kind of 

approval from the federal government to put on those kinds of 

functions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we do not.  The total 

administration budget of Crop Insurance is split 50/50 between 

the provincial government and the federal government, and 

they do not okay day-to-day goings on of the corporation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many . . . as I understand it there is . . . 

people came from all over the province to attend the meeting 

which started, I understand it . . . registration was from 8 to 10 

in the morning.  So that presumably would mean that people 

travelling from some distance would have come in the night 

before, and I'm wondering whether or not the Crop Insurance 

Corporation picked up the cost of their rooms for the Thursday 

night prior to the meeting -- how many there were and the costs 

associated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we did not pick up the cost of 

the rooms for Thursday night. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So there was no one, Mr. Minister, came in on the 

Thursday that you would have paid any additional expenses for 

them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were a few . . . my officials 

tell me the delegates who had their . . . not the delegates. None 

of the delegates had their rooms paid for Thursday night. There 

were some organizers who had their rooms paid for Thursday 

night. And there were people . . . as you know, we're doing 

public meetings, so we had people on the road doing those 

shows who were on the road all week and would have been 

somewhere Thursday night and had their room paid for. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So any of the Crop Insurance employees that 

came in on the Thursday prior to the conference, they would 

have been responsible for their own cost of room for the 

Thursday night. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, if they were delegates. Other 

than a few organizers who were in organizing the conference 

who would have had their rooms paid for, the delegates coming 

in, if they came in Thursday night they picked up their room on 

their own expense. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Was there any kind of . 

. . was the verbatims kept of the program, or tapes of it, or any 

of that nature, kept of the conference, Mr. Minister?  And if 

there was, are those tapes available? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, the conference was not taped. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, do you not think it might have been 

a good idea to, in light of, you know, you're putting on a 

session where there's a great deal apparently of work that went 

on there, and it seems only prudent that you might want to keep 

them for future reference to refer back to or to pass judgement 

on the quality of the presentation and decide what to do next, if 

you're going to have one in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well it may very well have been a 

good idea.  We didn't choose to do that. I guess if we had, you'd 

probably be in here saying we're wasting money making 

movies.  But none the less, no tapes were kept. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- We're in here, Mr. Minister, saying that you 

wasted $70,000 on the whole thing, not just on making a few 

tapes up which indeed apparently you never even did. 

 

Mr. Minister, further to that, you told us the other day that there 

were eight hours of work sessions.  Well looking at the agenda, 

Mr. Minister, the most I can come up with is 5 hours and 10 

minutes of actual work sessions, if you include things like the 

opening remarks from the president of Crop Insurance and the 

keynote speaker's address which was some 1 hour and 30 

minutes long.  If you include those as work sessions, Mr. 

Minister, you can come up with 5 hours and 10 minutes, not 8 

hours, as you have suggested.  And I'm wondering where the 

discrepancy is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Did you in your calculations count 

the brilliant remarks by the Minister of Agriculture who 

addressed this? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

According to the agenda, the brilliant remarks from the 

Minister of Agriculture were not on the agenda nor included 

here.  And I'm wondering where those . . . oh, it's down at the 

special guest, the minister. 

 

How long did your remarks take and what context were they . . 

. Did they add the extra 2 hours and 50 minutes to come up 

with the 8 hours, as you suggested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I didn't time myself there to be sure 

that I was earning my keep.  I think I left there somewhere after 

9 o'clock, and there was a speaker on again after that, as I 

pointed out the other day. 

 

I don't know if the member's looked and counted the 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

hours that were on Saturday because there were some hours 

there on Saturday.  I'm not sure where you're getting the five 

hours from and whether you consider the remarks by the 

minister as responsible to his employees is not important or that 

the remarks of the president who is responsible is not 

important, but that all was part of the agenda. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well maybe, Mr. Minister, we can go through it 

with you then, and we'll see if we can come up with eight hours 

of sessions.  The very first session which, if you could call it a 

session -- I'm not sure that welcoming and opening remarks 

from Terry Tangjerd, the CEO for Crop Insurance, would be 

considered a work session, welcoming them -- but that was at 

10 o'clock to 10:45 -- 45 minutes. 

 

The next session was from 10:45 to 12 o'clock, which is 75 

minutes.  Is that not correct, Mr. Minister?  After that there was 

. . . I wonder if you wanted to just go through it step by step 

like that and see if we can come up with eight hours.  Because I 

don't think you can, Mr. Minister, come up with eight hours of 

sessions out of that time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite has the agenda.  If you really want to have it in the 

record, I can read out the agenda and you can do your own 

calculations of the numbers.  From 8 to 10 was registration; 10 

to 10:45, welcome and opening remarks by Terry Tangjerd, 

who is the CEO; 10:45 to 12 was presentation on town hall 

meetings. Then it was lunch.  From 1:15 to 2:45 was a keynote 

speaker, Gary Gregor, who is a renowned speaker.  We actually 

took a coffee break.  From 3:15 to 5 o'clock concurrent session 

one.  And from 6 to 7 was the cocktail hour, and banquet after 

that.  And from 7 o'clock, I spoke to them.  After me, Rick 

Worman, another speaker, motivational speaker, spoke to the 

group. 

 

Saturday morning starting at 8:30, concurrent sessions.  And 

from 10:45 to 12:15, panel discussions -- the future of 

agriculture, recognition, equality, and team.  And from 12:45 to 

2:45, lunch and awards for long-time employees.  From 2:45 to 

3:15 there was closing remarks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If we go through that 

then, my calculation comes up with five hours and ten minutes 

of work sessions, not eight hours, as you have suggested. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I don't know, my calculation 

gives me nine and a half hours.  I don't know what you're 

taking out of there as not being part of the agenda. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well do you consider registration as part of the 

agenda, two hours there, from 8 o'clock to 10 o'clock, where 

people come in, sign their name, and say, I'm here.  Do you 

consider that to be part of the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well it would be very difficult to 

have a program if you didn't have the registration to know 

who's there. 

Mr. Boyd: -- So this is considered, the two-hour time period 

between 8 o'clock, 8 a.m. in the morning and 10 a.m. in the 

morning, that's considered part of the work session?  You 

arrive at the conference, you walk in and say, I'm here, and 

they say, good, way to be, you got here, thanks for coming.  

You consider that to be part of a work session, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's not in my calculation to get 

nine and a half hours. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well let's go through it then, Mr. Minister.  We've 

concluded that that isn't part of the session then, so that takes 

out that.  From 10 a.m. to 10:45, 45 minutes there.  Now do 

you consider that to be part of the work session, Mr. Minister, 

the entire time frame of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well obviously remarks by the 

CEO would be part of work time.  That's one of the reasons that 

we bring people in, is so the CEO gets to talk to them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So we got 45 minutes so far, Mr. Minister.  Then 

from 10:45 to 12 o'clock, which is a total of -- 10:45, 11:45, an 

hour, and another 15 minutes -- 75 minutes, presentations on 

town hall meetings.  Charabin, I understand he's an employee 

with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  What were the remarks 

that he made, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, we 

didn't make tapes of the conference.  I wasn't in attendance at 

that time.  I don't know that I can quote verbatim the comments 

from some speaker at the conference. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And then after that at 

1:15 to 2:45 for a total of 90 minutes -- yes that would be 

correct -- there's a keynote speaker, Gary Gregor, and he spoke 

on motivation. And does that . . . would you consider part of 

the work session, Mr. Minister, a motivational speech I 

presume on . . . generally I would think on topics unrelated to 

crop insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well that's certainly not true.  

Motivational speakers are a part of what we were trying to do 

to build a team and motivate people to do a good job, certainly 

part of the agenda and part of the plan of the conference. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So his topic of motivation, you in your mind and 

your officials' minds, would be part of the conference, would 

be part of what you would consider a proper thing or . . . Like I 

wonder if you could elaborate a little bit more on that.  What 

did he talk about besides motivation?  I mean did he say we got 

to get out there and work hard and sell and sell and sell to these 

farmers out there, and every person that walks through the 

door, you guys have got to sell him a policy and get their name 

down to buy as much coverage as possible, or how did that 

work, Mr. Minister? 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, crop insurance is a 

business.  It sells insurance like any other business.  It has to 

treat its customers with courtesy and with respect and to 

provide them information just as anybody else.  The speaker, 

Gary Gregor, makes his living going to companies and talking 

to the employees in that manner.  That's how he makes his 

living.  And Crop Insurance has to deliver a service the same as 

any other private company or government department or 

anybody else does. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well we could go 

through this piece by piece all the way through it, Mr. Minister, 

but I think we'll find at the end of the day that there was very 

little work done in these sessions that would be considered by 

most farmers of Saskatchewan to be productive time that was 

spent actually discussing the issues at hand for crop insurance, 

discussing the things that they feel would be the most pertinent 

issues on their minds these days, things like the changes to your 

program, things like where their revenue payments are, things 

like where their coverage is, what their premiums are these 

days. 

 

That would be what I would consider and I think the farmers of 

Saskatchewan would feel would be productive time, Mr. 

Minister.  But I don't think that they believe that having a 

motivational speaker come in and give them some rah rah 

speech about how to sell to farmers, and how to eke out the 

best dollar for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 

would be considered in their minds as a useful use of taxpayers' 

dollars, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I wonder if you'd just care to comment.  Do you think, Mr. 

Minister, that the farmers would support having a paid 

motivational speaker come in and talk to Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance employees and try and buoy them up for the spring 

rush of farmers coming in the door and I guess instructing them 

on how to sell policies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I certainly think that if a 

particular farmer has good service from his crop insurance and 

doesn't have an error that costs him thousands of dollars, he 

will consider it well worthwhile. 

 

I think the members opposite obviously don't believe in staff 

development and don't believe in a good professional civil 

service.  And I think that may well be one of the reasons why 

we have to do a lot of that right now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think that the farmers 

of Saskatchewan indeed want a quality Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance employee group.   There's no question about that, 

Mr. Minister.  They don't want mistakes on their policies.  They 

don't want any of the things that can happen from time to time, 

Mr. Minister.  They indeed want that.  But I'm just wondering 

whether or not spending $70,000 of taxpayers' money indeed 

accomplished that goal that you set out to accomplish, Mr. 

Minister. 

 
I think the farmers of Saskatchewan don't believe that that goal 

has been accomplished by blowing $70,000 on a weekend of 

fun and games.  And that's fine.  I mean, I'm not against these 

people having a good time, Mr. Minister, if they're doing it on 

their dollar.  No problem with it whatsoever.  But if they're 

only paying $20 to come in for sessions, and you're putting 

them up in the best hotels in Regina and paying practically the 

full shot for this thing, Mr. Minister, I don't think that they 

would agree with you. 

 

I think they want a professional service.  They don't want to be 

running some kind of a cabarets for people to, what you 

consider staff development, Mr. Minister.  I don't think the 

farmers of Saskatchewan agree with you on this, and I just 

want to give you another opportunity to comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I just came 

back from SARM where there are 1,200 or 1,500, or whatever 

number of farmers there are there, in there on taxpayers' 

expense, having their motel rooms paid for, and spending three 

days in Regina to talk about how they manage roads in this 

province.  I think that it's probably a well worthwhile effort.  

They do it twice a year. 

 

And I therefore think that farmers understand that when you 

have a province as big as Saskatchewan and a corporation as 

big as Sask Crop Insurance, that it's well worth the effort to 

occasionally bring them in to get them to work together in a 

coordinated fashion to discuss common problems.  I'm sure the 

SARM will also have a banquet tonight, but I don't think that 

detracts from the fact that they do good work during the day. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Have you been 

receiving any calls from producers around Saskatchewan 

concerned about this, Mr. Minister?  And how many, if you 

have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have I think 10 or 12 calls that 

we've had, the officials tell me, out at the public workshops that 

we're having out in Saskatchewan.  We've had two or three 

people raise concern about the conference.  I think most of 

those are of course by the misinformation let out by the 

member opposite.  When people go on the media and say that 

this is a weekend of fun and frolic and it's casinos and they're 

not doing any work, obviously farmers will be upset.  When 

they understand that it's staff training, staff development, and 

something that all other private companies do and are involved 

in and that it's to provide better service for Crop Insurance, then 

the concerns certainly become much less. 

 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Did you have 

conferences like this before?  Have you had them last year, or 

anything like that?  What precipitated the need at this time for 

it? 

 
(1600) 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well you can ask some of your 

colleagues. I think the last conference of this nature was in '86 

when you people were in power.  We've had conferences. I've 

been out to Melville where we've had most of the staff in from 

around the province and doing workshops and I've addressed 

them.  We've had the agents all in at a time to place . . . agents 

have had conferences.  So we haven't had them all in one place. 

 

That, I think, was again as a result of pressure from me to say 

to the Crop Insurance that farmers are telling me that this 

corporation is not working together as well as it should; that 

you don't always get consistent service between the different 

arms of the corporation, and we need to pull this thing together 

a little better.  And as a result of that, as a result of workshops 

in regions where staff . . . they developed the idea that a 

conference having all people in one place would be well 

worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The other day when 

we were talking about the estimates of Crop Insurance, you 

wouldn't provide, and I wonder if you might now -- or you 

didn't provide at that time, the cost of the 476 employees for 

the Friday, what their salaries would total up for one day of 

work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, again there's no line 

item or no cost for that.  The people who are on salary are on 

salary and get their monthly cheque as they always do.  So 

there is no number for that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if you would just humour us then and provide us what 

the cost of 476 employees of Crop Insurance would be for one 

day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we could get a 

payroll and send over to the member opposite.  As I say 

though, the 476, many of those were agents who were not on 

payroll.  But we could give you their monthly payroll and you 

can divide it out.  We can even do the calculation for you, if we 

have those numbers. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  We would like to 

see that figure, and we would like your officials to break it out 

for us -- what the cost of the 476 employees were.  If you say 

that it was a session, a work session and all of that sort of stuff, 

I guess the farmers of Saskatchewan will judge that on its 

merit, Mr. Minister.  But I think they'd like to know what the 

employees for that day, what it would cost for those employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that breakdown of 

daily salaries with us.  We can put together that, if the member 

insists on knowing what our daily payroll is, but that's difficult.  

We've got some large numbers.  But if they include agents who 

were there free of time, on their own and so on, it's difficult to 

sort out. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, would you give us the 

assurance that you would provide us with that information 

before we conclude Saskatchewan Crop Insurance estimates? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will endeavour our best to get 

whatever numbers the member has asked for. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How many of those 

476 employees that were there on that day were working on an 

earned day off, an EDO, and will they be given another EDO 

day for that time period? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, they will switch the EDOs for 

an EDO at some time in the future. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Do you know what the number of employees 

were that had EDOs that day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again we don't have that number 

here; we can probably get it for you.  It would be in the 

neighbourhood of a third of the employees who would be 

having an EDO -- of the full-time staff -- and certainly not a 

third of 476 which include agents and adjusters and a lot of 

other people.  But of the permanent staff who get EDOs in their 

contracts, it would be somewhere in the neighbourhood of a 

third of those. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The more we dig into 

this, the more it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that there's 

something wrong with a department and a minister that would 

approve this sort of expenditure.  We see that there is some 

$70,000 spent for five hours and ten minutes for 476 people to 

take part in a conference that has very, very questionable 

content, Mr. Minister, extremely questionable content; about 

whether a motivational speaker is an acceptable expenditure of 

time and dollars for people to take part in a session. 

 

There's also, in the concurrent session no. 1, workplace 

humour.  I think people have to wonder whether or not that 

would be considered a justifiable expense in these times, Mr. 

Minister.  And I'm wondering, one other session that seems a 

little odd here, is -- well there's several; maybe there's more 

than one, Mr. Minister -- career planning.  What is career 

planning?  What was the session involving that about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, it's interesting that 

the member alleges that there are only five hours of session and 

then says he's going to go through it and prove it, and he gets 

halfway through and quits.  Because leaving out lunches, 

leaving out registration, leaving out a whole lot of things, 

leaving out banquets and all the rest of it, my calculation still 

comes up to eight and a quarter hours.  So it's interesting that 

the member starts to go through this thing with an allegation 

and then quits halfway through and then says he proved it. 

 

As to the career planning, I think that's a fairly self-explanatory 

project.  Career planning is career planning. 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

Mr. Boyd: -- I was wondering if you could tell us what the 

content of it was, Mr. Minister?  What do you mean by career 

planning?  Were these market agents planning their careers?  

Were they discussing how to deal with their pension, or how to 

deal with RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan), or what 

were you talking about when you say career planning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, Mr. Chairman, I don't 

have the details.  We don't have it on tape to show the member.  

But obviously people move up in corporations; that's how you 

get good corporations.  You train staff and you move them up; 

and people who have ability and talent, you move them up to a 

higher position.  And that's how you build a strong team, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan where often we're not 

competitive in the market-place to bring in outside talent.  

Often times our best source of management and so on is from 

within.  And if we take some time to take a couple of hours to 

teach people how to plan a career and how to prepare to move 

up in a corporation, I think that seems to be a logical and 

sensible thing for any corporation to do. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What was the session 

about stress about?  What did they talk about when they were 

discussing stress? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again I think it should be 

fairly obvious.  We spend a fair bit of time and money on stress 

for farmers.  We have a stress line that operates 24 hours a day.  

Our people deal with farmers in the very difficult situations that 

we have out there.  The stress that farmers and our customers 

feel is a problem as well for our workers.  We sell crop 

insurance in a very restricted time period.  We're always on 

deadlines.  And how to manage stress in the workplace is 

something that I think any business or any government 

operation should be concerned about and deal with because if 

people are stressed out they're obviously not productive 

workers. 

 

And I think if the member opposite were to go and work in a 

Crop Insurance office for a week or two in the selling season, 

he would soon understand what stress is all about. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you could 

provide us with the details of the court challenge that's going 

on with regard to the GRIP program.  Is the court challenge still 

current or is that . . . What is the status of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are two court challenges 

which are still in progress: one you would probably know about 

from an old colleague of yours, Grant Schmidt is leading; 

another one from northern Saskatchewan.  Right now those two 

are in the process of being amalgamated.  Crop Insurance has 

asked that if they're going to have a court case about the same 

thing that they combine and have one court case to make it 

easier to have this expedited and not to cost more taxpayers' 

money.  So right now the process is that those two groups are 

talking to each other to determine how to bring forward a court 

case if they so desire. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Has your department 

and your officials or the Department of Justice determined what 

the potential liability that you would face if the two court cases 

were successful? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Obviously I should not be 

commenting on things that are before the court.  I think it 

would be very difficult.  First there would have to be a ruling 

that we were somehow in breach of the law and that there were 

damages, and how those damages would be assessed would be 

a very, very complicated and difficult issue.  And I would not 

want to hazard a guess, nor do I think I should be in view of the 

fact that this is before the courts. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It seems like to me that 

they were talking about potential liability of some hundreds of 

millions of dollars as likely the numbers, the kind of dollar 

figures that we're dealing with, Mr. Minister.  Would you care 

to comment on that?  Are we looking at something in the 

magnitude of a couple of hundred million dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, Mr. Chairman, I think 

it's inappropriate for me to comment on something that's before 

the courts. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The other day you also 

alluded to the fact that Saskatchewan farmers have received . . . 

I just forget the number now, but maybe you could provide it.  

For every dollar that they've paid in premiums, how many 

dollars under the GRIP program have they received in benefits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- $2.77. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What would that number be in Manitoba and 

Alberta?  Do you have comparison figures for the people of 

Saskatchewan, the farmers of Saskatchewan, so they can judge 

what the Alberta and the Manitoba figures are relative to 

Saskatchewan? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Our calculation gives us that 

Alberta people would have gotten . . . Alberta producers would 

have gotten $3.72 for every dollar premium; Saskatchewan 

would have got $2.73; and Manitoba, $4.37.  That's 3.72, 

Alberta; 2.73, Saskatchewan; 4.37, Manitoba.  Those are based 

on . . . that's the '91 crop, which we know, the '92 crop, and an 

estimate for '93, which means those are based on those 

estimates.  For '93 it's an estimate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you would 

exclude '93 for me, please.  I'm not interested in that one.  I'm 

interested in '91-92. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If we went back using the crop 

year of '91-92 and the crop year of '92-93, which is the two 

years that we know, we would have Alberta at 4.65, 

Saskatchewan at 3.41, and Manitoba at 4.02. 

 

Some other numbers that you may be interested in are the cost 

that taxpayers have put into that.  You just might be interested 

to know that GRIP cost Saskatchewan taxpayers in '91-92, 

$267.74 per capita; and in '92-93, 239.  Manitoba, it cost their 

taxpayers $79 per capita, $79.72; and in '92-93, $76.99.  

Alberta, it cost their taxpayers $56.90; and '92-93 cost $61.  

You go down to places like Ontario, it cost their taxpayers 

$7.11 and $9.63 respectively.  So you can see that while 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

Saskatchewan producers didn't do quite as well on the return 

per dollar put in, Saskatchewan taxpayers certainly did much 

worse than taxpayers in other provinces. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and it has no bearing 

whatsoever that we have the most farm land of the three 

provinces.  When you consider that and the lowest population, 

naturally the figures look pretty good on a per capita basis, Mr. 

Minister.  The fact of the matter is, is that the Saskatchewan 

farmer is out thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars 

on average as a result of the program changes that you have 

made. 

 

Is there some kind of calculation, Mr. Minister, as to what the 

average farmer in Saskatchewan has received under the 

program '91-92, '92-93 -- the average farmer in Saskatchewan, 

total dollars -- has received relative to other provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know what the member's 

asking for.  We can take the gross pay-outs by the number of 

farmers in each province, would give you some idea. That 

would include some very small farms, some very large farms or 

we could . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give us that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Okay, we'll do that calculation if 

that's what you'd like. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm wondering if you 

could tell us on average what the changes in the crop insurance 

program as planned for this year -- the spot loss hail 

provision -- what that cost would be average, premium-wise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That cost I gave here last time we 

were in estimates.  The cost will be on average about 3.5 per 

cent . . . no, it's 1.5 to 3.5; an average of 2 per cent is what the 

premium will be on spot loss hail.  Farmers pay half that 

premium so on average they're paying . . . they will pay 1 per 

cent of their coverage to have spot loss hail.  Again, that varies 

from township to township on the hail rates, as the member 

well knows, so it's not accurate for each individual farm, but 

the range is 1.5 to 3.5 or .5 to 1, as a half. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'll conclude my remarks and turn it over to one 

of my colleagues in a few moments here, but just suffice it to 

say that I'm extremely displeased on behalf of Saskatchewan 

farmers with the conference that you held this weekend and 

feel that it was a very wasteful use of taxpayers' dollars.  And I 

would submit to you, sir, that the only reason it was done was 

because you had 70 or $80,000 left over in your budget for the 

administrative portion of Crop Insurance and you thought to 

yourself, well we might as well have a little shebang here and 

wrap 'er up good for the year and have everyone congratulate 

each other and pat each other on the back and tell each other 

what a wonderful job we've done in the past year, and 

hopefully we can do a good job in the future years, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And I think that the people that were there likely would agree 

with me that there wasn't any degree of work sessions that you 

have suggested that there is, Mr. Minister.  And I submit to you 

on behalf of farmers of Saskatchewan, that it is a total waste of 

time, that that conference could have been held in regional 

conferences around this province in a one-day session, and 

therefore would not have precipitated the cost that you blew on 

a conference of this nature, Mr. Minister.  And I think the 

farmers of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

are outraged and should be outraged at an expenditure of that 

magnitude, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's interesting 

that the member opposite has done the calculation of what it 

would cost to have done this in regional and has determined 

that it would have cost very little.  I don't know whether it 

could have been done cheaply. It probably could have been 

done more cheaply regionally, but that's certainly questionable. 

 

As to whether or not we had money left over, I think my 

colleagues will well know that there was special warrants for 

Crop Insurance as we ran something like 18 or $19 million 

over-budget -- as a result, I might add, of writing off deficits in 

the feed insurance which were there as a result of operations 

under your term in government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, my 

information is that there was $80,000 left over in your account, 

and this was simply a means of making sure that next year your 

budget would not be lost and out $80,000.  It's a simple matter 

of use it or lose it, and you chose not to lose it.  And therefore 

we have this kind of a situation. 

 

But I guess it begs a further question, as you have just said that 

you were in a deficit position in Crop Insurance?  Is this what I 

heard you say, that you needed special warrants to cover the 

deficit situation that you were in? 

 

But why, if you already had to go to special warrants, would 

you now be choosing a mechanism where you had a conference 

that was going to cost you more money than if it was going to 

be held in regional meetings instead of one big conference for a 

big weekend?  There seems to be a loss of rationality there.  

Why would you do that if you were already in that deficit 

position? 

 

I could not help commenting on that because I think you left 

yourself vulnerable in that particular situation. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to pick up on a slightly different topic, and 

I won't be asking you questions that citizens have sent in in this 

next series of questions.  I 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

just want to make a general comment, first of all, and that is 

this, that you are holding, in my opinion, one of the most 

important portfolios that you can have as a government.  We 

know the premiership is important; we know the Minister of 

Finance is important. 

 

But certainly as their colleague, you have been given the 

position of Minister of Agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan where it is well known in Canada that we hold 

virtually half of the good farm land in all of Canada.  So as 

goes the agriculture in our province, goes our economy 

essentially.  And I think you recognize that significance and the 

importance. 

 

I always say that quality agriculture is job 1.  In spite of our 

efforts at diversification, in spite of your efforts at 

diversification, we're still, I'm sure most people would say, too 

overly dependent on agriculture.  And so the secondary 

industries that are a result of that diversification, the tertiary 

industries that can develop as a result are very, very important 

to the development of the economy of Saskatchewan as a 

whole, and certainly, in particular, to agriculture. 

 

And as your position . . . in your position as Minister of 

Agriculture, you have a hectic schedule, a busy time, and 

you're always running from one meeting to another. And if you 

are like I was, as minister of Social Services, you're usually 

five minutes late for every meeting.  And you might even be 

paying more than the normal person in Saskatchewan for your 

driver's licence by this time.  I'm not quite sure.  But those are 

some of the risks that we run in this business. 

 

But I wonder if you could explain to me that process, or the 

policy I suppose, that you have adopted in your busy role as 

Minister of Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan in 

terms of assistance, in terms of help, in terms of turning to 

colleagues and so on to help you fulfil the demanding role that 

you have. 

 

I suppose at the outset I would ask you if you could give for me 

and the people of Saskatchewan an outline, not of your 

departmental staff at this time -- we can perhaps get into that at 

some other time -- but I was thinking of your personal staff in 

your office, in the ministerial office.  Just run it by me.  How 

many folks have you got in there?  What are their qualifications 

and the remuneration that they receive in their role of assisting 

you as the cabinet minister with responsibility to Agriculture 

and Food in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask for leave to introduce some 

important guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to draw 

your attention to three guests in the Speaker's gallery.  They're 

councillors from the RM of Meeting Lake who are in here to 

attend the SARM convention.  Mel Funk, Andy Serhyenko, and 

Steve Puto.  They're in here this afternoon to meet with the 

Minister of Justice, and I would like to ask you to join me in 

welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

Item 1 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, in my office I have a 

chief of staff, Mr. Don Delhomeau.  His salary is $4,221.  I 

have an assistant, Andy Prebushewski, who is a farmer from 

Hafford.  His salary is 3,454.  Junior ministerial assistants, Tom 

Halpenny, who is a farmer from Kindersley, and his salary is 

2,893.  My senior secretary is Wendy Hollinger at 3,092; 

intermediate secretary, Elaine Maksymiw, at 2,785; and the 

junior secretary, Deanna McIntosh, at 2,141. 
 

That as you may well know from the publicity surrounding it is 

the standard complement for a minister's office in this 

government. 

 

(1630) 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now could you 

explain to me your expectations and the duties of Don who is 

getting 4,221?  And I assume that's per month. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Chief of staff is responsible for 

organizing the office.  He is the main liaison between the office 

and the department.  Often people think that people in the 

minister's office have the job of escorting a minister around and 

worrying about the minister's timetable and so on; they do 

much more than that.  That is the only link between the people 

that were in this Assembly who develop policy and the people 

here who are the staff who carry out policy.  And obviously, as 

you say, my schedule is very busy and I cannot do all of that. 
 

Don will deal with casework that comes in . . . brought in from 

MLAs from either side of the House.  They come in normally 

to Andy and Tom who are the more junior, and often Tom is 

involved in . . . or Don is involved as well in doing that sort of 

work where there's a problem.  It's their job, when there's phone 

calls coming into the office and there's some recurrent problem, 

to alert me and the department that there may be something 

amiss and that there's policy or staff or whatever that needs 

correcting.  He is the chief of staff of my office. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think you 

mentioned Andy and Tom.  And I noticed, with some 

significance I believe, that they are farmers, you mentioned.  

And I can see maybe some benefit in so far as these people 

having empathy with other farmers that phone in and a close 

relationship.  I'm 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

assuming that's why they are there. 

 

Could you describe for me their particular duties a little bit 

more specifically, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Their duties involve, as I said 

earlier, the liaison also with the department.  And that we have 

assigned particular portions.  Crop insurance would be more 

Andy's situation where there's crop insurance complaints 

coming in or crop insurance problems that he deals with.  Tom 

deals with, more with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan).  Although being the junior one, he's the one 

that answers the phone on the casework that comes in from . . . 

And then much of it comes in through people in this Assembly 

who bring it in. 

 

They also have some duties in escorting me to SARM 

conventions.  For example, this afternoon Tom was there to 

take notes of people who want to meet with me and set up a 

meeting the Premier promised I would do.  And so he sets up 

that meeting and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, and I'm sure you're saying thanks a lot 

too to the Premier on that one.  But anyway I know how that 

works. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know that when I was elected back in 1986 I 

had the same august job as the chairman has now as one of my 

duties.  And after becoming thoroughly familiar with the rules 

that I couldn't learn any more, I was taken out of that position 

and appointed as chairman of what we called the caucus 

committee on health.  And as such I was a back-bencher and I 

ran literally all around the countryside in Saskatchewan 

because that was the time of the Murray Commission hearings 

all across the province, and George McLeod who was the 

minister of health at the time obviously could not keep up with 

everything.  And just as you're saying it was very, very busy, so 

he took me as a  back-bencher and said to me, go out there and 

. . . having been Mr. Chairman . . . as chairman as well I knew 

what I was not supposed to say there. 

 

But I was asked then to go around and monitor the meetings, 

monitor the mood and so on; and I did that job and I enjoyed it 

very much.  It was really a learning experience for me in terms 

of format, in terms of procedure, and also the possibility of 

meeting so many of the fine folks that we have out there in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And having said that, could you indicate to me whether you are 

taking advantage of some of your back-benchers; whether there 

are folks out there that go around and on behalf of the minister 

attend meetings and do these kinds of things?  I know they're 

not doing that as legislative secretaries because according to the 

Premier you don't have any legislative secretaries.  So could 

you give me a perspective of the assistant that you may be 

getting that way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well as they member knows and 

probably had in your organization, we have what we call an ag 

caucus and we have seven or eight members who attend 

meetings.  And I meet with them on a fairly regular basis, 

usually weekly.  And also have used many people, many not 

only from ag caucus, but we have I think something like 20 

some farmers in the caucus so it's always of very great interest 

to them.  They think the Minister of Agriculture is important.  I 

don't want to say it's something as important as the Premier 

because . . . You can say that, but I can't. 

 

Just to get back to the question at hand.  We have used many 

members who, particularly people such as the member from 

Saskatoon, whatever, who is very familiar with supply 

management industries and so on and has attended banquets 

and functions and so on for me at Saskatoon when they're there.  

Others have attended different functions and have done very 

good work for us.  I think, and you well know, the hassle of 

getting back-benchers around and often running over their 

expense allowances and so on. 

 

One of the problems that we do have is rules with airplanes.  

We don't fly any back-benchers anywhere so that becomes a bit 

of dilemma sometimes trying to get them to meetings when I 

can't be there.  But we want to try to not only be prudent but be 

perceived to be very financially responsible and that's one of 

the reasons that we don't fly back-benchers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have in front of 

me the Public Accounts from the auditor of the province of 

Saskatchewan for the year 1992 and 1993 where we have the 

details of expenditures, of revenue and expenditures.  And on 

page 40 of that document -- this is the Public Accounts -- on 

page 40, at the bottom of the page, we have under "Minister's 

Travel", and this is under the Department of Agriculture and 

Food, page 40, "Minister's Travel".  And, Mr. Chairman, I'm 

quoting from the book here and that is, the Hon. Darrell 

Cunningham to the amount of $14,723 apparently paid to you 

out of public coffers. 

 

Could you confirm that that is the actual amount that you were 

paid for all kinds of travel in addition to your MLA's salary and 

in addition to your cabinet portfolio's salary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have the data here for that 

particular year.  I would assume that that would be the number 

if you're reading it from the book. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, following on, on page 40 of the 

Public Accounts document -- and I don't know where your 

officials would have this information, if not in this particular 

book that I have -- according to the auditor, Provincial Auditor, 

there was one Ron L. Harper who received $1,274 in travel.  Is 

this the MLA as we know him?  And if so, could you indicate 

to me why he was paid $1,274.  Was it to attend a meeting?  

And if so, where was that meeting; what was the purpose of the 

meeting; when was the meeting; and pertinent details such as 

that. 



March 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't have the details of that here.  

We will certainly get those for you.  I hesitate to quote from 

memory.  He attended a meeting in Winnipeg; I believe it was a 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture meeting but I hesitate to . . 

. We will get the detailed information for you because I don't 

want to quote from memory.  But he did attend a meeting out 

of province for me. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm somewhat surprised to 

hear that you haven't got that information here because I 

already asked that question in written form, through notice of 

question, and your House Leader refused to answer that 

question that I had asked and converted it over to motions 

debatable, which means that essentially it's where the questions 

die, that's the place where questions go to die.  And he refused 

to answer that. 

 

Then subsequent to that, I asked you that very same question in 

question period, but you were out doing your thing and the 

House Leader answered and said that is . . . the estimates is the 

place to ask those questions.  So I was taking him at his word 

and I just assumed that there was this correlation amongst 

ministers, that they would be able to . . . for this information to 

be transmitted to you so that you would be prepared to answer 

these types of questions. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, am I to assume then that the next line item is 

Eric M.T. Upshall for $259, that you have no pertinent 

information available to us this day as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct, and you are 

absolutely correct.  This is the correct place to be asking that 

question and we will certainly provide you that information, if 

not within a few minutes, certainly at the next time we're here 

or we will send it across to you -- whatever you choose. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, will you commit to answering 

the next line item as well, which is Grant G. Whitmore for 

$783.  And that is all the information that I have here.  I have 

nothing to go on in terms of why he would have been, I 

assume, reimbursed for whatever cause, for whatever reason. 

 

And then there is also the Hon. Berny Wiens for the amount 

$15,109.  Now whether that is still a portion of his ministerial 

activities, I'm not sure, but I would be looking forward to your 

explanation as to that sum. 

 

And then under travel, it's still under the main heading, travel, 

there is less reimbursement.  And there seems to have been . . . 

under other there's $1.231 . . . pardon me, $1,231,971 and no 

breakdown, no indication as to what that is all about.  And then 

there seems to have been some kind of reimbursement, money 

flowing back into this account of $12,934. 

 

Are there any of those amounts that you can give me some 

solid answers to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will have all of those answers 

here and give all of those in detail. 

Mr. Neudorf: --  And when you say detail, you're going to be 

answering such questions as: was it a meeting; what was the 

purpose of this; when did it take place; where did it take place; 

was there travel involved -- and obviously there must have 

been; what was the mode of travel; and at whose request did 

this individual do whatever they did to get that money?  In 

other words, I would want a complete explanation, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, and we will get that complete 

explanation rather than attempting to give it to you from the top 

of my head and not getting it correct. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you give me a further 

commitment . . . like what I'm talking about right now is the 

travel costs of these individuals for that particular event.  Now 

what I would like in addition to the travel costs are obviously 

other costs that were involved, whether it be food, whether it be 

accommodation, or whether it be perhaps payment to get into 

whatever activity for entrance fee or whatever it happens to be.  

Could you give me a commitment to give me the overall 

picture in addition just to the travel, what we're looking at right 

now?  And then I don't have to go through that piece by piece. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will certainly do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question 

that deals with leases on lease land.  And I had a call today 

from an individual, and I'll deal with his lease number so that 

we don't get any names involved here. 

 

His new lease is LAM 45971.  And his old lease number was 

LCM 27629.  Now he bought this piece of ground . . . well he 

didn't buy the lease, but he bought the deeded land, and then 

the adjacent land was transferred to him. 

 

On the basis of the transfer that he's going to sign, his lease fees 

are going from $10,000 a year to $16,000 a year.  The reason 

that the individual was told this, that it would go up, was that 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) had 

reassessed this land from dry brown zone to a moist brown 

zone.  Now we had a lot of rain down in that part of the world, 

and I'm not sure whether they reassessed it last year, but they 

should have taken it in 1988 when your gophers had to carry a 

canteen.  And if they did it last year, then it's really a strange 

thing that they would take that into consideration. 

 

Now he's also been told that once he signs the agreement that 

maybe they will reduce it, that maybe they will reduce the fee, 

and I would suspect that that would have to take a 

determination again by SAMA in order to have that fee 

reduced.  Now this individual called me about it and asked me 

to bring it to your attention, Mr. Minister, and I said I would.  I 

also know 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1994 

that he is making a substantial investment in this land that deals 

with a $16,000 lease fee, and that doesn't include all the taxes 

he pays on top of that, Mr. Minister. 

 

I wonder if you would deal with that. 

 

Another problem that he raised with me is that it was 

considered 2,108 cow-months originally.  And when he 

purchased it, that was the decision that lands branch came to 

him with.  And then when they established the new lease fee, it 

was not done on the basis of cow-months; it was done on the 

basis of acres.  And so then they could re-jig the whole lease 

fee in moving it from 10,000 to $16,000. 

 

Now there are other people in that area that have complained 

about that same process.  And I know of another person in that 

same area that wanted to move his lease from himself to his 

son, and in that process would have had an annual increase of 

$2,000 a year in his lease fee.  And in order to transfer this 

lease from the father to the son, he would have had to establish 

a new lease and it would have gone up. 

 

And the story is that SAMA made the decision to change the 

type of land that this is.  And in discussing it, I think that there 

is a serious error in how this is assessed.  And I don't think that 

that should be done on that basis. 

 

And I wonder if you would commit yourself to looking into it 

to make sure that it's done correctly and that the individual has 

a reasonable recourse in the discussion that he's had with your 

office and the branches of your office.  He isn't complaining 

about what they have done; he's just complaining about the 

changes.  And he isn't . . . the thing that bothered him the most 

was that he was told that it would be similar.  And $6,000 a 

year or a 60 per cent increase in the rent is not similar, and so 

that's what he has got a problem with.  And if you wouldn't 

mind having a comment about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly we'll look into the 

individual case.  We have converted the new leases from 

cow-months to acres although the conversation should be 

equivalent.  If there's a reassessment of the land, that would 

have an influence.  The other thing is that our grazing leases 

have gone up from four eighteen to four seventy-nine, so that 

may have some effect.  But it sounds like a large increase, and 

certainly I will investigate this particular case and see if we can 

inform the lessee of the policy and if there's an error, of course, 

correct it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to go back to this discussion we had 

right at the conclusion of our last estimates together, and that 

dealt with the payments or the sum of the amount of the losses 

that were incurred by Crop Insurance in 1991-92.  That was 

$150 million, Mr. Minister. 

 

And in your explanation, it said that it was 150 million minus 

85 million.  In your discussion and your comments that you 

made to this House, you said it was 235 million reduced down 

to 150 million and that the record in the Public Accounts 

summary financial statements is accurate.  And yet when I 

discussed it with the staff that were at the Public Accounts 

meeting, they indicated to me that the $150 million should have 

read 65 million, not 235 minus 85 giving you the 150.  And I 

wonder if you would give us an explanation of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think I have this figured out.  The 

235 million I referred to previously was the estimate that we 

thought we were going to pay out of revenue insurance.  And as 

it turned out, prices of grain moved and we only paid out $150 

million, which is the $85 million that we didn't pay out.  And of 

course we didn't get the estimates until after the books were 

closed for the year, and so the adjustment was made to the 

following year and not back to the year. 

 

So basically what happened is we had a pay-out of $235 

million which we estimated.  It turned out to be only $150 

million.  And hence the $85 million had to be adjusted in the 

next year because the books had already been closed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, Public 

Accounts, the main financial statements says that there was 

$150 million loss carried forward.  And that $150 million loss 

should read $65 million -- isn't that correct?  The $150 million 

should read 65 million rather than $150 million.  I don't know 

where you get the 235; it doesn't even appear on that page that 

we're dealing with.  The 235 million might have been what you 

estimated at, but the amount of money that you have is a $150 

million loss in 1991-92.  And in Public Accounts it was clearly 

established that that number should have read 65, not 150, loss 

carried forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That 85 million was the difference; 

that was the amount we were out in our estimate.  So what 

shows in '91-92 as $150 million loss, really it should have been 

$85 million less because that was the final result, although we 

didn't know that at the time.  So $150 million is reported in 

there. It should have really been 65 million, if you take off the 

85.  We didn't know it at the time, therefore we reported in 

'92-93, 201 which really should have been 115. So it's $85 

million that really belonged in one year and got pushed into the 

next year's accounts because we didn't know about it until after 

the books were closed.  And they tell me this is according to 

the standard accounting procedures. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 


