




















































Hansard: June 01, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2755 

 June 1, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Clerk: -- I wish to inform the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 

not be here to open today's sitting. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

Legislative Assembly 40, give or take, 40 grade 12 students 

from Robert Usher in the north end of Regina.  Accompanying 

the grade 12 students are Todd Miller, their teacher, and I have 

no chaperons listed.  I can only assume that that's because in 

the north end of Regina we raise people to be very responsible 

and therefore zero need for chaperons. 

 

I'm very pleased to see this group because it will add to the 

guide services' statistics, if I mention Beep and get my picture 

taken one more time with a school group.  But I'm looking 

forward to meeting with them for a photo at 2:15 and a visit a 

little later. 

 

I ask all colleagues to welcome this group from Robert Usher. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to 

give the opportunity to members here to welcome with me a 

gentleman whose name has come up from time to time in this 

Legislative Assembly.  He's in your speaker, Mr. Gallery . . . I 

knew that was going to happen one of these days, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

He is in your gallery, and his name is Frank Gribbon from the 

Saskatchewan Council on Compulsive Gambling.  And I would 

like all members to help me welcome Mr. Gribbon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

would like to introduce to the House today, two ladies from the 

town of Hudson Bay.  They are Cathy Ryan and Pam Lessard.  

They're visiting Regina, and I would like all members of the 

House to join with me in wishing them a good week in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Clearwater Raft Tours Ltd. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Combine 

the exhilaration of a roller-coaster ride, the fear of walking 

down a dark alley at 2 in the morning as a kid after a horror 

movie, add to that scenery that compares to none, and the 

churning, boiling 

whitewaters of the Clearwater River and you have a recipe for 

the experience of a lifetime.  I know because I've been on this 

incredible whitewater rafting trip, and my knees still shake 

when I think about it. 

 

Recently the non-profit North West Tourism Development 

Group formed a partnership with Clearwater Raft Tours 

because they feel the rising popularity of rafting will lure large 

numbers of people to our region.  They are now able to market 

the product to a broader geographic area in a more aggressive 

fashion.  As tourists pour in, they will take the opportunity to 

market the rest of north-west Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Both groups are interested in developing the North in a 

responsible, cooperative, earth friendly, and financially sound 

manner which will not disrupt the way of life for residents of 

the area.  This type of plan will no doubt work well for the new 

partnership because nature-oriented vacations or eco-tourism is 

one of the fastest growing segments in tourism today. 

 

The rafting tours travel along the Clearwater and Foster rivers 

and run through a protected wilderness park.  Trips usually take 

five days and are done in true wilderness fashion.  Outside 

magazine has recently proclaimed that Clearwater Raft Tours is 

one of the best new adventure travel packages in North 

America. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm pleased to see tourism and economic 

development once again joining together in an effort to show 

the wonders of Saskatchewan to the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Hagel -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it was my pleasure this morning at 11 o'clock to be a 

part of one of the happiest announcements in my community 

that we've had for some time.  This morning at 11 o'clock the 

kick-off took place for the sale of public shares in the Temple 

Gardens Mineral Spa with the sale of the first share in fact to 

the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

The spa will be using geothermally heated water and mineral 

water that will put it on a par with the best of the spas, in fact, 

throughout Europe, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And in fact along 

with the heritage Main Street, the murals projects in Moose 

Jaw, the Snowbirds gallery, the zoo, the Wakamow Valley 

development going on there, will serve as, I believe, the anchor 

for a very solid, small-scale tourism industry in the future of 

our city. 

 

I want to acknowledge the support of the Department of 

Economic Development and Sask Water in this very exciting 

project.  And I know I share the enthusiasm of people in Moose 

Jaw as well as tourism people around Saskatchewan in advising 

the Assembly of this. 

 

I want to extend my congratulations to Deb Thorn and 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

the directors and the many investors in Moose Jaw who will be 

looking forward to a very successful project and to invite 

everyone to come to Moose Jaw about a month or two before 

the Grey Cup game in 1995 for the official opening of the 

geothermal Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trans-Canada Trail 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today just by 

chance, the Minister of Highways brought to my attention an 

exciting project that he was involved in a media conference on 

this morning. 

 

On June 1, 1994, the next stage of Canada's national dream will 

be launched.  We've already completed the railway and the 

highway, but now there's a group working to complete a 

trailway.  This shared-use trailway will stretch from St. John's, 

Newfoundland, to Victoria, B.C. (British Columbia), and from 

Calgary, Alberta, to Tuktoyaktuk, Northwest Territories.  The 

funding sponsors are Canada Post, Canada Trust, Chrysler 

Canada, and TSN/RDS (The Sports Network/Resultat Des 

Sports). 

 

The Trans-Canada trail will be for walkers, cyclists, 

equestrians, cross-country skiers, snowmobilers, and establish a 

dedicated trail from coast to coast in perpetuity. 

 

I think it's one of the most adventurous projects I've ever heard 

of, and as a cyclist, I hope to be somewhere near the beginning 

of the trail, from my spot here, on the day that it opens. 

 

Canadians can participate in buying metres at $36 I think, 

approximately, a metre.  And I think it's an example of what 

communities can do.  In good times it would be difficult even 

to get governments to sponsor a project like this, but this is 

something where people have not waited to do that; they've just 

gone ahead on their dream and put their resources together. 

 

So I want to commend all the people involved in this ambitious 

and wonderful project.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Moosomin Share Offering Rally 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to take a moment this afternoon as well to 

recognize the hard work and efforts of a number of producers 

and business people in the Moosomin area. On Monday 

evening the Moosomin Terminal Limited held their kick-off 

share offering rally.  About 200 producers turned out, and 

business people. 

 

I think what it's indicative of, Mr. Speaker, is the efforts of 

individuals across our province and in small rural communities, 

per se, looking at ways in which they can work towards 

projects and economic development and spin-off in their areas.  

And as I indicated at the meeting in talking to producers -- and  

most producers and business people were quite well aware of 

the fact -- that we as individuals must take some of the 

initiative; we can't always wait for government. 

 

So I want to acknowledge the efforts of the board, terminal 

producers, and encourage all farmers and business people and 

people in the area to get involved in such projects.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert School Receives Environmental Recognition 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If there is one 

aspect of our daily living in which our youth have had an 

impact, Mr. Speaker, I believe it has to do with the work that 

our youth within our schools have done on environment. 

 

And a good example of this is what has been done in one of the 

schools . . . well in several of the schools in Prince Albert and 

one in particular that I want to point out, and that's St. Francis 

School who has recently achieved green status according to the 

Society of Environmental and Energy Development Studies, 

known as the SEEDS program, and that's because they have 

now completed over 100 environmental projects. 

 

And I want to congratulate the students who have been in 

leadership on this: Dave Cantin, Lauren Harnett, Owen Walter, 

and Nikki Creighton, and Manda Tibbs; as well as their 

teachers and the administrative staff from the school. 

 

I do believe that this impact will . . . they will continue to have 

a major impact, and it's a future that these young people are 

looking forward to and are helping all of us change our ways 

with respect to how we treat our environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gambling Hot Line 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

My question is going to be to the Associate Minister of Health 

or the minister of Gaming, whoever decides to answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, recently you received a proposal from Frank 

Gribbon of the Saskatchewan Council on Compulsive 

Gambling.  His organization is proposing to work with you to 

provide personal counselling services to those who call in on 

your so-called 800-number hot line on gambling. 

 

Under this proposal, the council guarantees that anyone who 

calls your hot line will receive in-person counselling services 

from a recovered compulsive gambler within 24 hours of their 

call which, I might add, would be a tremendous improvement 

upon the 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

current situation.  Mr. Gribbon has 10 people ready to go that 

are lined up for this service.  They would be prepared to start 

immediately in the southern part of the province and within 

three months in the North. 

 

Mr. Minister, our office has spoken to Mr. Gribbon, and we 

have reviewed his proposal and we believe it to be an excellent 

one.  Mr. Minister, do you intend to adopt the compulsive 

gambling council's proposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question.  Mr. Gribbon's proposal on behalf of the Council for 

Compulsive Gamblers was . . . I found it on my desk yesterday.  

Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity to read it through.  I have 

referred it to officials in the Department of Health for their 

review and we will be looking at it very closely.  I am not 

prepared today in the House to make a decision one way or 

another. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It's no wonder things take so long sometimes 

to develop, Mr. Minister, since that proposal was delivered to 

your office on Friday already and you delivered it yesterday. 

 

Mr. Minister, please accept the fact, please accept the fact -- if I 

could have the minister's attention -- Mr. Minister, please 

accept the fact that your current system simply is not working 

and it's costing the taxpayers $550,000 a year.  Frank Gribbon 

has told us of of an individual who phoned the 800 number last 

Friday and was referred to Mental Health.  Mental Health 

referred him to a counsellor in Regina.  He then found out that 

the counsellor would be out of town and unable to meet with 

him for the next four days. 

 

The bottom line again, Mr. Minister, is your current system 

ain't working.  People who call for help need help immediately, 

and Frank Gribbon's proposal would help provide that help 

within 24 hours of the call coming in.  Mr. Minister, will you 

get up now and admit that your hot line system is not working, 

that it needs an overhaul, and will you begin that overhaul by 

adopting the proposal as it was presented to you on Friday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I will admit no such thing 

to the member or to this House.  Mr. Speaker, the member 

complains about a delay of a letter which was received on 

Friday which I had my first opportunity to review yesterday 

which I have forwarded to the department for the officials' 

review.  I would want to point out to the member that for nine 

years in this province, nine years, people were suffering 

addictions to gaming.  Was anything done in nine years, Mr. 

Speaker?  The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have put in place in this province a program 

for prevention and treatment that very favourably . . . in fact 

better than compares with other provincial jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker.  We're monitoring it carefully.  We are always 

consistently 

looking for ways to improve and so on.  I have received Mr. 

Gribbon's proposal, and it will get a fair assessment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, I wish we 

could stay serious about this instead of just going political and 

spouting off the lines as you were instructed to by the 

Government House Leader just now.  Let's stay on the topic.  

Let's stay serious about this for a moment because it is a serious 

matter that you have put into the hands of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, under your current system, people in rural 

Saskatchewan receive no face-to-face counselling services 

unless they're willing to travel to the city.  Under this proposal, 

recovered gamblers would travel to the caller's home to provide 

face-to-face counselling, and this service would be provided for 

a very minimal cost to the government.  The council and its 

members are simply asking to recover their expenses; that's all.  

They estimate that this would cost about $6,400 a month for a 

case-load of 50.  That's about $77,000 a year, Mr. Minister.  It's 

less than 15 per cent of your $550,000 that you have already 

committed to this project. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you not agree that this is a very reasonable 

cost for a service that would vastly improve your gambling 

addiction services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I will say again to the 

member, I had my first opportunity to review this proposal 

yesterday.  I have referred it to the departmental officials for 

their review.  Mr. Speaker, when we establish program and 

policy in this government, we don't do it on the back of the 

Hansard.  We try and do it carefully and review all of the 

information that we have and assess the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said to the House, I have said to the 

member, we're going to very seriously look at this program, but 

I'm not going to be pushed into a decision on the floor of the 

legislature by the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, you've embarked upon a new 

strategy within this government.  You're institutionalizing 

gambling, and now you're telling me that you're not going to be 

pushed into anything.  Mr. Minister, please accept and admit 

the fact that your 800 number for addiction gambling is not 

working.  That's the premiss I think that would be fair to start 

from. 

 

Now you have had since Friday an opportunity to look forward 

to a very simple proposal that's going to literally save $500,000 

a year on a program that is not working.  These are 

rehabilitated addictive gamblers who are saying there's nothing 

like experience. 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Now what you're proposing to do is set up so-called experts 

that are going to take two weeks training in Minnesota 

somewhere and come up and try to deliver a service that is not 

doing its job.  Mr. Minister, I want you to admit at this point, 

from what we've been talking about and what you've had in 

your hand since Friday, that this is a very, very good-looking 

program that's going to pay strong dividends at a fraction of the 

cost that you are proposing right now.  Would you not admit 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has been 

very up front with the people of Saskatchewan in recognizing 

that when there is the presence of gambling and gaming in the 

community, there will be resultant social impact. 

 

Well over two years ago we established an Advisory 

Committee on the Social Impacts of Gaming.  That committee 

made some very clear, consistent recommendations, Mr. 

Speaker, which we have followed almost to the letter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we have set up our program, we want it to be a 

program that combines immediate assistance, immediate 

contact.  We want to involve, we want to involve, Mr. Speaker, 

professionally trained counsellors.  We want to involve people 

like members of Gamblers Anonymous, and we are willing to 

look at a variety of proposals that will come to us.  A proposal 

has been delivered to us by Mr. Gribbon, and I say again, we 

are going to seriously look at this proposal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Casino Agreement 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice or whomever 

may wish to respond to the question. 

 

Mr. Minister, despite the fact that your government has taken 

away the public's right to take you to court on many occasions, 

the courts seem to be a very busy place for you and your 

government.  The latest threat comes from the Metis Society 

who say that your gambling policy is discriminatory and 

violates section 15 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

They have issued a statement which indicates that they are 

considering seeking out judicial declaration and possibly an 

injunction.  I think, Mr. Minister, that this is another blunder 

and another indication that what you're doing to the province 

isn't working. 

 

Mr. Minister, has your department drafted an opinion with 

respect to this possible court challenge, and can you tell us how 

much the defence of your position will cost the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member will 

know, it certainly is the right to challenge 

decisions or legislation or implications of legislation by any 

group in this province, and we respect that right.  We are well 

aware of the fact that the MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan) 

has indicated they have some concerns with Bill 72.  And I 

think as we go through the debate on this piece of legislation, it 

will be quite clear that firstly we have involved Metis people 

with respect to the expansion of casino development and that 

their needs can and will be satisfied.  With respect to a 

challenge, I think although it's safe to say that we certainly 

don't look forward to any legal recourse that different entities 

may make, we respect their right to do so, and they will be 

handled in the appropriate fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Minister, as 

my colleague indicated yesterday, Mr. Minister, many groups 

across this province have been excluded in the legislation.  The 

Metis Society has been excluded.  The exhibition associations 

have been excluded.  The charities have been excluded, and the 

people of Saskatchewan have been excluded in your agreement 

all because of your insensitivity.  As we see today, the 

taxpayers may again have to foot a bill while you defend your 

government's actions. 

 

Mr. Minister, instead of running roughshod over interest groups 

and their rights, wouldn't it make sense to include them in the 

negotiations from the very start instead of making deals behind 

closed doors?  Would it not be sensible to include everyone in 

the discussions and try to avoid court challenges? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Moosomin, his comments are totally contrary to 

what the Bill will state.  And I think, as we enter into debate on 

second reading, he will be aware of that. 

 

I want to quote from just a part of the legislation in case the 

member hasn't read it, under part IV, the associated entities 

fund.  And it deals with the payments that may be made from 

the fund for the associated entities.  And it says that payments 

may be made: "(a) to charities and exhibition associations in 

Saskatchewan; (b) to any organization or association 

representing Metis people in Saskatchewan . . ." 

 

And so I say to the member opposite, we have quite clearly 

indicated -- I've said in this House and said outside of this 

House -- that we intend through the associated entities fund to 

set aside 25 per cent of the profits that come from these 

expanded casinos.  That's a commitment that we made today, 

it's a commitment that we'll make tomorrow, and it will be 

quite clearly indicated, as we go through the debate on Bill 72, 

that the commitment is there. 

 

So with respect to the Metis Society, I just, Mr. Speaker, want 

to say one more thing.  The MNS are well aware of the fact that 

the government is not in the position at this time to enter into 

negotiations because 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2759 

of some of the circumstances that surround the audit that has 

taken place. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I think you've just proven the point.  The fact is that 

the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) has 

been assured of 25 per cent.  Your legislation says that the 

Metis association, the exhibition associations, the charitable 

associations, may be included in some discussions in receiving 

25 per cent of the revenues.  And that's the word that concerns 

all these organizations.  The fact that they may receive this 

funding.  It's not a guarantee. 

 

You tell us that it's a guarantee.  Well why not put that in the 

legislation?  Why not affirm that right now?  And if you're not 

quite willing to that, Mr. Minister, why not table the legislation, 

go through the discussions and give these other groups the 

same assurances that you've given the FSIN and yourselves as 

government, the fact that you've made that commitment and 

made it part of the Bill.  Will you table the Bill right now, Mr. 

Minister, complete your discussions, then bring it back at a 

later date?  Because I don't see the urgency when the casinos 

won't be built for a couple of years down the road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say in the 

outset that the member from Moosomin has, through the 

questioning from him and . . . himself and the member from 

Rosthern, clearly been putting themselves in a contradictory 

position.  On one hand there's the hue and cry about the 

program that's put together to deal with the social implications.  

And the next minute the member from Moosomin stands up 

and cries, not enough money for interested . . . and for other 

entities. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, these people, it's not a Jekyll and Hyde 

situation, it's a Jekyll or Hyde.  But no one is sure who is which 

on any given day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we proceed through this legislation clause 

by clause, the members of the opposition will be, I am sure, 

clearly satisfied that their concerns with respect to the 

associated entities and their ability to generate revenue through 

the expanded casinos will in fact be looked after most 

appropriately. 

 

Swift Current Health Board Offices 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question today is for the Minister of Health.  Your 

government-appointed Swift Current District Health Board has 

decided to renovate the old nurses' residence for their new 

health board offices.  This will cost approximately $868,000.  

Obviously the hand-picked board members appear to have 

misplaced priorities. 

 

Without even completing a needs assessment, this unelected 

board has decided on behalf of the district that it needs 

$868,000 worth of new administration 

offices.  Even if the needs assessment determines that other 

needs are more important, the money will be gone, Madam 

Minister. 

 

The people of the south-west want a chance to express their 

views on their health district board's choices.  When will they 

have that chance, Madam Minister, to elect or defeat the people 

who are spending $868,000 of their health care tax dollars on 

offices? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I should ask the member 

opposite whether he has spoken to the Swift Current Health 

Board about that and if he hasn't when he will.  And with 

respect to accountability, the member opposite is fully aware of 

the fact that health boards will be having public accountability 

meetings, and I suggest that if he's concerned about that 

particular issue, he should make his views known -- if not 

before then -- at the public accountability meetings. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, Madam Minister, 

you're talking about accountability after the money's spent.  

There are more important ways to spend $868,000 on health 

care rather than renovating an old building.  The people of 

Mankota and Climax, Ponteix -- they'd rather have doctors and 

nurses and ambulance services in remote areas and more 

money for home care than bricks and mortar as you've stated 

many times. 

 

At a time when hospital staff are being laid off, budgets cut, 

services pared back or completely taken away, how can you 

support the decision of the Swift Current District Health 

Board?  Tell the people of Saskatchewan where your priorities 

are, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

the member opposite's question, I once again urge him, if he's 

concerned about decisions that are being made, then he should 

talk to the Swift Current Health Board.  Because he has raised 

the issue, I will also pass your concerns on to them, but you 

should talk to them personally.  Don't be afraid to do that. 

 

I think that, however, the member opposite instead of 

recognizing that health boards in this province are doing a 

considerable amount to coordinate the health care system, to 

reduce expenditures, and to improve health care and the 

delivery of services in the long term, instead of recognizing the 

good work that people are doing in their communities, in 

communities like Climax and Eastend and Ponteix.  Instead of 

acknowledging that, he wants to make sure that he destroys 

what's taking place in terms of health care.  He wants to destroy 

medicare because that's where the Liberals were in the '60s on 

the issue and that's where they are today.  He wants to destroy 

the efforts that are taking place at the grass roots level to make 

the health care system not only affordable but more effective 

and responsive to the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, I'll tell you, 

I have been consulting with the people, not your hand-picked 

boards.  And I know what the people are saying.  Even those 

who support the concept of health care reform agree that a 

community health care system that was once strong and 

successful is now suffering under patronage appointments to 

boards, questionable spending, and services put at risk. 

 

A commitment to wellness seems to have taken a back seat to 

politics by you, Madam Minister.  The community has 

legitimate questions and concerns about the situation and they 

deserve answers to those questions. 

 

Madam Minister, will you insist that the local health board get 

a mandate, through elections, from the people of the south-west 

whom the board are supposed to represent, before this 

renovation or other questionable spending practices go any 

further? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well when the member opposite resigns 

and allows his constituency to give him a mandate, then we'll 

move to district board elections. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Madam Minister, your political 

answers and your political games aren't being accepted by the 

people of Saskatchewan.  They're tired of it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Madam Minister, organizations such as 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) are 

continuously calling for board elections this fall.  And as 

Murray Mandryk points out in today's Leader-Post, the 

one-man show of Garf Stevenson, along with all the excuses 

that your government has given to the people, are bogus.  The 

fact is, it's purely political, Madam Minister. 

 

Will you stop the games and give the people of Saskatchewan 

what they want and deserve and commit to calling elections 

this fall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well now the Liberals have finally come 

out of the woodwork on health reform.  The fact is the Liberals 

opposed health reform in the '60s and they oppose health 

reform in the '90s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They are not interested in making sure 

that health boards are in place, have done their needs 

assessment, have coordinated services and are ready to proceed 

to elections.  That's not what they want to ensure.  What they 

want to ensure is some sort of political agenda of their own 

with respect to health reform. 

 

Liberals and Tories in this province oppose the move 

by this government to make the health care system more 

affordable and more responsive.  They oppose it with every 

inch of their being, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member opposite is not interested in elections.  If he was 

interested in elections, he would have stepped down and 

allowed the people in his constituency to vote him in as the 

Liberal.  He's not interested in elections, he's interested in 

political grandstanding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of Aviation Fuel Tanks 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the Minister of Environment.  Mr. Minister, it's 

our understanding that on May 18 your department closed a 

tender for the installation of two aviation fuel tanks; one each at 

the air tanker bases of La Ronge and P.A. (Prince Albert).  

These tanks are worth about $30,000 apiece. 

 

On the day the tender closed, only one company, Northern 

Steel Industries of Tisdale, had officially met the Environment 

department's specifications for the type of fuel tank required.  

However, Northern Steel did not end up with providing the 

tanks for this particular tender. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you explain why the tanks were purchased 

from another company, even though Northern Steel was the 

only one that met the Environment department's specification 

on the day the tender closed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, we will take notice of that 

question and provide the members opposite with the answer 

when we've done our research. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's too 

bad the Minister for Energy didn't answer because he's had 

some experience with Advanced Ag. 

 

Madam Minister, we have been informed that the company 

which eventually provided the tank was Advanced Ag and 

Industrial of Biggar, who did not receive approval from the 

Environment department until May 24 -- six days after the 

tender closed. 

 

And I have a copy of the tender document.  Section 5.6 says 

that the tank must be an environmental protection tank 

manufactured by Northern Steel Industries of Tisdale or an 

approved equal.  Section 12.3 says: requests for equals or 

substitutes must be lodged in writing with the owner, meaning 

Saskatchewan Environment, at least 10 days prior to the tender 

closing and approved by the owner. 

 

Madam Minister, Advanced Ag had received no such approval 

as of the date of tender closing, let alone 10 days before.  Can 

you tell us how they were able to circumvent the process and 

why the Department of Environment ignored its own tender 

requirements in awarding this tender? 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think everybody 

has a reason to question all of the preliminary comments made 

by the members opposite and their supposition about the 

circumstances in this tender.  We'll say that we will take notice 

and get back to members opposite with the accurate 

information, the accurate information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, Madam Minister, I 

have a letter from Paul Roy the general manager of Northern 

Steel, and he believes that Advanced Ag received this 

preferential treatment through political interference in the 

tendering process.  He says, and I quote from his letter: 

 

 We are not aware of how this decision came to be or who was 

responsible; however, we can only assume there was political 

interference since the department did not follow its own 

tender guidelines.  We are not opposed to competition in the 

industry; however, our company takes the steps to prepare the 

design and to meet the criteria of the tender. 

 

 We are opposed to political, unfair advantages as appears to 

be the underlying factor in this decision.  We would like to 

know why the Department of the Environment was able to 

ignore the tender requirements to allow another company 

access after tender closing. 

 

Madam Minister, why did your department ignore its own 

tender requirements, and was there political interference into 

this tender process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again there are 

facts here that I believe have been manipulated by the members 

opposite.  We'll do our research, and the department will 

provide us with the accurate information, and we'll pass it on to 

the members opposite. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Question period is concluded.  Before 

we proceed to ministerial statements, I want to caution the 

minister that if the minister wishes to answer a question she 

may.  If the minister, on the other hand, wants to take notice of 

a question she should do so without any preamble. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Smoke-Free Policy 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the 

Assembly of a new policy to protect the health of 

Saskatchewan government employees.  Today I am introducing 

a government smoke-free policy that takes effect July 1st of 

this year.  This policy prohibits smoking and the sale of 

tobacco at all times in Saskatchewan government buildings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in the provincial government are showing 

leadership in this matter.  We're protecting 

the 70 per cent of employees who don't smoke from 

involuntary exposure to second-hand smoke in the workplace.  

The health hazards of second-hand smoke are undeniable.  As 

an employer we have a responsibility to provide a safe work 

environment.  In fact it is the objective of this policy to provide 

a safe and healthy environment for government employees, 

clients, and visitors. 

 

The smoke-free policy expands on the resolution passed earlier 

this month to make the Legislative Building smoke free.  It 

applies to all enclosed workplaces owned or leased by 

government departments, boards, commissions and other 

agencies identified in The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act.  This includes government vehicles 

that are designated by SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) as being smoke free. 

 

Designated smoking facilities will be allowed in government 

buildings where a complete ban would not be practical, such as 

in correctional institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to reducing the 

grave effects of tobacco smoke in this province.  About 1,400 

Saskatchewan residents die each year due to smoke-related 

illnesses.  At least 330 non-smoking Canadians die each year of 

lung cancer alone as a result of second-hand smoke.  Experts 

actually, Mr. Speaker, estimate that to be substantially higher 

than that, but 330 that can be directly traced. 

 

The average smoke-filled office contains concentrations of 

tobacco smoke that are 270 times higher than levels considered 

safe.  We are showing leadership in this area and we encourage 

other sectors to follow suit.  Each department or government 

agency is responsible for enforcing the smoke-free policy in the 

same manner as any other policy affecting the workplace. 

 

Government occupational health and safety committees will 

help implement the policy and provide information to 

employees.  To help employees adapt, Saskatchewan Health 

will assist in providing access to stop-smoking programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it's especially appropriate to announce 

this progressive measure immediately following World No 

Tobacco Day, a day dedicated by the World Health 

Organization to promote a tobacco-free society.  It is entirely 

appropriate that we take another positive step to addressing this 

issue in our own corner of the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I certainly 

would want to agree with the minister and applaud her for her 

efforts in this area, and the government's initiatives in this area.  

I think this is certainly an excellent example that the 

government is setting for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we wholeheartedly endorse the initiative, 

Madam Minister. 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Smoking dramatically increases the onset of lung cancer, as we 

know, and a host of other illnesses.  As the health care dollars 

of Saskatchewan are becoming even more and more stretched 

all of the time, I think initiatives like this go a long ways 

towards dealing with those kinds of concerns and problems. 

 

So congratulations, Madam Minister.  It's an important -- small 

but important -- step and we certainly agree with you and 

endorse it wholeheartedly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I too would like to commend the government for this 

undertaking, and we had an opportunity on a private members' 

day to discuss this issue and it was a very important motion that 

day with which we, I believe, all concurred, and 

wholeheartedly concurred.  I do think that it's a progressive 

step for Saskatchewan, and I do think that it has been a long 

time coming given that some of these enterprises, initiatives, 

have been undertaken by the previous federal administration in 

government buildings some time ago. 

 

We only have to look at the increasing statistics, unfortunately 

amongst women and young people in smoking, and question 

what it is that we're really doing wrong in getting the message 

out.  So I think that when we can provide some leadership, be 

models for the people, that that is always, always good -- to be 

able to set an example. 

 

Hopefully as time goes on, such initiatives as this will reduce 

deaths and ill health, from emphysema, from other respiratory 

illnesses, from cancers and heart disease caused by smoking. 

 

So as the third party in this Legislative Assembly, we want to 

applaud this undertaking and give you our endorsed support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

Bill No. 51 Removed from Order Paper 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to 

make a ruling.  I draw to the attention of members that until 

recently this Assembly had two Bills with substantially the 

same purpose on the order paper at the same time:  Bill No. 51, 

An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act (Board of Internal Economy Powers) under the 

name of the Leader of the Opposition; and Bill No. 70, An Act 

to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(No. 6) under the name of the minister responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

 

In this regard, I'll refer members to a ruling of the Chair dated 

May 9, 1994 when the Speaker addressed the matter of two 

Bills of the same object by making 

reference to Erskine May, 21st edition, page 468 and by 

quoting earlier rulings of the Chair.  It is the practice of this 

Assembly that in such instances, once the Assembly has given 

or refused second reading on one Bill, the Speaker then must 

prevent any further consideration of the other Bill. 

 

In this case, both Bills sought to establish procedures 

respecting compliance with Board of Internal Economy 

directives.  On May 30, under rule 51 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

Bill No. 70 received second and third reading.  Consequently, it 

is necessary that I order Bill No. 51 to be removed from the 

order paper. 

 

(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, Mr. 

Premier, and your officials back once more.  I'm wondering if 

you have the global questions which our office requested of 

each department, and if you have those ready and if you could 

send those across. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I guess one goes to the third party as 

well; that's why there's two.  Yes, that's it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, last 

time we met we were discussing areas around the hiring of 

individuals, questions surrounding the practices of your 

government, what you had promised Saskatchewan people 

prior to the last election. 

 

You recently eliminated the cabinet press office.  The 

following people at one time or another have worked in that 

office.  I believe there was a Darcy McKenzie, a Carol Bentley, 

a Lisa Simpson, a Lisa Thomson, and a John Millar, a Wendy 

Ward, a Virginia Wilkinson.  Can you tell us what happened to 

these people after that office was eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we'd be prepared to 

document this and forward it to you by way of a document.  I'm 

having a little bit of difficulty in getting the material readily 

available the way it's drafted.  That's why I say we'll offer to 

get it to you. 

 

But as best as the information is, I think Mr. McKenzie, Darcy 

McKenzie, is with SGI; John Millar is still with Executive 

Council; Ms. Carol Bentley is on contract with Sask Water; 

Lisa Thomson is with the Gaming Commission, gaming and 

liquor authority; Ms. Ward is still with the cabinet press 

secretary; and Virginia Wilkinson is with the press secretary -- 

media relations, not press secretary, it's in the reorganized 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

media relationship. 

 

Maybe what we could do is just document this and forward it to 

you to take a look at as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- There was one other one there, I believe, Lisa 

Simpson. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- She is no longer in the employ of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  I believe she is in British 

Columbia or . . . well I'm not sure where she is.  She's not in the 

employ of the Government of Saskatchewan, in any event. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  It looks like you've 

got a pretty good percentage here on job placement.  Is it 

normal in the downsizing of government that it looks like about 

90 per cent of the people would get other jobs, or is this only 

happen when they work for you?  Is this normal that you would 

have this high a percentage rehired into major areas of 

government after the termination of their office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, what we basically 

endeavoured to do was to assess whether or not we needed a 

cabinet press office as it was originally structured and 

functioning.  And while the people there served the function as 

it was established reasonably well, our view was that we 

needed to reorganize the function from a centralized cabinet 

press role into the current methodology which is set up.  In that 

context, we -- not we, they -- we and they, those that were 

affected, sought and determined whether or not there were 

other positions available elsewhere. 

 

As my first answer has implied to you, some were successful, 

some moved on, and it worked on that basis.  So what we're 

trying to do here is downsizing, yes, but we're more concerned, 

in the context of the press office, to establish the most effective 

organizational vehicle. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, the reason I ask is that I 

see most of these people on almost a daily basis involved in 

media scrums out here in the hallway.  And you had your 

cabinet press office, which obviously you thought it didn't look 

appropriate to have that many people on the public payroll 

servicing yourself and Executive Council, so you decided to 

come to some other method here. 

 

I mean you can put them under contract, or you can shoot them 

to a department.  But that flies right in the face of what you 

criticized in opposition where you said that even though they're 

working for a department now, they should be paid for by you, 

sir, not shoved off on a contract to Sask Water or Social 

Services or the Gaming Commission or SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) picking up their salaries.  But in effect 

they're still doing the same job.  They're still in the building 

here; they haven't left.  They're here on a daily basis. 

 

And you really criticized the previous administration for those 

types of things, and now you've got them 

doing exactly the same thing.  And it would seem to me that if 

you were going to dispense with this and fire these people 

because you were spending too much money on it, then you 

should have followed through and actually done it, not just 

shipped them off to a department or a Crown corporation. 

 

And here they are, every day outside the very door of this 

Legislative Assembly doing the same thing that they always 

did.  Do you think that's appropriate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I do not think it's 

appropriate, but neither do I think the Leader of the 

Opposition's statement's factual.  For the 1993-94 year ended, 

I'm advised that we had five people in media relations and six 

in the cabinet press office for a total of 11.  For the year under 

review, we have five.  The media relations and cabinet press 

office are gone; it's now in media services.  That's a reduction 

from 11 to 5. 

 

But there is a huge difference between what we have done and 

the way previous administrations, yours primarily, operated.  

Under the former administration, every cabinet minister had a 

media relations person, a press office or person.  We do not 

have that.  We centralized.  That was the attempt that we tried 

to do. 

 

Plus in addition to having a press person per minister under the 

previous administration, you also had a central office location, 

a central function.  So what we did when we assumed office 

was we said we don't like the idea that every minister should 

have a press aide.  There may be some, based on the nature of 

the projects which are involved, I think one would agree; with 

respect to gaming and the like, it's a very contentious matter. 

 

But the net result of what we've done is a considerable saving, 

both in terms of dollars and bodies.  And what we did from a 

chronological point of view was we eliminated them from 

ministers' offices.  We put them into the central services of 

media relations and cabinet press, totalling 11, and we have 

further reduced them centrally to five.  Now there's still some 

that are, as I've pinpointed, existing in other circumstances.  

But by any comparison, you will see this is a substantial 

reduction from anything that took place in the last year, '90-91, 

under your administration. 

 

I don't mean this to be political, just simply saying that there is 

a factual statement here which has to be accepted -- that 

numerically and from a dollars point of view, there is a 

substantial reduction. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I don't necessarily accept 

those statements because there seems to be other pieces to the 

puzzle here.  Can you tell me then what the media review 

branch of Executive Council is, what's its duties and 

responsibilities are?  What does this office do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a different 

function.  It's not related to the functions of press officers.  Let 

me describe the functions as we see 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

them, at least under our administration. 

 

A press officer, media officer, is a person who will be involved 

in the preparation of press releases, in the release of them, in 

the arranging of appropriate interviews with the media -- that 

kind of a direct interface. 

 

What we're doing with respect to the second function which 

you've identified is a different role.  What we are endeavouring 

to do is to figure out what the reaction of media is, or the 

reports of media are, respecting government policies and 

government programs.  It's analysis, it's summaries, it is a 

provision of those kinds of services; it is not a question of 

provision of press releases or relationships with the media. 

 

So they are different functions which are being fulfilled.  

They're not an additional number -- X number of bodies -- to be 

added to the five that I gave you because they don't interface 

with the media; that's not their job.  They may be out here from 

time to time, but that is not their responsibility. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well my information is that we have six 

people working for the Premier to clip news articles from 

newspapers.  And I think you're aware, Premier, that the 

Legislative Library does that on behalf of members free of 

charge. 

 

So you've got six people clipping newspaper reports, one of 

them in the Star-Phoenix which you claim that you never read 

anyway.  And I think what we have here is a little bit of 

splitting hairs, because previously I think that's what some 

people in media relations also did.  They not only helped put 

together the news, they monitored the news.  And now you 

very craftily split some of these functions up and tried to pass it 

off as something entirely different. 

 

Could you tell me how much these six people are paid to clip 

newspapers for you on a daily basis, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The total amount paid for media 

services is $358,650 -- not for clipping of papers, I might add.  

There is a range of other services.  I think the member will 

obviously acknowledge that electronic media is not only a 

growing but perhaps in some ways even more important aspect 

of the monitoring of news, both on a provincial basis but on a 

national basis with emerging national crises and debates about 

that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Can you give me that figure again, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- $358,650 for the year under review, 

projected '94-95. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well seeing as the taxpayer is coming up with 

nearly $360,000 here, Mr. Premier, I hope you do start to at 

least read the stuff that they clip, seeing as they work for you. 

Now we also have another component here that we need to 

explore, because I think this also is a rather crafty piece of 

work here.  We now have a thing called a communications 

event coordinator, which the taxpayer can pay up to $67,400 

for.  And this is for the chief liaison between media services 

and the communications coordination unit.  And I wonder if 

you could tell me what this person does. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well this, Mr. Chairman, is a different 

function.  We're not that crafty, by the way -- not in this area, in 

any event.  Budget planning, health care reorganization, new 

agricultural policy, very crafty and capable -- not in this area. 

 

This essentially is the title for the unit which is responsible for 

the scheduling of ministerial-public interface.  Scheduling not 

only . . . it's not a scheduling unit as such, but it is the various 

requests that you'll get from people who want to make 

submissions, how you arrange visits to various communities -- 

that kind of a situation.  It does not involve putting out press 

releases or the monitoring of press matters.  It is the question of 

trying to coordinate the public interface, the communications 

meeting with the public interface. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Would you say then, Mr. Premier, that Ms. 

Davis is the chief liaison between media services and the 

communications coordination unit?  Would you term her to be 

the sort of the chief liaison between media services and the 

communications coordination unit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  That's not her role. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Because it has been explained to me that the 

functions that this individual performs are very similar to those 

performed by one Dave Burdeniuk and a Virginia Wilkinson. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who's Dave Burdeniuk? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You ought to know, he works for you. 

 

I guess the question I might be asking myself, in your shoes, is 

what is my chief of staff doing these days now that you've 

created all of these positions there.  What do Mr. Burdeniuk 

and Ms. Wilkinson do exactly to earn their keep then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well keeping tabs on the chief of staff 

is a challenging task all right, but I'm not going to hire any 

more people to do that. 

 

None the less, I don't know if I . . . Ms. Wilkinson will be 

leaving the cabinet -- or sorry, the media services arrangement; 

I still think of it in the old terms, cabinet and press office -- and 

through competition she has gained a position in Social 

Services.  Dave Burdeniuk will be the new Virginia Wilkinson 

if I can put it in that position. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that's nice, Mr. Premier.  You still 

haven't explained to me exactly what that 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

individual does.  I'd clearly like to understand for -- and the 

remuneration behind that individual -- what exactly that person 

does.  Is it personal advice to you or is it personal advice to 

your staff or personal advice to your cabinet or what does this 

individual do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Are you talking about media 

relations/media services? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Burdeniuk, right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Burdeniuk?  Yes.  They will, 

amongst other things, continue to prepare news releases, 

distribute news releases, operate radio-television room news 

conferences; provide assistance to departments, agencies, 

Crown corporations and commissions with respect to the 

preparation of releases; coordinate day-to-day media relations 

for the office of the Premier, including media interviews, news 

conferences, public appearances, media-related advice, and so 

forth. 

 

That will be the job that Mr. Burdeniuk will carry out.  It's the 

normal and standard job that your media relations persons does 

or do and what we do, only we have a larger function in 

government for doing it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well when I add all of this up, Mr. Premier, 

and they're all related one way or the other out of your office, it 

looks like 20 people to me working in media and 

communications for your office. 

 

Now I know that your office needs to have services provided to 

it, but quite frankly I find 20 people in these days of austerity . . 

. particularly I don't understand this 360,000 or 358,000 for this 

clipping service.  It would seem to me that you've got lots of 

room to cut yet and I would suggest to you, sir, that I don't 

believe the place to do that was with media services. 

 

That particular entity had always been considered available to 

all people in the building, myself, the Leader of the Third Party 

and others, and it seems that you've taken the opportunity to 

take people out of what was clearly a very partisan operation -- 

the cabinet press office -- and you have now inserted them into 

an area that was never viewed as partisan. 

 

By doing so you are able to say to the public, I've reduced the 

number of people working in media for me.  I say, I still count 

20 altogether and we have this problem of our media services 

in the Legislative Building being filled with political 

appointments. 

 

So I would say to you and I would challenge you, do you not 

think that there is perhaps room to cut here with the amount of 

people that you have providing services to your office in the 

way of media relations, media clipping, media monitoring, 

event coordinating?  I mean there must be somebody down 

there that's totally capable enough to assume some of these 

responsibilities beyond what they are today.  Would you not 

agree? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I will agree with 

the general proposition that I think there's always room to find 

more efficiencies and I will take the Leader of the Opposition's 

suggestion that we take a look at more efficiency to heart, 

because quite obviously necessity if nothing else just in terms 

of our fiscal position, where we can save a meaningful dollar, 

we will. 

 

Having said that, what I cannot accept, and not to be 

argumentative, is the Leader of the Opposition's 

non-acceptance of my description of the function of the 

communications coordination unit versus media services and 

media relations.  Now if you choose to lump them all in as all 

media, then you've got your 20.  But I say to you, as I have and 

the record will show, that that is an incorrect categorization of 

the functions. 

 

And again, I would simply say, not to be argumentative, if you 

look at comparison numbers of people under the former 

administration and the current administration, we have made 

enormous savings.  Can we make more?  Perhaps; we'll take a 

look at it. 

 

And I say that without admitting the 20 that you have, I say 

conveniently but wrongly, lumped into one function.  They're 

not one function; they're separate functions.  There's an 

interrelationship because one would like to think that the 

Department of Agriculture and the Department of Economic 

Development are interrelated; that there's a symmetry, but they 

are separate departments, separate functions, and that's the case 

here too. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well you and I can argue, Mr. Premier, I 

agree, on definition, but I look at all of these people with . . . 

they really do only have one job in mind and that is to help 

save your political hide.  There is really no other way to 

describe what these people do.  And it's this type of thing, Mr. 

Premier, that as time goes on, I can tell you from experience, 

the public will not put up with.  So I'd suggest you get on with 

the paring operation and listen to the words of wisdom from 

someone who's been there. 

 

You also engage in polling, and to your credit, Mr. Premier, the 

polling that your government does, now is released.  But there 

are some problems I've found with the data and, for instance, in 

September of '92 you conducted a general omnibus survey of 

the residents of Saskatchewan, and in the executive summary 

you stated that 57 questions were asked and yet the survey 

instrument listed only 55 questions.  There was 2 that were not 

reported upon. 

 

Likewise in December of 1992 you also did another polling 

which stated that 58 questions were asked, yet the survey 

shows only 47 questions.  We have noticed in following this 

polling through, that most of those follow the same pattern.  

You do not state the total number of questions asked in the 

methodology.  Why is that?  Why do you not come through 

with all of the questions that were asked in those polling 

surveys? 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is 

certainly getting into an esoteric area for me because, as he 

may know better than I, polling and methodology of polling is 

very complex and very sophisticated and getting more complex 

and more sophisticated. 

 

But I'm advised that the explanation is as follows: the specific 

omnibus reports cited do not state that a specific number of 

questions were asked, rather the reports indicate the number of 

questions included in the survey instrument.  There is a 

difference. 

 

The numbering system on the questionnaires may not match the 

number of questions identified as being included on the survey 

instrument in the text of the document.  For example, for 

purposes gender and residency are considered questions, but 

these are not numbered on the survey instruments.  And that 

was a specific situation for the September '92 report. 

 

Now from what I can make from this explanation is that this is 

an issue where the pollster who obtained the contract on bid, 

tender, assessed bid, and the results are there, simply has a 

different mechanism of identifying what is a question and what 

is not a question, which may not be a satisfactory way to do it, 

but the bottom line of it all is that what he asks at public 

expense is what you get. 

 

So the explanation which I give to you sounds to me like a very 

technical one; I don't know if it's proper or not, but it doesn't 

matter because there's nothing hidden here. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, the problem is that when 

you talk to people who have responded from these surveys -- 

and over the last two and a half years that has got to be in the 

several thousand now who have responded to surveys around 

this province -- one thing becomes very consistent about the 

line of questioning.  The pollster commonly asks how the 

respondent is going to vote, who they think the best leader is, 

and other political questions. 

 

So could you confirm for us today, Mr. Premier, that there is 

partisan polling being carried out with taxpayers' money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the 

arrangements are that the government polling, which is 

conducted, is conducted by the pollster in the professional 

advice of the pollster, the government, I guess at some point, 

will ask the pollster to query the public on attitudes toward 

health care or attitudes toward the particular issues of the day.  

But that we also, by contract, permit -- and in fact it's desirable 

-- for the pollster to ask additional questions if the pollster so 

feels free to ask additional questions required. 

 

So at this stage in the game, whatever the pollster may or may 

not ask as part of the package in order to make sure that there's 

a complete picture of the questions 

which were asked for us, is left to the pollster.  And in the 

context it does not affect the basic issue, which is what the 

member's getting at, and that is what do we pay for.  What we 

pay for is for the information which we have and you get -- 

whatever it is, 90 days later I guess it is it's released under 

freedom of information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well you wouldn't be surprised if questions 

like, if an election were held today, what party would you vote 

for; and who do you think the best leader is -- you wouldn't be 

surprised if those types of questions were asked by the pollster 

as an add-on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- May very well ask it as an add-on, and 

it would not surprise me. 

 

I've been to -- not lately, but in my days of retirement of 

politics from 1982 to 1986 -- I had the pleasure of attending 

many conferences on a number of public policy issues 

involving Canadians.  And we received reports from pollsters.  

And I can tell you that they are contracted by governments of 

every stripe to do government polling, and the taxpayers pay 

for what the government asks them to do.  But I would be very, 

very surprised if the pollster did not, under that contract, ask 

additional questions.  Because in my own experience, the 

information which flows is either beyond the scope of the 

mandate of the contract or done through some independent 

government surveying. 

 

Keep in mind that the -- and the member will know this -- 

polling is . . . in fact some scientists, political scientists, argue 

that polling now is losing its utility.  So much of it that's going 

on by private corporations and by political parties and other 

public interest groups, that the public is getting very 

sophisticated with the questions which are asked.  There's a 

multiplicity of pollsters out there asking a multiplicity of 

questions. 

 

You may not believe it, but I actually was polled myself -- and 

I don't think it was by a government pollster -- who asked me 

how did I intend to vote.  It took me a little while to think about 

it, but I ended up saying that I was going to vote NDP (New 

Democratic Party).  So it happens, you know. 

 

All I can tell you is that as a big reform -- and I don't want to be 

political about this -- but to tell you bluntly, we are spending a 

huge amount less in polling.  For the year ended '93-94, 

taxpayers spent $263,455 to give you the exact figure -- 264 to 

round it out -- compared to '90-91, $940,000, or virtually four 

times the sum. 

 

Now maybe 264,000 is too much.  Sometimes I think it is, 

judging by the way the results are released and the way that the 

media plays it, which I'm sure must have been very frustrating 

for you on the government benches.  But you take a look at the 

government poll conducted, you take a look at it, and some 

innocuous question is dug out by the journalists -- I'm not 

knocking the journalists here, they're all my very close friends 

and I like them very much, and I'm sure the feeling is mutual -- 

but . . . You're surprised?  The 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

question is asked, so I have to ask someone in my office, is this 

question asked?  My point being that for 264,000 I sometimes 

wonder what the value of it is too. 

 

But we do need it because what we need to know is whether or 

not the government policies are so wildly off-base, that you're 

going so contrary to public opinion, that you should be 

desisting, ceasing and desisting in a particular area that goes. 

 

Now sometimes you may decide as a matter of philosophy and 

principle, notwithstanding the polling -- I'd like to think we do 

that as a government, maybe too often -- to be quite frank with 

you, that notwithstanding the polling, you're going to do what's 

right.  But you need to have this little testing from time to time, 

and we've cut it down by -- well, as I say, it's a quarter of, or 72 

per cent of what it was under the last year, in less than a 

thousand days of office. 

 

But I take the Leader of the Opposition's suggestion to heart, 

and maybe we can take a look at even cutting this down further. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'll be very surprised, Mr. Premier, if you 

don't get some advice to the contrary the closer you get to the 

next election.  There'll be those around you who will want to 

use the services of pollsters much more than what you might 

like. 

 

There's another issue that raised its ugly head again yesterday.  

I think we saw an example in here of the Liberal leader trying 

to score some cheap political points in question period over 

some issues that we know surround the justice system.  And as 

people that have been around here for a while understand, there 

has to be a clear separation between what police forces do and 

what the Minister of Justice does.  That's the only way that we 

can all maintain confidence in the system.  It's unfortunate that 

people like to raise that spectre once in a while to get their 

name in the newspaper. 

 

But there is maybe perhaps one point that is worth while 

thinking out.  At one time, I'm told, in this province and other 

jurisdictions in Canada, that there has been a separation -- I 

believe in the federal government there is -- between the 

Attorney General and Minister of Justice, because of some of 

the thornier issues that raise their head from time to time. 

 

And I'm wondering, given the fact that the portfolio is 

combined now, and it was I know under our government, if it 

might not . . . and I would seek your opinion as one who has 

held I think both positions in a previous administration, if the 

separation of those two duties might not be a wise solution to 

perhaps some of the perception out there, that it would not put 

members in as dicey a position as they might be perceived to be 

in. 

 

And I simply ask your opinion whether that might not make 

sense, because it is separated on the federal level and rightly so. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I think the Leader of the Opposition 

has raised a very important question but not an easy one to 

answer, in my judgement.  The separation at the federal level is 

based on around two ministries.  One is the Minister of Justice 

and the Attorney General of Canada; in this case it happens to 

be Mr. Rock.  And then there is the Solicitor General, whose 

name escapes me, federally. 

 

The Solicitor General is responsible for the police forces, 

namely the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and all of the 

matters pertaining thereto --  numbers, funding, allocation, and 

administrative matters.  But the Solicitor General is not 

responsible for the nature and course of conduct of 

investigations by the police.  Those are done by the police as 

they would be done in Saskatchewan or elsewhere, 

independently by the police.  And eventually the information 

then is turned over to the Department of the Attorney General 

and Justice, primarily provincial because administration of 

criminal law is provincial, at which point, with a 

recommendation, at which point a prosecutorial decision is 

made or not made. 

 

Separating the two is an interesting dilemma which has 

bedevilled me for the number of years that I was attorney 

general and minister of Justice, and also minister in charge of 

the police.  But I have come to the view that separation is 

basically desirable where the activities of the police function 

are so numerous and so onerous that there needs to be, for 

administrative and other purposes, an independent ministry 

with deputies to look after it.  I don't think that's the case in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In the context of the examination of people who are under 

investigation, federally and provincially, it will eventually end 

up under the minister of Justice and attorney general at the end 

of the day.  But it's a debate which is certainly not a clear-cut 

one, and perhaps we do have to revisit it.  We've been trying to 

consolidate our departments as you know -- Urban and Rural 

Affairs into Municipal Affairs; Environment and Natural 

Resources into one department, rather than separating them.  

And again all I can say to the member is that I have to take that 

under advisement. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I don't want to belabour it, but yesterday 

the response said to me that there is a basic problem here.  The 

Minister of Justice was challenging the Liberal leader to go out 

and say something in the hall. 

 

The concern is legitimate -- honestly.  I mean we have ongoing 

investigations in a number of areas.  As I understand it, one of 

the only options available is to farm it out to another 

jurisdiction, another province, federal government, somebody 

like that.  I'm not sure that that process is a good one because it 

inherently delays; you have people dealing with things that, 

quite frankly, have no knowledge or background into it. 

 

We had four separate issues raised yesterday, all of which are 

legitimate.  They were raised for the wrong reasons.  They were 

raised in this House in order to 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

create some type of political soapbox for an individual to crawl 

up on, but the issues are legitimate.  And after a long period of 

time they begin to wear on people. 

 

So I only bring this up to ask you to consider it, to look at ways 

that we can get through this process in a way that will be seen 

as responsible by all and at the same time make sure that the 

delivery of justice is expedient, because I believe that the case 

that has been mentioned around yourself for a number of years 

and other ones, are . . . they're very trying.  And I think we all 

would like to see these things resolved as expeditiously as 

possible without any possible perceived conflict because we're 

all entering this Chamber as politicians first, and then we take 

on our various duties after that.  And if you wish to comment 

any further, fine.  If you don't, that's fine.  But I think it's 

something worth while to look at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The only comment is a bit of a 

repetition, but I think it's worth repeating.  I think the 

suggestion has some considerable merit to it.  I certainly will 

discuss this with the Minister of Justice and department 

organizational people, like Mr. Clark of my staff, to see if there 

is some merit in doing this. 

 

Again I think the only comment that I would make is that it is a 

situation which really requires the highest of standards by this 

House, by which it should be handled.  And I'll only say in 

passing and I only mean this in passing:  I think that the nature 

and the form of the questions raised yesterday were -- to put it 

mildly -- very unfortunate. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, I want to go back for a minute to 

the previous set of questions on polling.  I know . . . at least I 

thought that the practice in the past under my administration,  

whenever there was a political question asked by a pollster, the 

party was obligated to pay for that question. 

 

Do you know, in the circumstances that I raised here, if the 

NDP Party had paid for those questions that were done as part 

of an omnibus polling done for the Government of 

Saskatchewan where a political question was asked that 

wouldn't necessarily be reported on because, as you say, it was 

something separate from the omnibus question, whether it 

would be health, or judges' salaries or whatever else you were 

polling on.  And if there were political questions asked, was the 

NDP Party paying for those political questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I'm not 

trying to avoid the Leader of the Opposition's very excellent 

questioning -- if I may say so -- in this area, when I say that for 

me the problem always is, on polling, what is or isn't a political 

question.  In fact the very act of polling itself, as I would say is 

implied by the nature and the tenor and the tone of your 

questioning, is thought by people to be political. 

 

(1500) 

 

You are asking questions in order to gain political advantage, 

and no matter how you word the questions 

and no matter how extreme they go -- even to the ultimate 

question of sort of saying, are you going to vote Conservative 

or Liberal or NDP? -- there is a political dimension to it. 

 

We are saying to the polling that we are releasing and to the 

contracts which we have entered, to the people, we have these 

questions which we want to ask you.  You have freedom to ask 

those questions, any others that you want to ask; you're an 

independent operator in your own right.  We're only paying for 

you under the terms of the questions that we want to ask.  

That's all we pay for you.  And what we pay for on behalf of 

the taxpayers, we release to the taxpayers.  What we are 

charged for, if I can put it that way.  That is what I'm advised is 

the situation.  And that is the case. 

 

I tell you quite frankly again, I said this to you from a seated 

position, some of this polling I think really has to be looked at 

for its utility.  If you want to talk hard-core political polling, 

this can only be done by a political party.  That is where it's got 

to be done in terms of profiles and various attitudinal aspects of 

it.  It cannot be done in a government poll.  And it doesn't 

matter if they tagged on one or two or three extra questions at 

the end of the day; it won't help you any.  It's not a meaningful 

poll, political poll. 

 

And this is not intended to be a political poll.  This is intended 

to be a poll on government policies and ratings and attitudes of 

a government policy.  And you know yourself, from your many 

years in political life, if you asked four or five questions, one of 

which was how are you going to vote in the next election, that's 

not any kind of a political poll worth a doggone. 

 

A political poll has to be exactly that.  These are not political 

polls in the traditional sense; these are government polls on 

government policy.  Now anything that a government does is 

political, as I say, and so that's my answer to you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I'll assume from 

that answer that the NDP Party was not paying for any of the 

questions that might be attached to those polls. 

 

While you were in opposition you made several statements 

about associate ministers and their credibility and their 

usefulness in serving the public, and basically said that if you're 

not up to being full time than why bother with you.  You 

presently employ two, three associate ministers who sit around 

your cabinet table -- three.  Can you tell the Assembly and the 

people today why you would not either elevate those people to 

a full-time position or follow your own advice to the former 

premier and dispense with them because they simply aren't 

worth their pay cheques? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well actually I will tell the member 

opposite that I have not ruled out, by a long shot, doing exactly 

what I said in opposition and eliminating the associate 

ministers.  At some point in the political cycle and in the 

mandate of the government, I have to take a look at obviously 

where we're headed and what we've accomplished and 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

what we haven't accomplished, and I've not ruled out the the 

question of elimination of associates. 

 

Let me however tell you why the associates took place in our 

circumstances.  And I do not . . . I repeat again, this is not 

political because I think the debate that we're having here is at 

least one that I like; it's got some meat and substance to it, and 

even when we disagree when I say the following. 

 

When we assumed office on November 1, '91, we felt we had a 

fiscal problem in two areas.  One was the operating budget of 

the government which traditionally the Minister of Finance is 

responsible for, and one was in the Crown Investments 

Corporation side where there were a number of large 

expenditure items: Saferco, Weyerhaeuser, Crown Life, and 

HARO, very complicated deals, NewGrade.  You know 

yourself what the NewGrade documents are like.  I've actually 

made a point of trying to read through them all and they are 

that thick.  I don't pretend to understand them but I've gone 

through a vast variety on NewGrade. 

 

And it just simply was impossible for one person, given Gass 

Commission and all of that, to do it.  And it turns out, I don't 

want to embarrass my colleague, but the member from . . . the 

Deputy Premier, even at that, working at the full load on 

Finance, was forced to request a change in responsibilities. 

 

So the idea of the Associate Minister of Finance was -- at that 

time it was my colleague, the current Minister of Labour -- that 

he would take the responsibility, working in coordination and 

in tandem with the Minister of Finance, of trying to get the CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) contractual 

and fiscal arrangements rearranged, renegotiated, understood, 

and in compliance with the Finance policy. 

 

In the case of the Department of Health, the same situation 

arose.  We have undertaken, whether you like it or you don't 

like it, a very major reform of health care.  It is the subject of 

many, many books, Strong Medicine, how to save health care, 

as an example.  I predict this to be one of several that will come 

out in Canada praising what we're doing.  And our situation 

here is that the Minister of Health was . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well again I don't want to overstate it, but I 

mean we're just on the road non-stop. 

 

And we had other problems.  What do we do on labour 

adjustment?  You have to sit down with the health care unions 

and start talking labour adjustment.  So essentially I asked the 

minister from Moose Jaw to join and to carve off that function 

and other related functions with respect to the area of health 

care. 

 

Now with respect to the Associate Minister of Education, this is 

a slightly different kettle of fish because here the circumstances 

primarily try to address the issues of special training needs, 

aboriginal issue needs, related to education.  We all know what 

the demographics are and what the requirements of education 

are, particularly -- with all of us -- but one 

segment of our population.  And it just seemed to me that we 

needed to devote more specific energy to this very large, 

numerically and fiscally, field of activity. 

 

Now having said that, why I started out my answer and why 

I'm going to close it in the same way, is that we've come in less 

than a thousand days quite some distance on both the finance 

side and on the health side, maybe not as much on the 

education side.  I do not here mean to be critical of the 

department or the minister but just because I think that that is a 

much more complex issue. 

 

And what I'm going to do at some appropriate time is to reread 

the speeches that I made when I was in opposition about the 

question of associates.  Keep in mind that our cabinet, even 

with associates and counting me, I think, is 18 only.  And the 

cabinet from '83-85 was 25, and from '89-90 was 20 which, by 

the way, I don't think is . . . 20 I don't think . . . looking back at 

it now, perhaps I was in error in criticizing 20.  I don't think 

that's out of line.  I don't intend to go to 20 by the way; I'm not 

laying the groundwork for 20.  I think 18 or 19 is about the 

tops.  And I know your motion that it should be a percentage of 

the number of seats in the House. 

 

But let me just close on this, less you raise that.  We have to 

have legislative and parliamentary reform but not to the point 

where the most important reform is not accomplished, and that 

is effective government.  I don't mean effective politically, yes.  

But I mean effective in the sense of administrative, sensitive, 

hearing, listening, and making policies. 

 

And a lot of these reforms which are currently being bandied 

around by yourself, sir, are worthwhile, but a lot of them will 

hamstring not only this government, but successive 

governments.  Successive governments will live to regret the 

days because the biggest reform, all in the name of reform, will 

not have been accomplished, namely an effective, 

smooth-running administration. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate your answer, Mr. Premier, but I 

think you're a bit of a captive of your own rhetoric.  There's no 

question that some of the logical answers for the problems that 

you face are there. 

 

I brought that piece of legislation forward in good conscience 

because I believe that the public don't trust us any more to 

make those types of decisions.  It's like the question 

surrounding balanced budget legislation.  There's good 

arguments for and against, but the feeling of the public today is, 

is that it has to be done so that politicians have no choice. 

 

While in opposition you made a great to-do about legislative 

secretaries, parliamentary secretaries.  And you were right 

partially in your criticism of the system as it was employed by 

the previous administration.  There were far too many of them, 

some put in those positions for the wrong reasons. 

 

But I think in the parliamentary democracy the 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

solution would probably be to have a limited number of cabinet 

ministers and then as you brought people on with greater 

responsibility, that the option of a legislative secretary or 

parliamentary secretary be there, because you don't have to pay 

them the cabinet minister's salary.  What you do though is 

allow them access to things like Executive Air, the car pool, the 

ability to carry on the functions of a minister but in a limited 

way. 

 

And what I would suggest, Mr. Premier, is that you do away 

with your associate ministers and that you drop the number of 

your cabinet down to around 15 or 16, but you reinstitute a 

parliamentary secretary position with some criteria attached to 

it that the public will feel comfortable with and that the abuses 

which you saw in the previous administration don't happen in 

your own.  I think it's employed with a great deal of success in 

other jurisdictions; and it's one that would say to the public, 

yes, I'm cutting back on the number of cabinet ministers, that 

I'm not necessarily simply playing politics with demographics, 

that I'm trying to satisfy a very large caucus by having people 

elevated to cabinet in some form or other. 

 

And quite frankly I look over your cabinet and I see people that 

are working far harder than others.  And I think what you want 

in executive government is to balance that load out, access for 

the people who you're charged with serving, but not necessarily 

have to play so much politics because that's what sours the 

folks out there. 

 

I mean they look at your Provincial Secretary who is the 

Keeper of the Seal.  And beyond that there ain't a whole lot 

there.  And yet I look over his monthly salary here, and we're 

over 15 grand for basically political people that work for him.  

And I understand allegiances, Mr. Premier, but I think there's a 

better system that could be employed. 

 

Now you would have to go back a little ways on some of the 

things that you said about parliamentary secretaries, but I really 

believe there's a saving for the government there. 

 

And I'm not trying to tell you that the parliamentary secretary 

regime employed by the previous administration was the right 

one.  There was abuse there, and I'm the first to admit it.  So 

you can take it as a suggestion.  You can ignore it.  You can do 

whatever you wish, but the people are telling me that you do 

need to reread some of your own speeches and get on with 

some democratic reform vis-a-vis the way that Executive 

Council structures itself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I think we have made some 

democratic reform.  The other night I pointed to an article in 

the Leader-Post which I quoted to yourself; I'm not going to 

do that again.  I think we are captive to some extent of our 

speeches that we make in opposition; that is almost the 

inevitable nature of politics. 

 

I think the argument on legislative secretaries that you make 

today is a solid political science and solid 

governmental argument.  You should be bringing on MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and taking the duties off 

ministers and training them for potential ministerial function.  

That is what good legislative secretaries should do. 

 

The reality was, however, that we campaigned against that, and 

we've tried hard to keep as many of our promises as we have 

kept.  This is one which we have kept, although it's been tough.  

It's as simple as that. 

 

How to revisit it, I don't know.  As I say . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give it a new name. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well what I have to do is tell the 

member what I just said a few moments ago.  When I'm sitting 

down in the next several months or weeks taking a look at what 

the nature of the cabinet should look like, in the context of your 

suggestions and the like, I'll have to make some hard decisions 

both as to associate cabinet ministers and legislative secretaries.  

But my own belief is that 18, 19 as a cabinet is the tops, that 

we've got to restructure the departments of government to fit in 

within that, and that they should carry out their responsibilities 

as efficiently as they can.  But it's not an easy question. 

 

And I would say the last point about reform and I think the 

member will agree with me when I say this.  You can't legislate 

honesty.  I mean honesty is legislated -- the Criminal Code says 

you've got to be honest and so forth.  But you can't legislate 

those things. 

 

(1515) 

 

We can reform our institutions to make sure that they're 

transparent, they're open, and they're efficient, and they're 

responsive as best as you can.  But at the end of the day, 

accountability and responsiveness and receptivity will depend 

on us as individuals, the quality of people that are elected to 

this Chamber. 

 

You can have the best rules and the best reforms, and the worst 

MLAs will stymie this institution.  You can have the worst of 

rules and the worst of reforms, and the best of MLAs can make 

this institution sing, as I have seen it sing in years, in my years.  

And I mean sing -- a great palace of debate, a great forum of 

ideas, a great exchange of philosophies, a clash of personalities 

on a non-personal basis.  It has sung.  And I think some day 

again it will. 

 

But to me, the notion that you can do it by simply legislating A 

to Z . . . now all the stuff that has been advocated, not only by 

you people, in the third party, but even by our side, I'm not 

dismissing out of hand.  But I just know it doesn't matter what 

the rules are; you give me the people, the quality of the people, 

you'll make this Chamber sing. 

 

I remember the debates of Ross Thatcher -- I've referred to this 

in the past -- and Davey Steuart.  I remember some of the 

debates involving Devine and Blakeney, Premiers Devine and 

Blakeney.  If I may say 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

so, involving myself even.  The place might not be exactly 

harmonious, but this was what parliament was all about. 

 

And we're going to continue working . . . (inaudible) . . . 

reforms, and we're not dismissing your reforms out of hand.  

But I think the fundamental assumption behind this has got to 

be really looked at by all of us: whether you can make reform 

and accountability work by rules and statutory regulation alone.  

And I think we can do some of it, but at the end of the day what 

we need to do is to make sure that we are in the spirit of that 

kind of accountability. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, we all remember the 

things of our youth in a better light than we do the present 

sometimes. 

 

One of the issues that you recently dealt with, and it's 

interesting that I would read an article which talks about your 

minister of Municipal Affairs talking about how Buy 

Saskatchewan strategy will be implemented.  She refers to it as 

a new policy of buying from Saskatchewan companies since 

late last year. 

 

I find this rather strange.  I know that you've dealt with this 

recently at a provincial premiers' meeting because the lowering 

of trade barriers is something which predicates against a Buy 

Saskatchewan strategy.  But it was something that was done 

extensively under the previous administration.  I believe 

SaskPower was taken from about 17 per cent of its purchases to 

over 90 per cent. 

 

I'm wondering if you could explain to me the new policy 

initiative of Buy Saskatchewan which your minister of 

Community Services talks about -- this is from Monday, May 

30, so it's this Monday.  And I'm wondering . . . well, I'll quote 

you a little bit more: 

 

 Saskatchewan municipal governments are being encouraged 

by the province to review their policies and make sure they 

are following a Buy Saskatchewan strategy. 

 

To my knowledge, that has been in place for a long, long time 

and I'm just wondering, in the light of the discussions that are 

going on amongst provinces, if you could tell me exactly what 

your minister is up to here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The long and the short of it is, it's an 

attempt to extend your Buy Saskatchewan policy which 

applied, as I understand it, to the departments and agencies and 

commissions and Crowns in government, to third parties -- to 

encourage the municipalities, school boards, anybody who's 

involved in this province, to Buy Saskatchewan.  That is 

essentially what I think is behind the statement of the minister, 

although I must confess I've not read the text of her remarks 

myself. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- How does this square, Mr. Premier, with your 

recent discussions with other premiers on the lowering of 

interprovincial trade barriers, with Saskatchewan placing itself 

in a better position to 

export our technology, our goods and services, some of the 

things that you were talking about in your estimates with the 

Liberal leader the other day, about how Saskatchewan is 

positioning itself in various areas to take advantage of certain 

things.  How will this policy initiative of your government 

square in this recent level of talks amongst provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- There will be no difficulty in squaring 

the circle as far as I can see because in the discussion of the 

lowering of interprovincial barriers, no provincial government 

is surrendering the notion that all barriers should be removed in 

all circumstances.  It is an impossibility in this country and it is 

an undesirable policy, in my judgement.  Some of the premiers 

may disagree with me in this regard; in fact they have disagreed 

with me in this regard. 

 

What we're attempting to do in the discussions is to lower, in 

some of the areas, some of the key barriers in order to make 

sure that as Canadians we are able to move freely and compete 

for the provision of goods and services within the borders of 

this country from sea to sea to sea, understanding that there will 

be the necessity for regional local discrepancies based on 

regional local concerns. 

 

The example that the Deputy Premier uses is northern 

Saskatchewan hiring.  Aboriginal content as an example tied 

into that as well, something which your government also 

pursued under the lease arrangements for the uranium mines up 

there.  There's always room for that. 

 

What we're saying by this statement is, look, not Saskatchewan 

only if this is usurious, if it's not justifiable, if it's much more 

expensive than, say, other competitors as Canadians.  What 

we're saying is that our people can supply just as well, just as 

competitively.  Think Saskatchewan first, buy Saskatchewan 

first. 

 

I'd go so far to say even if the margins were a little bit higher 

for the Saskatchewan business people, give the Saskatchewan 

business person the break.  You don't have to give it to the 

Albertans or the Manitobans.  This is not being un-Canadian, 

it's being pro-Saskatchewan and it's consistent with the 

interprovincial barriers discussions. 

 

The point I wish to make on the barriers, which again is another 

very key point the Leader of the Opposition raises -- this is 

perhaps a bone of contention between he and myself, and 

maybe not -- we will never ever be able to perfect the economic 

union of this country.  We are only 27 or 28 million people, 

most of whom are strung out within 100 miles of the United 

States border.  The north-south pulls are too great; the distances 

are too great; the cultural differences are enormous, as we 

know, witnessing the Quebec debate. 

 

The best that we can do is try to continue to lower those 

barriers while permitting ourselves to build up our regional and 

local economies as best as we can. 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

 And that's been my quarrel with the former administration, 

although I think we came pretty close in Mr. Mulroney.  It's 

been my quarrel with Mr. Chrtien ever since I first got to 

know him in the constitutional talks in '78-79. 

 

I think perfection of the economic union is an ideal, but it is not 

the right economic nor is it, in my judgement, the way in which 

this country of 29 million people survive. 

 

By the way, let me close, you will know this, California -- this 

is perhaps bad geography but it will make my point -- is about 

the size of British Columbia geographically:  30 million people, 

the sixth-largest economy in the world, California alone, and 

that's efficiencies of scale, travel, markets, climate, oceans, 

ports. 

 

We're not even the size of California and we're going from 

Newfoundland, Cornerbrook to Victoria, or right out there at 

the far end of Vancouver Island, where they're doing logging 

these days, Clayoquot Sound or somewhere. 

 

So you have to have these sometimes seemingly contradictory 

positions resolved as best as you can through a reasonable 

compromise. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You don't envision -- and the reason I ask the 

question is that municipal government is a little squeamish 

these days with the way that they've been treated by senior 

level of government -- there are no sort of penalties being 

envisioned here, are there?  This is strictly a voluntary 

pronouncement by the minister as a statement of the 

governmental policy.  We've got nothing here that will once 

again dip into the ratepayers' pocketbooks in any way, is there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, there is nothing by way of 

penalty, financial or otherwise.  This is simply an attempt to 

encourage -- I use it when I say boosterism, in the best sense of 

the word, boosterism -- to booster, bolster Saskatchewan 

business, Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. 

 

I would say to the Leader of the Opposition, as an example in 

today's Leader-Post -- again I'm going to have to start making 

a change in habits and start reading this newspaper.  But this is 

what happens when you have a good media relations branch -- 

small, tight numerically, they put this in front of you.  I know 

that the Liberal member from Regina North West would be 

interested in this. 

 

Page B7.  Big headline:  "Job picture brightens",  "More 

Regina employers expect to be hiring."  Next headline, "Oil, 

gas firm promising."  Next headline, Golden opportunity for 

Cameco -- your corporation.  I give you acknowledgement for 

that and credit.  "Golden opportunity for Cameco in Asia."  

"Farm cash flow improves."  And just to top off the stories, 

"Zero-coupon bonds more attractive now." 

 

Well my point is, what we're trying to say is that that's 

the big picture, we think.  We think that's the big picture.  And 

we're saying to Saskatchewan municipalities, really flesh it out.  

Give it real meaning.  Do whatever you can do by way of 

additional support for Saskatchewan business. 

 

Time to be optimistic, Madam Member, from the opposition 

sides, to make sure that we can really get this ball rolling. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I've got one and my colleague here has one.  

My final question to you this afternoon, Mr. Premier, and it 

goes with your pronouncements earlier this year on gambling.  

Now I know you and the Liberal leader had quite a discussion 

on gaming, and I'm not going to get into that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I know it takes two to argue. 

 

You said over and over and over again that you personally 

didn't agree with gaming.  And I know, for instance, your 

colleague, the minister from Moose Jaw Wakamow, when 

Moose Jaw's downtown improvement district were planning a 

casino back in 1988-89, led a procession down Main Street, 

Moose Jaw against any type of gaming.  This was a very small 

enterprise compared to what your minister from Prince Albert 

is now envisioning.  We're on a much grander scale. 

 

And I guess my only question to you is: do you personally 

believe that Las Vegas-style casinos in our two major cities are 

going to break the track record of most other major casinos so 

far tried, which show about 80 per cent of the players coming 

out of the local economy, 20 per otherwise?  Do you honestly 

think that your government, that your initiative, is going to 

break the mould that everyone else has fallen into?  Is there 

something here that I've missed? 

 

Because if you have a personal distaste for this thing, what the 

numbers are showing all over Canada is that 80 per cent of the 

players will be local, and they will be from the lower ends of 

the economic and social scale.  And I'm not sure that that is 

going to be good for our province.  So is this why you've got 

some personal reservations because you know that probably the 

pattern won't be broken? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, I think the 

hon. member will understand when I say -- and he may not 

accept -- that when you are a government and part of a 

government, you have personal views, and you articulate them 

in the deliberation of government policy.  And at the end of the 

day, government policy is decided by democracy, in a vote in a 

democracy, and that's the end of it.  And our policy on the 

gaming is as we have articulated it, and therefore I support that 

policy.  Obviously if I didn't, I would have no right to be the 

Leader of the Government or the Premier. 

 

Let me talk a little bit about Moose Jaw very briefly.  When 

Moose Jaw arose four or five years ago -- I think the Leader of 

the Opposition will acknowledge this -- this was a proposal for 

free-standing Moose Jaw casino operation, at which point the 

arguments 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

respecting self-government demands of aboriginal people, 

primarily status treaty Indians, was not an issue on anybody's 

agenda.  It was just an idea of a group of Moose Jaw business 

people to get the Moose Jaw casino going. 

 

If our world had remained that way, I would venture into 

offering my personal opinion again to this extent, the extent 

that I can, by saying that I would be with the member from 

Moose Jaw and would be adopting the same position as I did in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

(1530) 

 

But since that time the world has changed.  What has happened, 

amongst other things, are two things:  one, an outflow of 

gaming dollars from the province, which means that somebody 

else profits elsewhere -- that's a fact; and number two, Indian 

bands, the Indian nations of this province take the view that 

under some rubric of treaty, self-government, they have the 

right to set up, amongst other things, casinos; that they are not 

regulated by the Criminal Code -- some of them have taken that 

view.  The best example was White Bear a couple of summers 

ago. 

 

Now therefore if you're in government, you're faced with this 

choice: you can say in government, for a whole number of 

reasons -- perhaps even including the one that you've talked 

about -- no, we're not going into casinos.  Then the moment 

you say that as a government, you've got to mean it.  Because 

then you've got to kick into place the administration of the 

Criminal Code of Canada and the police and the court system 

and the consequences that flow from that. 

 

We know what happened at White Bear.  There was a 4 

o'clock-in-the-morning raid by the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police), machine guns, masks -- they had to do their 

job -- and all the controversy that had ensued.  And with it, all 

of the optics, which are undesirable in any society, the optics of 

a non-aboriginal system enforcing something on an aboriginal 

system, with the leadership of the FSIN taking the point of 

view, perhaps, that flows from that. 

 

So when you combine those two factors, then in government 

you are faced with a very tough position and you either have to 

say yes or you say no.  We have decided yes.  I won't take time 

into telling you all the reasons for because I can't do it any 

better than my colleague the minister in charge of the Gaming 

Commission has done, except to say this specifically to your 

point, to say this -- two things as I sit down on this question -- I 

think there is a difference in the Saskatchewan context 

inasmuch as there -- if you look south of us, immediately south 

of us and the proliferation of casinos that exist there, some of 

them in . . . is there a place called Deadwood? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Deadwood. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Deadwood, where is it?  South 

Dakota? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Population -- 2,700. 

 

You know I have people telling me they get on buses in 

Saskatoon for a 14-hour drive to go to Deadwood, 2,700, two 

nights, and come back to Saskatoon.  I think that Regina, being 

what we are -- 185,000 people, 200,000 people, Grey Cup next 

year, the revitalized downtown, the optimism which is going -- 

that there is a potential for the attraction to this part of the 

community which would attack the notion that 80 per cent is 

drawn from inside the internal core. 

 

I don't know where that breakdown would or wouldn't take 

place.  The experts and the studies of the Gaming minister will 

tell you on that when he considers it.  I think there is that 

possibility and that attraction or that . . . I won't say attraction 

but that development that takes place. 

 

The last point I want to make to you, sir, and to the Leader of 

the Third Party, is what I believe is the necessity here to be as 

logically correct and consistent as you can be, as we can be.  I 

understand in government and politics sometimes it's not 

possible.  But one cannot take the position, as the Leader of the 

Third Party -- as best as I could figure out and I'm checking her 

words very carefully last night and analysing it -- can't take the 

position that says, well bingos may be okay.  Horse-racing may 

be okay.  VLTs (video lottery terminal) may or may not be 

okay.  Those are all forms of gaming.  But I'll draw the line 

there and say that casinos are not okay. 

 

One is either morally, economically, legally, constitutionally -- 

in the relationships of the aboriginal first nations -- for this or 

against this.  Or you can be -- I don't mean any member here -- 

or one can be hypocritical about it and simply pretend that we'll 

outlaw it, and it doesn't exist, knowing full well that it existed 

in the '80s, existed in the '70s and existed in an uncontrolled 

way, unregulated way, undeveloped way. 

 

To give you a flavour of the cabinet debate and the caucus 

debate that goes on, all of those dimensions enter into it from a 

variety of people's perspectives.  And we have concluded as a 

government that we can't rearrange history.  You can't mix with 

the facts.  You have to be logical and consistent.  If that's the 

case then, since you allow so many forms of gaming now, this 

is the next logical conclusion for economic development 

purposes and for aboriginal purposes.  And let's do it in the best 

controlled possible environment and climate.  And where the 

third party, in my judgement, is fundamentally in contradiction.  

And I would argue politically as well -- and to some extent you 

too, sir, because of your members' attacks on this -- is that 

some form of gambling is acceptable or I'll turn a blind eye to 

it; some forms aren't acceptable. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not the point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the member from Rosthern says 

that's not the point; that is the point.  



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Because the only other issue, alternative, is to permit it and to 

do it in the most controlled . . . do the addiction . . . Look, your 

criticisms on the addiction side I think are fair game.  I think 

we're doing a good job; you don't think we're doing a good job.  

I think that's fair game. 

 

But once that you decide that you're going to allow a certain 

activity in society, then you do it either regulated with all of the 

support services attached to it to make it work, or you forget 

about it.  You can't do it the way the Liberals are doing it and 

the way the Tories are doing it, which is basically, as I see it, 

trying to walk all sides of the street or both sides of the street 

on this particular issue. 

 

So that's my answer.  I'm sorry to be long-winded about it, but 

it's a very important topic and one which is not free of 

difficulties.  But that's the government position and that's what 

we are advocating in this Bill. 

 

And by the way, the Bill that's before you is simply a vehicle 

Bill.  I don't want to get into the debate, but it's a vehicle Bill.  

We need an instrument to set this into motion.  It's not a 

regulatory Bill and can be passed off pursuant to the policy 

once the minister finishes piloting the Bill through.  So there's 

nothing magic about this particular Bill one way or the other, 

except that it's the statutory legal requirement to develop this 

instrument for the policy which we've been debating now for 

the last two years. 

 

So I would urge you people, if you can, to see it from our point 

of view and to do the kinds of criticisms that the member from 

Rosthern is doing on hot lines on addiction and things of that 

nature.  But I don't think we can turn back the clock any more.  

Can't go back to the good old days where we sat around on a 

verandah, ate ice-cream and drank lemonade and didn't have to 

worry about violence on TV.  Sometimes I wish we could.  We 

cannot restructure history.  What we've got to do is live with 

what we have. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Premier, I'm going to say a few things 

and then take my seat, because my colleague from Kindersley's 

got one question for you evidently. 

 

But I mean, to listen to you on this issue, I think you probably 

present some of the right reasons.  But the simple fact is when 

you talk about logical and all of these nice-sounding words, 

you're doing the exact opposite.  And the reason I wanted you 

to talk about it was because I know what the member from 

Prince Albert's going to say when we take this Bill through -- 

logical, methodical, doing this right because of first nations 

isn't bringing in a Bill on the 76th day of the session and 

expecting us in a few days time, Premier, to roll over and pass 

this thing through which virtually gives you and your cabinet 

unlimited power. 

 

You look at the sections in there.  I could be Joe Blow from 

Muckinskavich and you could give me a part of the proceeds.  

That simply, Mr. Premier, is not methodical, it's not logical, it 

isn't all of the things that you just answered me.  The reasons 

you gave about Deadwood and about all of these things are 

very  

logical reasons, but the actuality of what we face in this House 

doesn't follow that.  It doesn't, sir. 

 

We are going to have to, in a matter of hours, deal with this 

issue and you are totally free to take a hundred million dollars 

out of the Saskatchewan economy without anyone having 

really any control on you.  I'll take my seat and let this process 

go on but I say to you, look at your own words in Hansard 

about methodical and logical and doing this in a slow, 

well-thought-out process.  This is not well thought out, 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I must make a response to this because 

again this is a very valid question.  And I have to tell the 

Leader of the Opposition and the members of the House two 

things about the Bill.  You can accept it or reject it.  It's up to 

the opposition what you do with it of course, and I mean that. 

 

Number one, the Bill was introduced at the stage that it was, 

not to somehow expect the opposition to let it go through in a 

day or two, although I think it can go through in a day or two 

because -- here's my first point -- the Bill essentially is 

structured like most Crown corporation Bills are under your 

administration and under our administration.  I'll tell you 

something else.  You don't even need to compare the Bills.  If 

you were coming to a law office and you were incorporating a 

company, you would have articles of association and by-laws 

of the corporation which would have precisely the same kinds 

of flexible terminology to it.  There's nothing exceptional to 

this.  Nothing exceptional to this.  This is not unusual. 

 

But the second point is, it came in because the minister was just 

successful a few days ago, as we know, depending on . . . I 

think successful in coming to the arrangement with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and some of the 

other actors, thus permitting us to say to the Assembly, we're 

now ready with the Bill. 

 

Now as I say, this is not a plea for . . . I mean when we finish 

consideration of the Bill, or the House, there's an old saying: 

governments open the legislature, oppositions close it.  You 

people will decide when you close it. 

 

But I'm telling you as a lawyer and I'm telling you as a person 

who's been on the government side and the opposition side, the 

Bill itself and its powers are not unusual vis-a-vis other Bills of 

the same calibre setting up corporations. 

 

Now your question next is what happens with the money, 

there's no accountability in the money.  This corporation will 

be the same kind of corporation, subject to the same auditing 

and the same accounting procedures as is any other 

corporation, of any instrument of the government that has been 

set up, with annual reports, with auditors' comments and 

critiques, with a variety of the caveats attached, just as we deal 

with the Public Accounts or deal through Crown Corporations 

Committee in our day-to-day operations. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

This is not the place to make the stand one way or the other.  

The stand has been made by both you and the Liberal Party in 

virtually every question period.  And after this Bill passes, 

today, tomorrow, one month from now, one year from now, the 

issues will still be before us.  This is merely the vehicle. 

 

If we were able to successfully conclude our negotiations, we 

would have introduced it on day one.  That's what we did with 

the labour Bills.  They've been around now for months.  Why 

would we want to try to do this in the last few days?  I mean, 

it's not going to escape the policy.  It's not going to prevent you 

from getting out tomorrow, if we adjourn tonight, and saying 

that the policy is all wrong.  We don't expect that. 

 

So all I'm saying to you is there's nothing unusual.  If you want 

to concoct the argument that it's unusual because of the issue, 

you can do it.  But if you look at the Bills and if you went to a 

lawyer, these powers are not exceptional, they are traditional. 

 

I decry, unfortunately, the way governments have over the 

years -- it goes all the way back to the '70s -- they give 

themselves more power, regulatory, etc.  But there's nothing 

special or extraordinary in this, that's all I'm saying. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier.  I 

wanted to this afternoon, just for a few minutes, discuss with 

you some comments that you made with the Leader of the 

Opposition earlier this afternoon about democratic reform.  

You had said that you'd certainly looked at all of our Bills with 

respect to democratic reform and the reasons why you wouldn't 

agree to them or the reasons why you would agree to them. 

 

But one in particular that I wanted to discuss with you this 

afternoon, Mr. Premier, was Bill No. 31, the appointments 

review committee, that we presented to the legislature here 

earlier this session.  It's one that I believe is a very important 

piece of legislation.  It gives an opportunity for a committee to 

be set up to review appointments to government, Mr. Premier.  

And I think it goes to the heart of democratic reform because it 

deals with the issue of patronage, Mr. Premier. 

 

You said countless times over the years . . . we can pull the 

record for you if you like on it, the clips of your statements 

with respect to patronage in the past, Mr. Premier, talking about 

. . . when you speak about patronage, you said that former 

MLAs and people that are obvious political appointments, it 

shouldn't be done.  And as I said, I can give you the quotes if 

you like.  I'm sure you recall them, and that won't be necessary. 

 

(1545) 

 

But you've done it, Mr. Premier, on a number of occasions.  To 

my knowledge, I think it's 37 now and counting, the number of 

political appointees that would be considered I think by 

anybody in Saskatchewan as patronage-type appointments, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

We've done it.  The previous administration did it on numerous 

occasions and you pointed them out at every opportunity, the 

kinds of patronage appointments that the previous 

administration did.  I've spoken out in our party as an opponent 

of that type of system and you're probably aware of that.  

Media reports coming out of our annual meeting in Saskatoon 

here recently pointed out that, Mr. Premier. 

 

So I think that the Bill that we presented was an important 

piece of legislation.  I think it was something that unfortunately 

I think you and your government dismissed it out of hand too 

quickly.  It should have been given more thought, I think.  It 

should have been given the merit that it certainly is due, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

We know that your government, as I said, has engaged in 

patronage.  Just one again -- I think it was yesterday or maybe 

even the day before -- Mr. Dombowsky, David Dombowsky's 

been appointed onto the board at the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon.  There's a number of them.  We've 

got the whole list here, Mr. Premier. 

 

As I said, we did it.  You did it.  The only one that seems to 

feel that they are purer than the driven snow on this is the 

Liberals, Mr. Premier.  But unfortunately, it appears that the 

Liberal leader isn't quite as pure as the driven snow on this one 

either. 

 

I'd like to quote to you something that came out of the . . . I 

believe it was a meeting that was held in North Battleford on 

April 17 where the Liberal leader is talking about patronage, 

Mr. Premier.  And I think it points to a certain lack of 

credibility on this issue as well, when we deal with the Liberal 

leader, Mr. Premier.  And I quote, here's what the Liberal 

leader's views on patronage would be, and I quote from the 

paper of April 17, and it says:  Another example, she said, is 

the NDP record of incompetent patronage appointments.  

However, she said she doesn't mean she wouldn't make partisan 

appointments if she were premier. 

 

 This doesn't mean Liberals won't get jobs.  They're 

competent.  If you have someone who's competent and has 

integrity, it doesn't matter what their political stripe is 

because they will do an excellent job. 

 

So I think it's, Mr. Premier, I think it's very obvious that while 

the Liberal leader in here says that patronage will not be a part 

of her administration if she were to form government, it's clear 

that when speaking with Liberals in the supposedly friendly 

confines of a meeting with Liberals that she's trying to present 

to them that she will indeed make patronage-type 

appointments. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Premier, you've made them, we've made them, 

the previous administration made political appointments, 

partisan political appointments, and the Liberal leader now -- I 

guess the mask has come off a little bit with respect to her 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

intentions if she were ever in a position of authority in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, that's why we feel so strongly that that was a 

very important piece of legislation, the Bill 31, dealing with 

patronage appointments.  And that's why it's important, Mr. 

Premier, I think that the people of Saskatchewan would have an 

opportunity to hear more about that piece of legislation and an 

opportunity to have input into it and believe that politicians will 

do the right thing on this for once, Mr. Premier. 

 

And I think we've reached the day, I believe, in society where 

people will not go along with this any longer.  They simply will 

not go along with government after government after 

government making political appointees, patronage-type 

appointees.  And it simply is the case, Mr. Premier, where all 

parties are doing it and all parties have said they would do it.  

But now we have an opportunity and a Bill in this legislature, 

Mr. Premier, which would at least provide some measure of 

control over this type of thing. 

 

And I think, Mr. Premier, that . . . I wondered if you would care 

to make some comments on that type of issue because I think 

it's something that goes towards the integrity of a government, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member raises a very important issue.  And I'm not going to get 

into the debate with him on the issue of patronage lists and 

numbers because he hasn't done it with me, and I appreciate 

that.  So I'm not going to do it either because I think there's a 

larger issue which he is addressing. 

 

May I make one comment, however.  I do agree with him with 

his comments about the Liberal leader and the Liberal Party.  I 

think that the history of the party in power is one which is 

riddled with patronage appointments.  There's no doubt about 

that.  And the clipping which you've alluded to -- got to check 

our media services branch -- I haven't seen yet, but we'll have 

to get a copy of that to take a look at it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're paying them 360,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, okay, don't get into that now.  

Anyway, I agree about that.  I think the idea that you say 

something and then act another way is wrong. 

 

But here let me respond to your position.  Number one, by 

voting against this Bill does not mean that we are voting 

against the notion that there should be a better way to deal with 

what we call patronage appointments.  I just don't think this 

Bill speaks to that issue adequately and we have no alternative 

Bill which is available for us to advance at this stage in the 

game. 

 

And I'll tell you why I don't think it does.  First of all, under 

67.02 of the Bill, page 2, basically the first and second 

categories of positions is the way it is structured now through a 

combination of public service agreements and order in council 

appointments.  In the year '93-94, 1,035 appointments were 

made, of which 1,029 were hired by competition or under the 

terms of the collective agreement.  This would be category 2, 

99.4 per cent under category 2, roughly speaking, on the 

assumption that the Appointments Review Committee, which 

you recommended in the Bill, wouldn't alter the guidelines as 

to what goes into category 2 and what goes into category 1.  

And the number of order in council appointments were .4 per 

cent . . . No, 0.2, and 0.4 were under Public Service 

appointments. 

 

So you can see 99.4 per cent were without order in council 

appointment.  So we roughly have a situation where under 

category 1, patronage positions under your Bill, that's a sliver.  

At the very, very top, they're the ones that make the headlines, 

but it's at the very top only. 

 

But there's an argument for it at the very top.  If the day should 

come that you would occupy the treasury benches, you will not 

be able to appoint people who do not support the fundamental 

policies of the government.  It's simply not possible. 

 

That doesn't mean you have to fire the deputy ministers.  We 

try not to.  I believe in the British model.  In the British model 

you get the deputy ministers preparing new budgets for a new 

government in seven days.  I think our deputies, from my 

deputy to the deputies of the departments, are in that category. 

 

But when we're talking about category 3, you're talking about 

an entirely different kettle of fish.  The example I give is the 

hospital boards which everybody on the opposition side is so 

critical of.  You're critical of them initially because you're 

critical about the initial policy brought under reforms.  How 

could we go through a system where on a highly politicized 

vote of 4 to 3, Joe Blow is appointed which is what your Bill 

recommends?  And I just don't see it working that way. 

 

I'd add one last point if I can to this observation by the member 

from Kindersley and this . . . to the member of Kindersley, just 

for a moment if I can because I think to me this is a very 

important point.  In effect, the proposal which you advocate 

advances to a large measure an appointment mechanism which 

parallels the United States of America.  Now that's not a bad 

model to follow.  It's a great democracy, the United States of 

America is. 

 

But when you have congressional committees deciding 

nominees ranging all the way from court appointments to 

specific governmental appointments and functions, you see 

sometimes the results, a) good people sometimes don't offer 

themselves because they just simply do not want to go through 

the political scrutiny and the politics that takes place in the 

nominations -- Judge Bork is an example and not on the 

Supreme Court of the United States; b) when you have a public 

hearing like that, you have vested interest groups politicizing 

and putting pressure on MLAs for appointments.  A perfectly 

good person 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

might be skewered from an appointment because of a belief on 

choice or on a lifestyle issue or a religious issue or colour of 

skin. 

 

And I just don't think that the American system works.  I think 

accountability under the parliamentary system is the best.  You 

don't like the appointment of Joe Blow made by this 

government, you kick the heck out of us during question period 

and during estimates, which is what you've been doing.  And 

we've got to try to justify it to the public.  If we do, we get 

re-elected; if we don't, we don't get re-elected. 

 

But the key here is to depoliticize as much of it as you can.  

And we think we made very great strides in doing that by these 

numbers that I've given to you. 

 

And I'll close by the way I started.  By voting against this Bill 

at this session does not say that we oppose further 

consideration of the Conservative proposal, the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) proposal, to depoliticize and to 

remove patronage from government.  And you're right, you're 

one member at that convention of yours -- amongst others -- 

who spoke very vehemently against the practice of the former 

government.  I take my hat off to you for that. 

 

But that doesn't mean that this is the Bill.  I think it is not the 

Bill for the reasons that I've articulated.  So we need to 

consider the deliberation of this in a very meaningful way and 

this exercise that the PCs were involved in here in this House 

was, I think, a valuable exercise. 

 

But it cannot be cast in the context that you're against 

patronage and I'm for it.  It's more complex than that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1600) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

officials who have joined us here for consideration of this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

with me today the acting president and CEO (chief executive 

officer) of the Liquor and Gaming Authority, Gordon Nystuen.  

I have Dave Innes, the vice-president of the licensing division; 

Maurice Herauf, the manager of the licensing administration 

branch; Brian Poole, the licence administration branch, the 

assistant manager; Leary Claypool, executive director of the 

Horse Racing Commission; and Susan Amrud, Crown solicitor 

with legislative services and Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 

welcome to Mr. Minister and the officials.  Mr. Minister, the 

Act as such, to amend The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, at the surface tends to 

convey the impression that it's a good Act, and that there is 

some legitimacy to it.  And in large measure I agree with that.  

I think there is some common sense in taking that particular 

stand and making this particular initiative. 

 

But like usual, when I say that, there is a however.  And the 

however is that I don't think necessarily that this particular Act 

can be viewed in isolation.  And I suppose that's where my 

concern would come in. 

 

When I think back to the time when we were in government, 

the Horse Racing Commission was under the Department of 

Agriculture and Food.  And now you are purporting to change 

that, and include it into The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act.  And I guess what that does is probably epitomizes and 

shows most clearly the difference in philosophy of the two 

governments, in that you are putting such a tremendous 

emphasis and hanging your hat on the gaming dollar.  More 

than anything, I think that it just sends that signal. 

 

Now quite frankly, I don't have a particular hang-up about 

bringing it over into that commission, so I don't think that this 

Bill is going to take all that, necessarily all that long. 

 

I am concerned, however, with some of the statements that you 

as minister made during the second reading of the Bill, because 

that tells me that you're not viewing racing in this province 

necessarily as an industry as such, but that you're viewing it 

from the larger perspective of the gaming dollar.  Because what 

you tried to do during your second reading speech is give all 

the wonderful reasons why we are where we are, as the Premier 

did just doing his estimates, and I was kind of fascinated with 

his answer.  Because the two of you are singing from the same 

song sheet and apparently in tune with each other.  Because 

you're trying to set the scenario that this is just the next logical 

step -- the horse-racing, the casinos, the VLTs; that there's a 

progression, that you're just following the natural step. 

 

And again, coming back to this Bill, precisely and directly I 

think I will agree with it.  But what concerns me is a heading in 

the Star-Phoenix or the Leader-Post, whichever -- there's not 

much difference between the two -- and it says, the heading: 

"Lautermilch spurs on horse-race betting."  And a quote that 

they ascribe to you is that: 

 

 The bottom line is we've got to get more people out to the 

track to wager on the horses because that's where the dollars 

come from. 

 

That's your comment, Mr. Minister.  And that underlines and 

underscores, I think, a premiss that causes many people in this 

province some concern.  Is that the only reason?  Is that your 

motivation?  Get more people out so that they can bet more so 

that the government can make more money.  I guess that's 

where the biggest concern of people is. 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

So while there are advantages, while there is this single point of 

entry, and all those kinds of things, maybe we should just take 

a moment, and we don't want to get necessarily on long 

political exposs here, but give me a prcis on how you 

perceive that this amalgamation will be better than having the 

two separate authorities as they were prior to this proposed 

amalgamation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to say 

to the member from Rosthern that the essence of this Bill and 

what we're attempting to do in this Bill is basically 

amalgamate, as you've indicated, the Saskatchewan Horse 

Racing Commission into the things that the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority license.  And what it does on the other aspect is to 

change really the meaning of the licences that we have 

established and the way we license alcohol, the sale of alcohol, 

and it changes it from licence to permits. 

 

I want to say just a couple of words with respect to other 

aspects of why we see the amalgamation as being an important 

. . . certainly we're going to be having some administrative 

savings and that is one of the initiatives that government has 

taken on since we formed government in October '91. 

 

And I think what it will do is allow us in a better way to protect 

the industry.  It's an industry that across North America is 

struggling.  And we understand quite clearly that there are 

something in the neighbourhood of 1,600 direct jobs in 

Saskatchewan that are created by the horse-racing industry; and 

that is really an important component. 

 

I want to refer briefly to your comments with respect to the 

headlines out of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, I believe it was, 

and perhaps the Regina Leader-Post.  And the quotes were 

right, and I certainly . . . I won't suggest to you that I didn't 

make those quotes, because I did.  But I did in the context of 

trying to maintain the base of the jobs, the 1,600 jobs that are 

involved in the industry. 

 

And I think it's important to know that the Government of 

Saskatchewan, now as in the days of your administration, take 

nothing in terms of revenue from the horse-racing and the 

pari-mutuels and the betting that takes place at the track.  

Government has nothing to gain in terms of revenue. 

 

What we're trying to do is decrease our administrative costs.  

The amount of people and the number of people who see and 

view horse-racing as a form of entertainment has been dropping 

and certainly we want to, you know, maintain that job base of 

those 1,600 jobs. 

 

There are a number of people who make their living training 

horses, as you will know, breeding horses, and who work 

directly at the tracks.  And we feel a responsibility to try and 

cut the administrative costs in that industry.  But in no way will 

this Bill increase the number of dollars that go to government 

revenue, because frankly the Government of Saskatchewan 

takes no revenue from the pari-mutuel bets at the 

horse-racing tracks. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you some fairly 

. . . And I want to pick up on the jobs and maintaining the jobs.  

In about two or three questions time we'll pick that theme up 

once more. 

 

I want to go through some of the logistics -- precise questions 

for which I hope you will have precise answers.  What costs . . . 

You've been talking about administrative savings and so on, so 

what cost savings do you expect to obtain by this 

amalgamation?  Give me some hard figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We expect to be able to save in the 

neighbourhood of $500,000 in administrative costs.  A lot of 

what happens in the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority is duplicated now with the separation of the 

Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission and the services 

provided by SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority).  So we're hopeful that we'll be able to save in the 

neighbourhood of $500,000 with this amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well we'll just see how accurate your figures 

are as we go along. 

 

How many people are currently employed by the Horse Racing 

Commission and how many people will be directly dedicated to 

the horse-racing regulation in this amalgamated Authority that 

you're creating?  So two questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm not sure that I got the last part 

of the question, but there are two full-time employees and 12 

part-time employees at the commission.  And the other 

question was? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How many people will be dedicated to the 

horse-racing regulation in this new Authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Basically the savings will come, 

Mr. Member, from overhead, office space, and that type of 

thing.  The number of employees will be maintained.  That 

won't change.  The staffing will be maintained as it is. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I don't think you answered my question.  

How many people are going to be working in the Authority 

dedicated to the horse-racing regulations and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It'll be the same as it is now.  

There'll be two full-time employees and there'll be 

approximately 12 part-time employees. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Twelve part-time?  Is this because of the 

different racing seasons or what would that be for? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It's because of the nature of the 

industry and the fact that it is a seasonal industry. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You mention that there will be 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

savings in terms of office space, consolidation and so on.  How 

will the outstanding leases for the Racing Commission be 

handled?  Will there be any costs associated with the 

abandonment of some of these leases? Because obviously some 

of the leases will not expire when this new Authority is set up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, with respect to the existing 

leases -- and I haven't the details with me here today -- but the 

process is that Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation takes over excess space and deals with excess 

space.  And in the overall scheme of government we're trying 

to disassociate ourselves with a number of lease spaces, that we 

find ourselves to be in a surplus position as well.  As you will 

know, some of the existing leases we've been able to 

renegotiate to a more favourable position based on 

Saskatchewan markets in our province at this time.  So the 

transfer will go to SPMC; SPMC will deal with the excess 

space in the process that they use. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, but Mr. Minister, that doesn't answer my 

question.  Surely you have a figure on which offices will be 

closed, which office will remain open, and what's the length of 

the lease left after that office is vacated, and what is the 

monthly lease rate so that we can get a figure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Just as an example, the office in 

Saskatoon will be amalgamated with the SLGA offices up there 

and we're paying $23,000 a year in lease rates in that location 

in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In which location?  The one that you're giving 

up or the one that you're going to be moving into?  And for 

how long is that lease that you're still bound to pay? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The lease expires in just a little bit 

over a year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what arrangements is SPMC going to have 

to do with this building that will still be leased for over one 

year but will have been vacated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm not aware of any plans that 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation has with that 

particular spot at this time.  What I will do is, from Property 

Management Corporation, ask for an indication as to whether 

or not they have made plans and if so, what those plans are, and 

I will pass them over to the member. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A little while earlier, Mr. Minister, you 

indicated to me that through this amalgamation there would be 

a $500,000 administrative savings.  Does that $500,000 include 

the loss of money on this empty space or have you just ignored 

that in your figuring? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What we will be doing is we're 

going to be shifting the costs of the Saskatchewan Horse 

Racing Commission.  That will be moved into the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority's . . . and it's 

budgeted in there.  The amount of dollars will be spent in there.  

The 500,000 will then 

be money that will be free to put into the horse-racing industry, 

so basically we're shifting the administrative costs from 

Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission into the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, and that's the 

portion . . . the residual portion will be absorbed through the 

SLGA. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What did you mean by your statement that 

that $500,000 then would then be invested into the Horse 

Racing Commission?  I didn't follow the reasoning behind that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There are a number of areas that we 

are looking at in terms of marketing software for the systems.  

There is a request, and certainly we have a need to upgrade the 

security, and requests come on a fairly regular basis for that.  

As well, we may be . . . and portions of this may go into some 

of the pools that assist the industry over the course of the 

seasons. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let's talk a little bit about how this 

amalgamated Authority will work as far as the board structure 

is concerned.  Will there be a single, joint board handling all 

aspects, or will there be different jurisdictions like horse-racing 

be delegated to committees?  How do you foresee this 

amalgamated board working?  Areas of expertise, or everybody 

working on everything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Member, the SLGA will have a 

seven-member board of which two members will come from 

and have expertise in horse-racing, and that will be their 

background.  We've done that with bingos and with the other 

aspects, with liquor, and we've put people on with that kind of 

expertise.  As well, we'll be asking from industry input to put 

together an advisory board to monitor and to maintain a 

proactive approach to horse-racing in the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, different areas of the Authority's 

jurisdiction I believe will be in conflict with each other.  For 

example, the promotion of casino gambling, for example, could 

well have a negative impact on track betting.  How do you see 

the Authority resolving these disputes?  Will one area be given 

preference over another? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well it really isn't the role, in terms 

of marketing of casinos, of the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority.  We will be later this day discussing Bill 72 

that will enable and that will structure a Treasury Board Crown 

that will deal with, I guess, the economic side of the 

establishment of the casinos.  And that will be done by the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. 

 

What we are attempting to do is to put the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority in a position where it is dealing 

primarily with licensing and with regulation.  We see it as that 

kind of an entity as opposed to developing marketing strategy 

for casinos and those kinds of things. 

 

We're really trying to focus on regulation.  We believe that the 

people of the province want a strong 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

regulatory body.  And so what we're trying to do is disassociate 

the operations of the gaming industry and the horse-racing 

industry from the regulatory and licensing side. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let me try another tack then, Mr. Minister, to 

get the answer that I'm looking for.  Have you undertaken any 

studies to estimate the negative impact that casinos will have 

on track betting?  And if you have, could you indicate where 

those studies are and could you share them with me?  Because I 

think, Mr. Minister, you would agree that that $500,000 that 

you're prepared to put into to support the horse-racing industry 

could be gobbled up in very short order if there is indeed a 

negative impact, as I suspect there will be, in this competition 

for the gaming dollar because the competition gaming dollar is 

finite; there is a limit to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess the history of this 

province is such that the casinos have been operating in 

Saskatoon and Regina for a number of years and have been 

competing with the track. 

 

In terms of the changes here, what we are doing, the tax rebate 

from the pari-mutuels is in the neighbourhood of $1.7 million.  

Out of that, there was a $500,000 administrative cost out of the 

$1.7 million.  The moving the Horse Racing Commission into 

the SLGA will give an expanded base.  It will give the whole 

$1.7 million. 

 

In terms of the impact on horse-racing, we don't deny that the 

expanded casinos and the video lottery terminal program will 

have some impact.  It's been the history, throughout North 

America where expanded forms of gaming happen, that 

horse-racing comes under yet more pressure.  It's nothing new; 

it's something that's been ongoing for a number of years and 

we're certainly anticipating that. 

 

We're looking at a number of initiatives that we might do.  

Simulcasting the races on the video lottery terminals is an 

option that we've been looking at.  The exhibition associations 

in both Regina and Saskatoon have asked that we look at how 

we might integrate the video lottery terminal program on site, 

you know, directly close to where the horse-racing operates, 

and so it would have a positive impact on some revenue for 

them in that respect. 

 

The temporary casinos, as an example, are operating for this 

year until we establish the site locations for the expanded 

casinos.  Both are operating on the sites of the horse-racing 

venues in Regina and Saskatoon.  And for this year, at any rate, 

we believe that there will be quite a substantial increase in draw 

of people to the track sites.  And if it, I guess, intrigues or 

interests the people, they'll slip over to the horse track and 

spend some of their time there. 

 

We know and we readily admit that the horse-racing industry is 

under some pressure from expanded gambling all across North 

America.  As an example, we know that a lot of gaming dollars 

that were spent historically in Saskatchewan are leaving this 

province 

to North Dakota and to Montana and to Winnipeg, and those 

dollars are being spent in those provinces.  That is putting 

pressure on the horse-racing industry. 

 

The numbers in terms of the dollars that are spent at the 

pari-mutuels, which basically funds the government input to 

the horse-racing industry, it's been a struggle to maintain it, 

which is why the government is putting at this point a tax 

rebate of some $1.7 million into the industry. 

 

This consolidation will remove the 500,000 from that 1.7, 

which will give another $500,000 of assistance to the 

horse-racing industry.  And in my consultations with the 

industry -- the breeders, the people . . . the trainers, the owners 

-- they view this as a positive move from the discussions that 

we've had with them.  And what we're attempting to do is to put 

some assistance to what is a struggling industry.  And from all 

of the indicators from people who know the industry, who are 

involved in the industry, that pressure is going to continue.  So 

it will be an ongoing struggle to help to maintain a viable 

horse-racing industry in the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I'll pick up on that last point in a question 

or two's time.  You mentioned that the industry has always 

been under pressure from casinos.  Surely you're not equating 

the casinos of the past to what you are proposing in the future; 

surely you're not suggesting that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Another comment that you made was that as one of the 

alternatives that you are looking at of propping up this industry, 

is that you are considering putting VLTs and casinos in close 

proximity to the betting -- the horse-race betting -- facilities.  

Now is this something that is feasible?  Is it up to you to decide 

where these go?  I thought that you had given those over to the 

two major city town councils and their citizens to come up with 

a site as such, and that you had committed to . . . that you had 

committed to, that whatever site was comfortable to them 

would be acceptable to you. 

 

So there seems to be a mixed message here, Mr. Minister.  

Could you clear that up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well there may be, and I'm going to 

try and clear it up if I can. 

 

I guess it's . . . historically, we need to understand that prior to 

1982, horse-racing was the only game in town; there were no 

other forms of gambling.  There was no competition from 

bingos; there was no competition from, basically from the 

casinos.  The casino . . . the bingo dollars, as an example, have 

expanded from '82 to $4 million, to a point where we're looking 

at $150 million spent on bingos which has put, you know, an 

amount of pressure on the horse-racing industry, which for a 

while operated with no competition. 

 

(1630) 

 

I want to explain this one more time.  There are two different 

programs -- there is the video lottery 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

terminal program in the province for which we have purchased 

3,600 machines.  And that is one program. 

 

The casino operation will be separate and apart from the video 

lottery terminal program.  It will operate independently of and 

from the VLT program. We have some flexibility in terms of 

what we do and where we place the video lottery terminals. 

 

The site locations . . . and you're quite right, we have asked for 

input from the two major cities in terms of site selection.  We're 

awaiting the results.  Regina has made their decision with 

respect to location and we'll be developing and putting together 

a process for site selection.  We're in the process of doing that 

right now.  But I need you to know that the VLT program is 

separate and apart from the casino program; those are two 

separate entities. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's what I thought, and I was wondering 

why you would have rolled the two into your previous answer 

when you said, putting on site the casinos and the VLTs.  And 

that's what prompted my subsequent question.  I didn't think 

that you would be willing to put the casinos in the same locality 

as the VLTs and as the betting services. 

 

Mr. Minister, you're quoted in the Leader Star as saying, and 

I've already quoted it once before: 

 

 The bottom line is we've got to get people out to the track, to 

wager on the horses because that's where the dollars come 

from. 

 

Do you see that one of the jobs of this new Authority will be 

the promotion of horse-racing as you have indicated that you 

think it should be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, that kind of assistance to the 

industry would come from the advisory committee that we will 

be establishing in consultation with the industry players and the 

people who are involved in the industry.  That would be the 

role that they would take on. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, obviously you are feeling 

some sympathy and some empathy with the horse-racing folks 

out there -- as I do -- as well, and that's essentially why, if we 

have to, we are going to be taking a fairly close look at this Bill 

because we can, as I said before, see some advantages.  My 

concern is the 1,600 jobs that you are alluding to, and I know 

some of the folks in our area are also dependent upon jobs in 

this area. 

 

However we, at the same time, have to be careful that we know 

what we're doing with the taxpayers' dollars and the regulations 

that are going to be in place to support such an industry.  Now 

when you're saying that we will put $500,000 toward this 

project then I want to make sure that we know what we're 

doing.  And your comments, first of all, are saying that we must 

promote and then you're saying well, maybe I won't promote, 

maybe it's up to them.  It's a situation where your objectives in 

promoting horse-racing and promoting casinos . . . and I'm 

going to say that, 

because when we come into the casino aspect of it you have a 

real vested interest in that because it's bucks in your pockets. 

 

So how do you intend to choose between the forms of 

gambling then in establishing your promoting priorities?  

Because I don't think that you can completely wipe your hands 

off and say, well that'll depend upon the Gaming Authority as 

to whether or not they're going to be promoting horse-racing.  

So I want you to make a distinction there and comment on each 

of those. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The industry has been consistently 

telling us that they want to be involved in their industry, and 

they want to be directly involved in the industry.  And one of 

the recommendations . . . We put out a discussion paper on 

horse-racing last year, and one of the recommendations and one 

of the discussion pieces that we put out was the establishment 

of the advisory committee.  And we had some very positive 

feedback because the players in this industry want to be 

involved in the day-to-day working and the marketing and the 

promotion of it. 

 

My comments I think were really quite justified.  The only way 

the horse-racing industry is going to survive is from the dollars 

that come through the pari-mutuel windows.  Without that 

there's no revenue for purses; there's no revenue for promotion.  

We have an industry that will die and as a consequence 1,600 

jobs may disappear. 

 

I want to say to the member today that in the development of 

the regulations that we are going to put in place, we are in the 

process and will continue to consult with the industry, both the 

horse-racing industry and those affected by the hospitality 

industry, in terms of developing regulations. 

 

I give this commitment to you, that we will be consulting with 

you as we develop these regulations.  I think it's important that 

the opposition . . . and quite clearly you've indicated that your 

goals in terms of maintaining a secure base for horse-racing in 

Saskatchewan are quite similar to mine, as the representative 

from the government side.  And we would want, and we will 

ask, for your input as we put together the regulations that will 

have impact on the horse-racing industry in Saskatchewan.  So 

over the next months we certainly will be consulting with you 

and with your staff, and asking for your input. 

 

Clearly you are involved to the point that you know a number 

of the people who are employed and who work in the industry 

and who are owners, people who have a vested interest, as do 

members on the government side.  And so we would certainly 

appreciate your input as we put together the regulatory package 

for the horse-racing industry in our province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well now that you mention that, what is your 

time frame in terms of the regulations being into effect? 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I guess mainly I'm referring to the 

regulations that will be put in place to govern the sale of 

alcohol with the hospitality industry. The Saskatchewan hotels 

association consultations are going on; the Saskatchewan 

restaurant association.  The industry itself has been very 

instrumental in terms of developing the rules under which 

horse-racing operates, and we don't foresee major changes in 

regulations on the horse-racing industry. 

 

There may be some, but I just say that we give you the 

commitment that as this process and the impact of this, the 

introduction and the passing of this Bill takes place, that the 

regulations that will come as a result of the passing of this Bill 

will be done in consultation with members of the opposition, 

the official opposition, and members of the third party. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that is at least a 

commitment that we will look forward to for . . . and working 

with you on that. 

 

There's another area that I want to turn to now and that is to 

refer briefly to the issue of charities.  As I indicated before, the 

gaming dollar, the monies available, the extraneous money in 

people's pockets is finite and it is certainly limited -- at least it 

used to be under the system that we've had.  With your 

penchant now for laying the economic future of this province 

on the gaming dollar, obviously there's going to be a 

tremendous promotion and a lot of the money that is not really 

expendable is going to be used on your gaming ventures. 

 

So with this expansion in gaming, I think you will admit that 

this will have an impact on charities and the charities across the 

province.  You've admitted that casino gambling will have and 

will draw people away from the racetrack, as such.  Is it not 

true also that people will be drawn away from charity 

sponsored gaming, and what impact is this going to have, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, you know you're quite right.  

There has been some change, and I think some fairly dramatic 

change in terms of gaming and gaming opportunities in the 

province.  I indicated earlier this afternoon that the amount of 

dollars that were going into the bingos and subsequently into 

the hands of charities has been increasing quite dramatically 

since 1982 -- where we had $4 million spend, we're looking at I 

guess something now in the neighbourhood of $150 million. 

 

More and more charities have been seeking profits from 

gambling as a form of revenue to put their programs together.  

And I would just say to the House and I say to the member that 

we are really uncertain in terms of what the impact is going to 

be on the existing forms of gaming.  Until we have the 

programs established, really it's quite difficult to know what 

that impact is going to be. 

 

We were very much surprised this year when we saw the spend 

on bingos increased to the point that it had at the same time it 

was competing with the 

introduction of the video lottery terminal program. 

 

We're cognizant of that fact, and I think this is probably a 

discussion that we'll get into as we address Bill 72, the 

establishment of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

because we have in there, included in revenues from the 

expanded casinos, a charity component which will help to 

mitigate the impact of existing forms of revenue for charities.  

And I think it's an important component.  It's something that 

the member of the third party and you as the critic for the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority had been asking 

for for a number of months. 

 

And as we were involved in our negotiations with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and as our 

discussions continued with the charities across the province, it 

became really quite clear to all of us that there needed to be a 

degree of comfort and an ability to ensure that some of the 

existing charity revenues would not be devastated totally by 

increasing the gaming opportunities in the province. 

 

So the new agreement with the FSIN and the new corporation 

that is established will have a charity component in order to 

deal with the concerns that you raise.  And I think it's, frankly, 

a responsible approach that we took as government -- listening 

to the people of Saskatchewan, listening to the people involved 

in charities; it was their desire that we do that.  The member 

from the third party indicated that she saw a necessity for that, 

as have you, and we have moved to put that component in 

place. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well you're talking as if you've done a lot of 

consultation with charities and everything is just perfect as far 

as they are concerned.  So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you, what 

consultation have there been with charities?  Which charities 

are you talking about?  Could you be a little bit specific in 

terms of your actual consultations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We can certainly provide you -- and 

we have provided during, I think, question period debates in 

this session -- a list of the consultations that we have had not 

only with charities, but with the horse-racing industry and 

people connected to that industry.  And I think as I recall it was 

probably 20 pages, 30 pages thick. 

 

We have had consultations with the officials . . . or by the 

officials with some of the charities, met with numerous bingo 

associations, exhibitions, exhibition societies, and the list goes 

on.  But I will send across to you another copy of the list of 

consultations that have gone on not only with the minister's 

office but with the officials from the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Your government is fond of saying, Mr. 

Minister, that we've consulted a whole bunch and therefore 

give the impression that everybody is happy.  Are you telling 

me now that the charities that you have had these discussions 

with and those that you may have omitted are happy with your 

plan right now? 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, I wouldn't want to suggest to 

the member that there are no concerns out there because quite 

clearly the charities are concerned about their existing revenue. 

 

We have changed the way bingos operate in this province, 

we've established the association model of operation of bingos 

in the province, and that has meant a change really in terms of 

the number of charities that have been involved in bingo 

revenues.  Some have lost.  There are some charities, and some 

very worthy charities, who don't have the revenue that they had 

a couple of years ago because of the nature of the change in the 

associations and the charities who have been involved. 

 

We have more and more charities on an ongoing basis looking 

for access to bingo funds.  And I certainly don't want to get off 

of the topic of this Bill, but I guess in the context of the impact 

on horse-racing and charities, they are both concerns of mine 

and of yours.  And I wouldn't suggest to you that there isn't a 

degree of concern out there about the impact of the expansion 

of gaming opportunities because there is, which is one of the 

reasons that we have included a charity component in the 

expanded casino agreement that we have signed with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  And I think really 

we're taking a responsible approach. 

 

(1645) 

 

Change never comes easy, whether it be in health care reform 

or whether it be in the development of the gaming industry.  

We live in difficult times and money is not that easy to come 

by.  So quite clearly, we have those concerns out there from a 

lot of different sectors. 

 

But as I say to you, we're cognizant of the fact that there are 

changes happening, and the change frankly is inevitable and 

we're dealing with that and trying to manage that in the best 

way and in the most responsible way that we can. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, we're both on a slippery slope 

here and the slippery slope is that we're tending to gravitate 

toward Bill 72.  And I've asked the technical questions, at least 

most of the technical questions that I have on this particular 

Bill, except to say to finish off this idea on the charities, you 

obviously must have done a bit of research on this. 

 

Now I would like to have some kind of a study in my hand 

from your department or your government that indicates the 

impact that your new gaming strategies, your . . . first of all, 

your penchant for promoting and advertising and increasing the 

amount of gaming dollars spent on horse-racing that you have 

committed yourself to and your other gaming strategies and 

initiatives.  What impact is that going to have on charities 

without getting into Bill 72? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We have commissioned a number 

of studies, I would say to the member from Rosthern, that deal 

with the impact of expanded gaming in the province, many of 

which are not 

available for public consumption because a lot of them deal 

with third party information.  And I think the member will 

understand that. 

 

I think probably the most important measure is what has 

actually in fact happened since the expansion of gaming has 

taken place and that would be since we're introduced the VLT 

program.  And what I will do is ask my officials to put together 

all of the statistics since that has taken place and will send an 

updated list of those across to you.  I think the measure of the 

impact will be evidenced quite clearly in that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, now this Bill 

that you're bringing forward, it brings horse-racing under the 

purview of Liquor and Gaming, and of course, we're all for 

efficiencies, Mr. Minister, but there's a few things that I would 

like you to address and that's the future of the horse-racing 

when of course your gaming policy is clearly detrimental to the 

handles that horse-racing is generating. 

 

I understand from your comments that you will save about a 

half a million dollars and I'm just wondering what you intend to 

do with these savings.  Do you intend to direct these savings 

into the horse-racing industry, or what is your intent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well what we know is that there's 

about a half a million dollars on administration and costs of 

running the independent commission that will now be available 

to enhance the pool, the fund that goes . . . the purse fund.  It's 

not a great deal of money and we admit to that. 

 

But government hasn't been in the past subsidizing 

horse-racing.  What we have done is rebated the percentage of 

the pari-mutuel fund that government would normally take as 

a fee.  We have historically been remitting that to the 

horse-racing industry.  As I indicated to the member from 

Rosthern, that was in the neighbourhood of a gross amount of 

$1.7 million, out of which $500,000 was used for purposes that 

although they did have an impact -- you needed the 

administrative dollars -- it wasn't money that would go directly 

into the owners and into the hands of the industry and the 

people who make that industry work and who create the 1,600 

jobs that are directly impacted and directly happen as a result of 

horse-racing. 

 

So it's not a great amount.  We recognize that.  But $500,000 

out of $1.7 million is no small amount, and I believe will be 

well received by members of the industry as a result of this 

initiative. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well that's surprising, Mr. Minister, 

because we too are concerned about the 1,600 people that earn 

their living or portions of their living through the horse-racing 

and investing in breeding stock and so on.  And I'm looking at a 

letter here.  I have a letter that you had sent to the 

Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission and those people 

involved.  This letter, I guess, is sent out in October, 1993.  I 

guess you'd made reference to 



2784 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

having sent a copy of this letter to the Liberal leader because 

of, I guess, a very brief and minuscule period in which you 

claim there is some ownership involvement in the industry.  

But this letter of course didn't go to the Liberal leader. 

 

But I want to refer to a few portions in it because now you're 

saying that the half million dollars is to go just into the prize 

pool . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that's what I 

understood you just to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

I'm asking you -- the other member is gone now. 

 

But what you said just moments ago was that it would go to 

enhance the prize pool, I understood?  Well then, you can 

clarify that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What I said to the member from 

Rosthern, and if you'd been listening you would know that I 

suggested that the advisory board would be in a position to use 

some of this incremental dollars for marketing, for software in 

terms of developing programs. 

 

There's also a security aspect.  There are pieces of equipment 

that are required in order to maintain proper regulatory function 

at the track.  And quite clearly there are a number of areas that 

this will be used for.  And I'm assuming that the advisory board 

that we will be establishing, and the advisory committee, will 

know best how to move this money around. 

 

We see the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority as a 

regulatory and a licensing body, and that's what we intend to 

be.  This $1.7 million is a rebate that is not collected from the 

pari-mutuel windows; it's money that is turned back to the 

industry and I think that's where it's appropriately put.  It is an 

industry that is struggling to survive. 

 

I think we've made some very positive initiatives in terms of 

the consultations we've had with the industry over the past 

months and years, at least since this administration has been in 

place.  And I want you to understand that there is other money 

that goes into the operations of the horse-racing industry. 

 

We've been threatened in this province, with the Prairieland 

Exhibition on an annual basis saying they aren't going to be 

running the Thoroughbreds in Saskatoon.  And we work very 

closely with them to try and assure that Thoroughbred racing 

happens in the Prairieland Exhibition grounds up in Saskatoon.  

And it's been a struggle that we've had for the last two years 

that I've been directly involved in it.  But we've been able to 

ensure that it happens. 

 

I want you to know and I want you to be reminded, there are 

many areas where the horse-racing industry has come to a 

complete, dead halt.  It stopped; it's just gone.  We've been able 

to maintain it.  Is it healthy?  The answer is, it's marginal.  But 

we will do what we can in the interests of the industry to 

maintain the jobs. 

 

I want to say to you that I don't propose to be an 

authority on the horse-racing industry.  It's very much a unique 

culture, and I have met some very interesting people since I've 

been sworn in as minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 

horse-racing industry.  They best know their industry; they're 

involved in it directly.  And this is why we have established the 

advisory committee, so that people who know the industry, 

who understand the industry, can better deal with the 

day-to-day problems.  And that's what we have attempted to do 

by establishment of that committee. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  In the letter 

then that you sent out on October '93, I'm just going to quote 

from it: 

 

 Despite the difficulties that have faced this industry over the 

past several years, our research and studies show that with 

goal-oriented, long-term planning now under way, the 

potential for the industry renewal is extremely positive. 

 

So the questions that would come from that statement is: 

describe what goals that you're referring to and which studies 

you're referring to in the letter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I think, to put it simply to the 

member, the goals would have to be to enhance the stability of 

the industry.  And I think that that's quite clearly what we're 

attempting to do.  Have we achieved all we've set out to do?  

The answer is no, not at this point. 

 

One of the things that we're attempting to do is to focus the 

administration of the Horse Racing Commission within the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority.  And I think 

that's important. 

 

What are we attempting to do?  Quite clearly, if we don't have 

the purses to support the breeders, we're not going to have a 

good quality of stock.  And one of the things that we need to do 

to attract people is to have a number of horses in the field who 

are competitive and have a good quality of stock.  Quite clearly 

the market share that needs to be developed in terms of the 

whole gaming dollar needs to be protected and enhanced where 

we can.  And certainly those are some of the goals that we hope 

to achieve. 

 

I would want to say to the member from Shaunavon, if you 

have some ideas and some thoughts with respect to how we 

might better protect or enhance the industry, that he would 

want to sit down with the Leader of the Liberal Party and 

perhaps they would be willing to share some of their thoughts 

and some of their ideas with us as we develop the future, and a 

long-term, hopefully viable future for horse-racing in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think now 

we'll go back to the question I asked.  Your letter refers to some 

long-term planning, and you do this with studies, I can only 

assume, and you state here:  the potential for industry renewal 

is extremely positive. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

And that's what I'm asking you, is how do you see this 

potential?  By what studies are you referring to?  What 

planning have you done?  In your letter you're referring to 

planning, so just tell me it now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me go through some of the 

suggestions and some of the things that we have itemized in 

terms of plans.  We have looked at a multi-year planning 

horizon, in terms of the rebate, for the pari-mutuel tax.  And I 

think that's long-term planning and I think that's important.  

Regulatory reform and the amalgamation of the Saskatchewan 

Horse Racing Commission with the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority, and I think that's long-term planning. 

 

Industry development, we have indicated that we will appoint a 

nine-person horse-racing and breeding advisory board made up 

of representatives from different organizations from the 

different tracks, and that we would seek their counsel and their 

involvement in the development over the long haul.  We need 

to know that we have management both in terms of the 

Standardbred operation and in terms of the Thoroughbreds, 

who are in concert with the industry and who are supportive of 

the industry and who want to manage in the long-term interests 

of horse-racing in Saskatchewan. 

 

In terms of people coming to the tracks to share that form of 

entertainment, I think quite clearly it's important that we have a 

reasonable marketing strategy and that people are made aware 

that we have a good quality of horse-racing in the province.  It 

doesn't take a Wall Street lawyer or three university degrees to 

understand that business is business.  You've got a market, 

you've got to have sound management, you've got to have a 

product to sell, and you've got to have a commitment to the 

business.  And I want to say to you that in all of these areas we 

have developed a plan. 

 

(1700) 

 

Now you may not be satisfied with the plan, or it may not be 

enough for you, or you may want a study done by a 

professional from goodness knows where -- I don't know what's 

on your mind -- but I want to say to you that the suggestions 

that came from the paper that we put to the industry have been 

most helpful in terms of developing for us a long-term future. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I mean it's in your 

letter that you keep referring to this positive renewal -- well just 

about the entire letter is talking about renewal of the 

horse-racing industry.  In fact the closing comments, and it says 

and I'll quote: 

 

 In closing, I encourage you to develop your breeding 

program, select your racing stock, and count on employment 

plans with the confidence that horse-racing in Saskatchewan 

is about to realize its true potential through renewal. 

 

Now are you guessing at this, or did you do a plan, or 

 you know there's going to be some renewal?  Because I look at 

a study -- I guess it's one that you had sent over -- Encouraging 

Stability & Innovation: To Revitalize the Horse Racing 

Industry in Saskatchewan.  I look at . . . on page 7 of this study 

it says: 

 

 Since the mid-1970's gross gaming revenue spent on horse 

racing has decreased as a percentage of total money spent on 

gaming from 100 % to less than 3 % currently. 

 

 This decline is in part due to the enhancement of gaming and 

entertainment opportunities throughout Saskatchewan with 

the introduction of expanded lottery programs, bingos, and 

the new VLT program. 

 

So then you're, I guess, trying to convince the people with your 

letter that there's some sort of renewal, and they should go out 

and spend monies and employ more people, as you're saying, 

get into more breeding programs.  But yet I don't see anything 

to back it up, that you intend to promote or do anything more 

for the horse-racing industry than I guess make them feel good 

by sending them out a letter. 

 

So what I'd like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is give me an 

evaluation of what potential you see in Saskatchewan for 

horse-racing.  And also given this study that I just quoted from, 

tell me what the impact of the VLTs and some of these other 

gaming opportunities you called will have on the horse-racing 

industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me answer the member in 

this way.  I mean you refer to -- and I know the paper you're 

referring to -- it's a document called Encouraging Stability & 

Innovation: To Revitalize the Horse Racing Industry in 

Saskatchewan.  The document was shared with the different 

stakeholders, the horsemen's benevolent and protection 

association, the Metis Society, the Regina Exhibition 

Association, the Horse Racing Commission, the Institute for 

Applied Arts and Technology.  I mean it was a fairly 

widespread document asking for input from the industry in 

terms of how we develop the future. 

 

You quote from page 7 of the document that since the 1970s 

the revenue spent on horse-racing on gaming has decreased 

from 100 per cent to less than 3 per cent.  So don't 

over-dramatize what we're talking about here.  When 

horse-racing was the only game in town and when there were 

no other forms of gambling opportunities, quite clearly 100 per 

cent of that revenue went to horse-racing. 

 

Since then you've seen an expansion into the bingos in the 

1980s.  You've seen the introduction of the video lottery 

terminal program.  You've seen an expansion, and you see the 

two proposed casinos, and you know full well that there's going 

to be pressure as there is in other jurisdictions on the 

horse-racing industry. 

 

What we're attempting to do is to minimize the impact and 

assist where we can.  Now you may not be 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

comfortable with what we've been doing, and you may not 

agree with the amalgamation and the administrative savings 

with the amalgamation of the Horse Racing Commission into 

the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority.  And that's 

fine with me. 

 

And you may not understand, as I don't profess to understand, 

this industry in detail, and perhaps what you might do is 

consult with the Leader of the Third Party, with your colleague, 

and she might be able to explain some of the past problems of 

the industry, and she may in fact have some solutions that she 

might put forward with respect to the industry and the 

development and its future. 

 

And I say to you again, it doesn't take a Wall Street lawyer to 

understand that in order to have a successful industry, you've 

got to have a good product.  In order to do that you have to 

have money into the hands of the breeders and the trainers, and 

you have to be able to market your product.  It's not unlike any 

other business.  And when you've got increased competition, 

you know that you have to be innovative in terms of marketing 

your product with the increase in competition for the gaming 

dollar. 

 

But I want to remind you, sir, that as you have indicated there 

is a finite gambling dollar -- you or the member from Rosthern 

at some point in time.  But you need to understand that gaming 

is a growth industry, not only in Saskatchewan but across 

North America.  The bingo revenues are up.  The casino 

revenues are up.  The raffle revenues are up. 

 

The horse-racing industry has not been, for a number of years, 

experiencing increases in the number of dollars that are spent at 

the pari-mutuel window, and that may be because it's not a 

form of entertainment that is widely enjoyed, as widely as 

others.  So you've got the competition factor.  Now you can't 

force people to spend their entertainment dollars in one 

particular hotel or restaurant.  You can't force them to be there.  

You can only offer and put your best foot forward.  And if 

people choose to involve themselves in that direction, then 

they'll do that.  But you can't create, and you can't do the 

impossible. 

 

So I say to the member, we're working with the industry, and 

we will continue to work with the industry to develop 

long-term planning and long-term stability for the industry, if 

that in fact is possible.  That's our goal.  That's what we hope to 

achieve.  You may not agree with the methods that we're using, 

and that's fine, but that's the way it's going to be.  We're going 

to work with the industry in the best interests of that industry. 

 

And you refer again to the introduction of the video lottery 

terminal program, and I find it quite interesting that you, as 

well as the leader of your party, can sit on both sides of the 

fence day after day after day.  Your leader says that some of 

her friends support gambling and some of them don't, and she 

supports her friends.  And we know that; that's quite clear.  

That's quite clear.  She doesn't take a position. 

Now is she suggesting or are you suggesting that we shut down 

the video lottery terminal program?  Because if you are -- I 

know it's competing with the horse-racing industry -- and if 

that's what you're suggesting then perhaps you want to go back 

to your riding in Shaunavon and you might want to consult 

with some of the hotel industry down there and some of the 

people who are in an ailing industry and were facing 

competition from video lottery terminals across the Montana 

border and across the Alberta border, and ask them if they 

would support your plans to shut the VLT program down. 

 

So don't give us both sides here.  You've got to be a little 

consistent, and at some point in time I think you might.  But I 

say to you, if you want to work with us, we're more than 

willing to share with you your thoughts and our thoughts.  

We've offered, and I offer the same to you and your colleagues 

-- the members of the third party -- if you have some ideas we'd 

be more than willing to hear them. 

 

I don't profess to be, as I've said before and I'll say it again, an 

authority on horse-racing in Saskatchewan.  It's a unique 

culture and it's an industry that few are familiar with, and we're 

working with the industry to do what's best for them because 

they know what's best for them.  And that's why, as a result of 

this paper, we'll be establishing the nine-person advisory board. 

 

But I would like you for a minute to refer to the Bill and 

perhaps you would tell us . . . And I mean if we're going to 

discuss the Bill, which is what I think we would want to do -- 

it's Bill 33; it deals with the consolidation of the Saskatchewan 

Horse Racing Commission with the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority -- and I ask you, do you agree with the 

concept of cutting the administrative costs and amalgamating 

these two operations, or don't you? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, you talk about 

inconsistencies.  That answer showed a lot of inconsistencies 

that you've been playing with all evening.  In fact if you want 

to continue with the political answers, you may find yourself 

here for a long time. 

 

A few minutes ago you talked about trying to lessen the impact, 

minimize the impact of other forms of gaming on the 

horse-racing industry, and that's totally inconsistent with this 

letter where you're talking about all the potential, and you want 

people to invest.  And yet your government is just going to try 

and lessen some impact. 

 

Another thing that you're extremely inconsistent about, Mr. 

Minister, you first said that, well you wouldn't have VLTs at 

the track.  Then of course you went and put VLTs next door at 

the exhibition grounds.  You said, well casinos will draw 

people back to the track.  Now you're planning to move the 

casino off the exhibition grounds, move it downtown.  So that 

seems very inconsistent.  In fact I'm wondering if now you 

think that perhaps you should move the horses downtown. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2787 

Mr. Minister, I'm just wondering if you can evaluate the impact 

of expanded casinos, and there's a couple of studies that were 

done.  The Fox study and Harrah's study say that handles will 

drop by 10 per cent when the casinos open.  So just, without 

being political, tell me what the impacts are.  You of course 

have dealt with the studies, or you wouldn't be able to know 

how on earth you're going to minimize impacts or create 

potentials for the industry's renewal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, let me say to the 

member that quite clearly the access to the market is what is 

going to be inevitably the success or the failure of this industry. 

 

The industry has been quite clear in telling us that that is the 

position that they would want to be in, is to where they have 

access to the market.  And they know they have to have a good 

product in order to sell.  They understand that. 

 

And they have asked us as well to act.  The Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority is the regulator and the licensing 

of horse-racing.  And that's what this Bill allows.  What this 

Bill allows is that the SLGA becomes the regulatory and 

licensing body, and the industry will be more responsible for 

the access to their market. 

 

Now if you want to know in exact detail the impact on 

horse-racing by expanded forms of gaming, what you need to 

do is look at documents that may or may not be available -- I 

don't know -- from the Manitoba experience.  You might want 

to look at Ontario.  You may want to look at some markets in 

the southern states. 

 

You will find variances in all of those different areas and all of 

those different jurisdictions.  There isn't one area where the 

impact will be identical to the other.  And we're not going to 

know in the Saskatchewan context what that impact is going to 

be until the expansion has taken place. 

 

But what I say to the people in the horse-racing industry, as I've 

said to them before, we will work with them in order to help 

them access the market, the gaming market.  We will, as the 

regulator and the licensing body of the Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority, develop regulations and develop a 

system that will allow them to operate in the least cumbersome 

way possible.  And that's the direction that we take.  And if the 

member would agree to that, we would certainly be more than 

willing to work with them in terms of that concept because I 

think what is important to members on the government side of 

the House is the people who are working in that industry and 

who depend on it for their living. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, as I referred to before, the 

Regina exhibition, they've noticed about a 40 per cent decrease 

in betting since VLTs and expanded casinos were opened at the 

Buffalo Buck Casino.  Now of course people may be dropping 

by, but they're not betting.  In fact the opposite is true, and 

they're leaving the racetrack and dropping by the casino to 

invest money they used to bet on the horses. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I want to know from you is what exactly are 

you going to do to preserve the income levels of the racing 

industry, in light of the competition that you've created? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well can I ask the member, is he 

referring to a 40 per cent decrease in the last six days that 

they've been running in this season.  Because I haven't got 

those figures here.  Is it this season that you're suggesting 

there's a decrease of 40 per cent? 

 

(1715) 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well it's been a 40 per cent decrease since 

the introduction of the VLT program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member, I 

mean they've been operating for six days or six running days in 

this season.  And are you . . . is this what you're referring to?  

Or are you referring to maybe when we had the pilot project -- 

150 machines in the south-east corner -- that was impacting?  

I'd like a little clarification here in terms of seasons, in terms of 

running days, and the decrease, the 40 per cent that you allege. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, you're just playing games 

with whether it's seasons or running days.  The fact of the 

matter is there's a huge decrease; you and I both know that.  

And I'm asking you what plans your government has to 

preserve some income levels in the racing industry, because 

they employ 1,600 jobs, as you said earlier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well as I said to the member 

opposite, we knew and we understand that there's going to be 

pressure on this industry as gaming expands.  What is difficult 

to ascertain is whether this is an impact as a result of the 

increase in bingo dollars that are being spent.  Is it as a result of 

the introduction of video lottery terminals?  Is it as a result of 

the number of dollars that are spent in casinos?  Or is it a 

combination?  Is it as a result of the number of dollars that are 

spent in raffles?  Because all of these forms of gaming dollars 

have increased, which is quite clearly an indicator that people's 

preference has not been for horse-racing. 

 

If your figures are correct and there is a 40 per cent decrease, 

quite clearly people's preference has been for other forms of 

gambling.  They're not spending their money at the racetrack; 

they're spending it on raffles and on bingos and on the video 

lottery terminals and in the casinos, in the casinos that are 

operating around the province. 

 

So to establish which particular area of expansion in gaming 

has caused the problem is fairly difficult.  If your figure of 40 

per cent is right -- and we don't argue that it is or isn't -- what 

we say is we anticipated and we knew that there would be a 

fairly dramatic impact on the industry.  But there has been over 

the past years.  As bingo expanded in the 1980s, the 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

impact became more and more dramatic, and we don't deny 

that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I guess, given your 

comments this evening, you'd love to have that letter that you 

sent out last October back, where you're talking about all this 

potential for renewal because that's certainly not where your 

mind is at today.  In fact what I'm hearing from you today is 

essentially that your government has given up on the 

horse-racing industry and the 1,600 jobs that are attached to it. 

 

Mr. Minister, will horse-racing have a guarantee of revenues 

under the charitable component of Bill 72? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member from 

Shaunavon that there are a number of ways that we can open up 

access to the horse-racing market, and we're looking at all of 

those at this present time.  I mean it doesn't follow that to bet 

on horse-racing you have to attend to the track and to the site 

where the racing is taking place. 

 

We're looking at interact on video lottery terminals and what 

we might be able to do on that regard.  We're looking at the 

expanded casinos and the possibility of putting in access to the 

tracks at the casino.  There are people who may not want to 

attend to the track but who would, as part of their entertainment 

time -- they attend the casinos -- would want to spend a little 

time betting on the races either in Saskatoon or in Regina. 

 

And I just say to the member, you can make all of the 

assumptions in terms of our sincerity with respect to the 

horse-racing industry that you want, but I say to the people in 

the industry and I say to the people of Saskatchewan that we 

are concerned that the industry be maintained, and we are 

looking at new and innovative ways of bringing more dollars to 

the industry. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you know what I've 

heard from you in the last while here is of course reasoning or 

excuses that competition which your government has brought 

in to the horse-racing industry, it's the reason the industry is 

dying.  And of course, horse-racing industry is relying on a 

great deal of labour and investment; and of course VLTs, on 

the other hand, don't.  I mean they're just . . . they're inhaling 

the money of the people of the province. 

 

So my question is: what are you going to do to make things 

fair?  Are you not going to be concerned about the 1,600 jobs 

and the investment that brings in?  Or is your government just 

bent on raking as much money from the general public as they 

can through the VLT program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well you know, let me say to the 

member -- and I don't claim to be an authority on this industry; 

I certainly am not -- what I can tell you is that you don't have to 

be at the racetrack to gamble on horse-racing.  Over half of the 

drop, over half of the handle, is from telewager -- not betting 

even on the races that are running before the people 

who are attending at the track. 

 

As an example, Chicago, Illinois, has not got a casino industry.  

They haven't got the casino competition.  What they have is a 

major racetrack, Arlington Park, that is going broke.  So I mean 

you can make all the assumptions that you wish.  I can only say 

to you that I know that the horse-racing industry across North 

America is in trouble and there are a number of reasons that 

can cause that. 

 

What I also know is that this government is committed to 

working with people in the industry to ensure that we maintain 

that industry and to ensure that we will if possible maintain a 

viable industry and protect those 1,600 jobs. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have some 

comments regarding Bill 33, An Act to amend The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act. 

 

Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, after reviewing this legislation, I must 

say there are a number of things within it that are 

improvements.  These will undoubtedly benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill improves the rules concerning the transport of alcohol 

between the permit holder's business and the franchise of the 

liquor vendor.  In the past only couriers were allowed to do this 

work.  Under these changes, permit holders will be able to 

transport their own product. 

 

Another improvement is the ability . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Another 

improvement is the ability to transfer a permit to the spouse or 

estate of the deceased upon the death of the permit holder.  In 

the past, the survivors of a permit holder for a dining or 

beverage room had to go through the long process of applying 

for another permit through order in council.  This placed 

unnecessary stress on people whose lives were already 

complicated by the death of a friend or a loved one. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is a good provision.  And I say with 

confidence that my constituents in Regina North West will 

support anything that reduces bureaucratic red tape. 

 

I also see improvements in regulations concerning cooking 

wine.  The amendments in this Bill recognize problems of 

controlling the sale of this product as well as the hazard it 

presents to public health. 

 

Furthermore, this Act will clarify the rules to allow limousine 

services to acquire permits.  It continues to allow sampling of 

products within liquor stores, giving customers more 

opportunity to try new products and make better choices.  

These amendments, while minor, are all sound and reasonable 

improvements to our current liquor laws. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

Although I support these improvements in the Bill, Mr. Chair, I 

have concerns with other aspects of the Bill.  I believe that 

through this Bill the government is continuing to follow a path 

that the people of Saskatchewan have become so accustomed to 

in the past two and half years.  That well-trodden path I believe 

is quickly wearing out from overuse.  At every turn we see the 

government moving matters of legislation into the realm of 

regulation.  This Bill is but one example.  Numerous sections 

of the legislation it amends will be removed from the statute 

books and placed in the regulations.  I am alarmed at this 

process but somehow not surprised. 

 

Why does the government want to continue to remove 

decisions from the legislative process where they are quite open 

to view, unlike in regulations?  I understand full well, Mr. 

Minister, that regulations must follow a proper process, just 

like legislation. 

 

My concern is that the regulatory process is far too obscure, far 

too closed, and too tempting for government to use.  This 

defeats the purpose of regulations.  Regulations are meant to 

refine legislation to account for what cannot be foreseen, to 

temporarily allow legislation to be effective until it can be 

amended.  Regulations were meant for those purposes. 

 

They were not meant to be used as tools to make major 

decisions.  People fear regulations, because before they know 

it, the government has changed a regulation without consulting 

them, without major public debate, and without taking the time 

to listen. 

 

Decisions to change regulations can have a profound impact, 

especially in the beverage and dining-room business.  I would 

like your comments on that particular issue, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member from 

Regina North West, I really find this quite ironic, because I 

think if you were to research Hansard, you would find that -- I 

think it would have been in about 1988, just shortly after I was 

elected to this legislature and was a member of the opposition; I 

was the critic of the then-minister, Graham Taylor, who was 

minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor Board and 

Liquor Licensing Commission and he introduced a piece of 

legislation -- that I used the same critique that you now use 

with respect to moving from statute to regulation.  And I have 

to say in hindsight, I was wrong. 

 

And the reason I was wrong is because of the nature of the 

industry and the changes that have occurred since I've been 

monitoring the operations of the hospitality industry and the 

changes, and how the sale of alcohol and the different venues 

and the styles and the types of businesses have changed. I'm 

quite convinced that my critique, although well-meaning, was 

not founded on I guess a pragmatic position, because it just . . . 

it doesn't work. 

 

And I just want to give you an example of the situation that we 

encountered in my home town, in Prince 

Albert, just recently.  We had an inquiry -- the Liquor and 

Gaming Authority -- had an inquiry from a young businessman 

who asked and was applying for a licence to establish a 

neighbourhood pub.  Well the whole concept and the whole 

way we retail and the way the hospitality industry is presenting 

their product has changed and continues to change so 

dramatically we didn't have a place for him. 

 

So I guess what that would have meant, had we not been 

introducing this Bill, would be that we would yet have another 

category of a class B licence and we've got 15 of them now.  

We've got class A which is basically not age restrictive, it's a 

restaurant situation.  We've got class B in which we have 15 

categories; those are all age-restricted venues.  And then we've 

got class C which deals with the manufacture of beverage 

alcohol. 

 

What this Bill does is it allows us to refer -- instead of licences 

-- but to refer to them as permitted areas.  It gives us a little 

more flexibility in terms of dealing with the business 

community and their aspirations and their changes. 

 

One other example is the brew pubs which, up until a few years 

ago, was a concept that wasn't known to our province.  So what 

we're attempting to do is allow the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority, through regulation, to deal with the needs and the 

concerns of the Saskatchewan hospitality industry, and to be 

able to quickly move when there's an area that they need to see 

addressed. 

 

I should tell the member that we are in the process of 

consultation with the restaurant association, with the 

Saskatchewan hotels association, and others who we have 

asked to be involved in the drafting of the regulations because 

they best know what will serve the needs of their industries in 

terms of how the Liquor and Gaming Authority regulate the 

sale and the licensing of their establishments. 

 

(1730) 

 

And I say to the member from Regina North West that I give 

you the same opportunity, and I will offer you the same 

opportunity as we have offered the industry, if you would want 

to become involved in a critique of the regulations before 

they're in fact passed by cabinet, that we offer you the 

opportunity to do a critique of the proposed regulations.  And 

that kind of input we think is important. 

 

This is certainly not an attempt to move control from the 

Legislative Assembly to the hands of either the minister's office 

or bureaucrats or cabinet.  That's not the purpose of this.  What 

we're trying to do is to put the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority in a position where we can be responsive to 

industry's demands and industry's needs.  And I certainly offer 

you the opportunity, if you would be so inclined, to involve 

yourself in assisting us to put together these regulations. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I appreciate the offer you've made 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

and I'd be glad to take you up on that.  And I guess it was sort 

of worth the effort asking the question to have you say that you 

were wrong once.  And it certainly indicates your empathy with 

my situation.  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, I have one very short question and in fact it could 

have a very short answer.  It could be either yes or no.  We 

really have been talking about, and I'm going back just a 

moment to the horse-racing industry -- I didn't get a clear 

understanding of a particular position from you on a question 

that was posed. 

 

I'm wanting to know about your commitment, the commitment 

of the government, to the horse-racing industry in 

Saskatchewan and a guaranteed, long-term commitment to the 

racing industry.  Will the horse-racing industry get a percentage 

of the money from the charitable component that is being 

proposed; yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'd like to be able to answer yes or 

no, but I would want to say that we're looking at all of the 

options.  We have indicated that we -- and as you have 

requested -- that we introduce or that we involve in the 

negotiations or the discussions a component for charities.  You 

will note in the legislation, when we get to Bill 72, that we have 

in fact the leeway to involve charities, Metis, the exhibition 

associations, and other entities.  And part of the reason we left 

that particular area open is to give us flexibility for the 

changing needs that may in fact be out there. 

 

As I've indicated to your colleagues, we're looking at what we 

might be able to do with respect to interact on the VLTs.  There 

may be a place within the casinos -- and we haven't finalized 

any of these decisions yet -- in the expanded casinos in Regina 

and Saskatoon. 

 

But I can assure the member this, and I've attended to some of 

the same functions that she has as someone who is more 

interested.  I shouldn't say more interested; let me rephrase that.  

But who has more of a history with the horse-racing industry 

than do I. 

 

But I want her to know that the government has a strong 

resolve and a strong commitment to the industry and I'm 

hoping that . . . and I was hoping that we had been able to 

evidence that with some of the comments that I as the minister 

have made and some of the interaction that we have had, some 

of the legislative changes that we have proposed here.  And I 

guess some of the conversations, although sometimes rather 

difficult with some of the management of the existing facilities, 

it would have been fairly clear that our commitment to both 

Thoroughbred and Standardbred racing in this province is 

sincere. 

 

And we will work through this process and I certainly ask for 

your input and I request your input.  It's a difficult area and I 

know that you will understand it's not only difficult here in 

Saskatchewan, but in other areas, and everyone is struggling 

with how they maintain the industry. 

 

Because I think maybe not only feelings from the heart 

are involved.  We certainly understand the economics of the job 

associated with this and certainly us as an agricultural 

community here in Saskatchewan should have some pretty 

serious interest in it.  And I assure you that this government 

does, and I certainly do as the minister. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  

Before I bid farewell to your officials . . . But I think they'll be 

staying around for another Bill. 

 

You would have been so much happier if you had said a yes or 

no because you twigged my memory to something else I wish 

to comment on.  You mentioned the Regina casino in passing, 

when you were talking about Regina and Saskatoon, and I do 

want you to know that the Regina casino manager is the one 

who stated in the last few days that the handles are down by 40 

per cent since the new casino opened. 

 

Now that remark was made by that individual, and I really do 

think that it would be in the best interests of your department, 

of your ministry, to look into that.  I don't think that it is 

incumbent upon me to phone up and find out exactly what it 

was he meant by the comments.  But I do think that as the 

minister in charge, you may want to call him and in fact check 

with him to determine whether or not those numbers were 

accurate that he gave out publicly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- A brief response to the member 

from Greystone.  As you will know, there's been some degree 

of cross-subsidy from the casinos both in Regina and in 

Saskatoon in terms of the operations of the Standardbreds down 

here and the Thoroughbreds in Saskatoon.  And that has been 

ongoing for, as we are told by the exhibition associations, for a 

considerable period of time. 

 

Mr. Butler will also be aware that the take from their table 

games, with the introduction of the VLTs in that area, will have 

increased the number of dollars that the exhibition association 

in fact has to work with in terms of cross-subsidizing racing 

from the casino operations. 

 

It's one of the reasons that we put an exhibition component in 

Bill 72, which we'll be, I'm sure, having a brief look at later.  

It's one of the components that we added in, and our goal is to 

achieve a situation where they can maintain the revenue that 

they have been generating through gaming. 

 

But as I say before -- and we've been through this, so no need 

to get into it again -- but I think we really need to look at 

marketing strategies and how we pique people's interest in 

terms of attendance to the tracks.  If that can't work, quite 

clearly as I've indicated, we're looking at some other options -- 

interact on VLTs; the possibility of something established in 

the expanded casinos. 

 

So there are options that we can use and we're looking at them.  

And if you have any thoughts, I'd be more than willing to meet 

with you at some point in time to discuss them in more detail.  

Whenever you're free. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

 The sooner we adjourn, the sooner we'll all have a little more 

time to have these kinds of discussions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 108 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, just before I move the 

motion, I would like to thank my officials for their work in 

putting together this legislation and I would, as well, like to 

thank the members of the opposition for their questions. 

 

And with that I would like to move that this Bill be reported 

without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Investment Corporation and to enact certain Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  I've noticed that in perusing this Bill that this Bill is 

actually a creature of this Legislative Assembly in its formation 

and it is resultant, in many degrees, to the Crown Investment 

Corporation Bill that was passed in 1993. 

 

And while there are lots of similarities between this Crown 

corporation that you're planning and proposing to set up with 

other Crown corporations, there are rather some distinctive 

differences as well.  And one thing that caught my attention, 

particularly, is the fact that in section 5 it says that the 

corporation, essentially, is going to be established by the 

Legislative Assembly.  Yet interestingly enough, and notice 

this, Mr. Minister, this corporation is going to be set up by us 

folks in here, yet its wind-down, its cessation is not going to be 

done by the creature that created it. 

 

In other words, the creator will not be the destroyer in the end, 

if you want to use that terminology, but rather it will be 

Treasury Board's prerogative to wind it up.  I found that very 

interesting while I was reading that.  Normally what happens is 

that a corporation is established by the Treasury Board and it is 

subject to wind-up by the Treasury Board.  But a question I 

guess I would have for you is: why would we set up a Crown 

corporation in this Assembly and yet this Assembly has no say 

as to when it is going to be wound up, but rather that it will be 

Treasury Board that will have that right?  Could you answer 

that for me, please? 

 

(1745) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm told by my 

officials it was just adopted in terms of the standard procedures 

of The Crown Corporations Act and it is consistent with that 

Act.  And that's why the wind-down provisions were drafted in 

that fashion. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well right away we're not getting off to a very 

good start here.  You say it's consistent with that Act.  If you 

recall some of our oppositions to that Act in those days, you 

will know that we did not agree.  This particular point, quite 

frankly and admittedly, escaped us.  And I guess now we're 

feeling some of the full effects of that Act that you passed last 

year. 

 

But that doesn't answer my question.  That just gives the 

wherefore that this is the thing that has happened and you're 

being consistent with that Act.  But why would you want it that 

way, Mr. Minister?  Why would you want to go through the 

charade of setting up a Crown corporation passed by this 

Assembly, and yet give the power to the Treasury Board? 

 

And for those who don't know what the Treasury Board is, it's 

the hand-picked members of cabinet.  It's not even all of 

cabinet.  It's the Premier's hand-picked part of cabinet that now 

will have the decision as to the demise or the continuation of 

this Crown corporation.  It escapes my logic; I can't understand 

it.  Could you explain it for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It is, by the way, not the Treasury 

Board that has the authority to wind it down. It's the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council that have the authority to wind down the 

corporation which, as I've said before, is consistent with The 

Crown Corporations Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll give you another opportunity, Mr. 

Chairman.  Would you check with your officials again that 

what you're telling me, that it's not Treasury Board, but rather 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, which to the uninitiated 

simply means all of cabinet.  So what we're arguing about now 

is it the select members of cabinet of Treasury Board, or is it all 

of cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- This is dealt with under section 5 of 

the Act, part (b), which refers to section 16 of The Crown 

Corporations Act.  And under section 16(1) of The Crown 

Corporations Act it, and I'll quote, I'll read it into the record: 

 

 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may wind up the affairs 

of a Treasury Board Crown corporation and dissolve a 

Treasury Board Crown . . . 

 

So what this part of The Crown Corporations Act indicates is 

that it would be cabinet that would have the ultimate authority 

to wind this Crown corporation down. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Do you think that's legit?  Is that democracy?  

And I repeat my question again.  Other Treasury Board . . . 

other Crowns are established by Treasury Board.  Here we are 

going through the charade of setting up a Crown corporation 

through the Legislative Assembly -- that's what we're doing 

here.  Why would not this Assembly of all elected officials then 

have the right to say we don't need it any more, we want to do 

away with it, we want to amend it? 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

What you're telling me now is that yes, this Assembly has the 

right, the prerogative, of setting up this Crown corporation, but 

you and your colleagues in cabinet can do away with it at your 

whim.  I don't see the consistency in that; I don't see the 

democracy in that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let we say to the member from 

Rosthern that quite clearly the act of establishing this Crown 

corporation in full view and in purview of the Legislative 

Assembly was a request, I believe, of yours in question period a 

few days ago when you asked if, in fact, we were going to have 

this open and above board and if it would be open to public 

scrutiny. 

 

There are two issues.  The first issue is that we have acted upon 

that in the introduction of Bill 72.  To establish this Crown 

corporation ensures that in fact the establishment of the Crown 

-- the reasons for the establishment -- are done in full view of 

this legislature and with input from all members for debate if 

they so wish.  The reason that the requirement to establish the 

Crown corporation is because of the Criminal Code of Canada, 

which indicates that we needed a vehicle to have the legislative 

authority to involve itself in gaming. 

 

We wanted to separate the regulatory and the licensing body, 

which is the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, from 

the development and the day-to-day operations with respect to 

the operations of the casino.  So hence we brought in a Bill that 

will establish a Crown corporation. 

 

This Crown corporation will operate the expanded casinos in 

Regina and Saskatoon.  The normal process will be that the 

dealings of this Crown corporation will have total public 

scrutiny through Public Accounts, as do other Crown 

corporations, so that any revenues that are generated from these 

casinos will in fact have wide public scrutiny.  In terms of the 

establishment of this Crown, that's why we're doing that.  

That's why we're here today and that's why we're debating this 

Crown corporation. 

 

And I think that in terms of operating responsible government, 

we want to allow members of the opposition to debate broadly, 

first of all, the establishment of this Crown; but secondly, on an 

annual basis and on a regular basis that the Provincial Auditor 

would have access to the workings of the Crown, the dealings 

of the Crown, the revenue that flows through that Crown 

corporation; that we would have the funds that will go to first 

nations and to other entities fully accountable to the Provincial 

Auditor.  And that is the goal that we're attempting to achieve 

today.  That is why we're here debating this Act right now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, let's read between the lines of what you 

just told me.  The only reason this Bill is before the House 

today is because you couldn't get away with it.  Your lawyers 

warned you: don't try it without backing legislation.  That's 

what they told you, because you would be contravening the 

Criminal Code of Canada.  That's the only reason we're in here. 

You tried it the other way first. 

 

And that's the only reason, in spite of what the Premier said a 

few hours ago in here, why we are doing this in the 11th hour.  

That's the only reason.  Your Bill was brought in last Friday.  

Here it is Wednesday and we're debating in this short time 

frame a major, major shift in the direction in which this 

province is going under your government's direction, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

So let's be perfectly clear.  If you would not be breaking the 

law otherwise, this Bill, your machinations, would never have 

seen the light of day.  The last thing you wanted to do was to be 

held accountable through this legislature, through the official 

opposition, to the people of this province.  That's the only 

reason -- none other, none other. 

 

You talk about accountability.  You talked about auditor so that 

the auditor could see.  Well of course, Mr. Minister.  That's 

why you're being forced to bring this into a Crown corporation, 

so that the auditor in fact will be able to peruse it.  Otherwise 

there would have been no accounting.  There would have been 

no accounting, Mr. Minister. 

 

So although you are doing this, although you are going through 

this process, it's the last thing that you want to do because you 

don't want to air this dirty linen, as it were, in the public light of 

this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, answer the question.  You haven't answered 

the question.  You haven't gotten close to the answer yet.  This 

is the question.  Number one, this Act is going to establish, by 

an action of the legislature, a Crown corporation.  If you will, 

in the bigger democratic process this would be considered the 

people of Saskatchewan's will being incorporated into a Crown 

corporation.  Well that's fine. 

 

But why then would cabinet, why then would the Premier and 

his select chosen few have the determining ability to wind up 

this Crown corporation?  Because it seems to me that if this 

corporation is a creature of this legislature, it is only this 

legislature that can do away with it.  That's precisely the 

question.  If you could answer that, we can get on to something 

else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I would certainly be more than 

willing to get on with other aspects of the Bill because I think 

it's a very positive piece of legislation.  It allows for the first 

partnership in this province, a true partnership in this province, 

with Saskatchewan's first nations people. 

 

And I want to say that the wind-up provisions are quite 

consistent with The Crown Corporations Act and the authority 

that The Crown Corporations Act, under section 16, gives the 

Lieutenant Governor in order in council the authority to wind 

down a Treasury Board Crown corporation and to dissolve the 

corporation.  The section of the Act that refers this to . . . The 

Crown Corporations Act refers to section 16(1) and I've read 

that into the record.  It's consistent with the legislative authority 

under the Act, The Crown Corporations Act. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

You may not agree with it, as you've indicated, when we 

established this Crown . . . The Crown Corporations Act.  It's 

the law of the land, it's legislation that was passed, and it was 

proclaimed.  This Bill is consistent with The Crown 

Corporations Act, and I am satisfied in terms of the order in 

council and the ability of the Lieutenant Governor order in 

council to dissolve the corporation. 

 

But I want to say that there was never an intention, never has 

been, and there never will be an intention to cover up dealings 

with respect to this development.  The reason this Crown 

corporation is here is to comply with the Criminal Code of 

Canada and to allow for accountability and to allow for the 

Provincial Auditor to have access to this entity that we're, 

through legislation, hoping to construct, and that there will be 

accountability because that is an important hallmark of what 

this government, I believe, has been able to achieve -- and 

that's open and accountable government. 

 

And whether it be with respect to the operations of the Liquor 

and Gaming Authority, whether it be with the operations of the 

new Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, it's our intent and our 

goal to achieve a maximum of accountability.  The wind-down 

provision of a corporation is allowed by The Crown 

Corporations Act, under section 16(1), and this is consistent 

with that. 

 

And I think it was drafted with forethought, it was drafted with 

consideration of our desire to be accountable, and I think it's a 

good piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think a lot of people in this province would 

tend to disagree with that last statement, Mr. Minister. 

 

All right, so now we have established the fact that the only 

reason this legislation is before the legislature is because you 

had no other way.  We've established that.  You had to abide by 

the Criminal Code; you couldn't find any other way out.  And I 

rest my case simply on the fact that here's the most important 

piece of legislation on day 76 of the legislature -- day 76 -- and 

you're going to get up and parrot the words of the Premier that 

we couldn't get a deal done with the FSIN before so therefore 

we couldn't do this.  And I don't think, Mr. Minister, that that is 

a legitimate excuse at all. 

 

And I'm appalled, quite frankly, that you as a legislator, even 

though you are in the privileged position of being in cabinet, I 

don't think that you're the type of guy that just because you 

have a special privileged position right now that that's why you 

would say you agree that you and your few colleagues around 

cabinet should have the right to undo, in the privacy of the 

cabinet room, where you can undo the work of this legislature. 

 

We're taking up the people's time.  We're taking up people's tax 

dollars this evening to discuss this piece 

of legislation.  And we're going to pass this legislation, I know 

-- you have the majority.  This legislation will pass tonight and 

the legislature has done that. 

 

Now you're telling me, and you just said that you feel 

comfortable in the fact that cabinet, in the secrecy of the 

cabinet room, can wind down something that this legislature 

has created.  I don't understand the rationale of that.  I don't 

understand why you think you should have that power.  I can 

see in the old days, if the Treasury Board created a Crown 

corporation, that the Treasury Board then would be able to 

dissolve or do away, wind up, or whatever with it.  This is 

different.  This is different because of what you did last session 

under the CIC Bill that was passed.  So I'm disappointed. 

 

(1800) 

 

This new Bill talks about the president of a corporation that is 

going to be subject to the direction of the board of direction.  

I'll repeat that.  This new Bill, in section 8 . . . and I hesitate to 

identify the sections, Mr. Minister, because you know we're not 

supposed to talk at this stage about individual clauses, but 

because the chairman is a nice fellow I think we can have a 

little bit of leeway here to expedite the matters and get this 

thing over with. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, this new Bill says that the president of the 

corporation is subject to the direction of the board of direction 

-- president.  The Treasury Board Crown corporations, as I 

understand it, none of them have a president.  Why would this 

change have been contemplated?  What's the significance of 

that change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I can't agree with the member.  

I'm sitting beside the acting president and chief executive 

officer of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

which is a Treasury Board Crown.  So the title of president for 

the new Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation is not inconsistent.  

It's not inconsistent with the process that the existing Treasury 

Board Crown, the SLGA, operates under. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The Bill also gives powers of corporations and 

these powers are enumerated in the Bill.  Now in the other 

Crown corporations, as far as I understand, this is done by 

regulation -- Lieutenant Governor in Council.  Why would that 

difference be here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told by my officials that the 

powers are not enumerated in the Bill if it's established by an 

order in council, but the process is, when a corporation is 

established by legislation with the powers that are embodied in 

the content of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well if that's the case, then I would imagine 

that cabinet also would not have the power to wind down.  

We're back to that issue here.  I agree with you and I think you 

gave me a good answer here, but I wonder if it's consistent with 

your previous answer 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

about the ability of cabinet to do something that only the 

legislature created.  There's inconsistency in there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess my interpretation 

would be that it uses a different process in terms of the 

developing and putting . . . drafting the powers into the 

legislation.  I think what is important is that the powers are 

articulated and that people understand what the ability of the 

Crown corporation is.  And we have in this section and under 

the powers, we have incorporated for your critique the powers 

of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation.  And I think that 

certainly you should be satisfied to have that . . . those powers 

articulated so that we can critique them here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, exactly.  Great, super, fine; I appreciate 

it; it's great.  That's the way it should be. 

 

However, the other Crown corporations are established by 

Treasury Board and therefore their rules, their regulations, their 

powers are enunciated by regulations, which means it's your 

little elite group of cabinet ministers that makes those 

regulations; and that's fine because it was a creature of 

Treasury Board, so cabinet should be able to do that. 

 

Here we have a creature of government . . . pardon me, not a 

creature of government, a creature of this Legislative 

Assembly.  And so therefore the powers are in legislation, and 

we see it here; we'll be passing those tonight.  That's great.  

That's how it should be, Mr. Minister.  Absolutely. 

 

Then let's go back to the previous point.  Why then should you, 

as a cabinet minister, have the right to do away with what this 

legislature has established?  It just boggles my mind.  And I'm 

sure everybody that's listening tonight is saying: yes, why?  

Why should cabinet have that power? 

 

You get up and you say, well that's because there's an Act that 

says it has to be that way.  But you are the very same guys that 

passed that Act.  I don't want to give you too much credit 

because I don't think you could look this far ahead and 

anticipate what we're doing here because you didn't want this 

legislation.  You only thought of this legislation last Monday, 

and that's when you got your drafters ready to draft this Bill 

because you had to; you were forced to. 

 

I've got a lot of other questions along that line, but on sober 

reflection, Mr. Minister, I don't think we're getting anywhere, 

quite frankly, because you haven't got the answer for me.  And 

I'm not buying the answer that you're giving by blaming it on a 

previous Act, because let's get to the fundamental issue.  And I 

don't for a moment believe you that you believe what you're 

saying.  That's not democracy; that's not democratic. 

 

But you know who I'm going to blame for this, quite frankly, is 

myself.  Because like I said at the outset, I didn't catch this in 

the CIC Bill that was passed last year.  I missed that thing.  But 

we would have put up an argument had I or had we, and it 

would have gone 

anyway, so we'd still be facing the same situation as we're 

doing now. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I want to spend some time now on some of 

the specifics of the Bill, some of the ideas behind the Bill, some 

of the projections and so on that you have.  And in order to 

accomplish that, I'll go to some more specific questions, some 

general questions, I guess, on the Bill itself. 

 

And that is that one thing we noticed is that a large component 

of the casinos that are being set up will be VLTs which will be 

on the premises.  Now some questions that I want to talk about 

pertaining to the existing VLTs: how was the sharing of VLT 

profits with the exhibition associations determined?  How did 

you determine that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I guess first of all I would like to 

sort of establish what our definition of the electronic equipment 

that we use for gaming and the different terms because I think 

I've got this established in my mind.  In the casinos we'll be 

establishing slot machines which are the little mechanical 

differences and they've got the arm inside and all that, whatever 

goes with it.  The video lottery terminal program is what we 

have in the temporary casinos and what we are running in the 

hospitality industry venues at this point in time. 

 

VLTs will not be in the casinos.  We will be . . . and I believe 

the figure is 500 slot machines for each casino location, both in 

Regina and Saskatoon.  That is separate and apart from the 

video lottery terminals.  And that program, as I've indicated to 

you earlier tonight, has a maximum at this point -- and I see no 

reason nor do we have an intention to expand the number -- of 

3,600 machines, which is about 50 per cent of market 

saturation. 

 

In terms of the agreement, the temporary casinos are operating 

with video lottery terminals.  There are 200 in each, Regina and 

in Saskatoon.  As the operations of these temporary casinos are 

functioning, government at this point is taking all of the 

revenue generated from the temporary casinos on the video 

lottery terminals. 

 

We have . . . and I guess it would be important for me to 

explain the history of our discussions with the exhibition 

associations.  We have given them a commitment and we 

understand their need for the revenue that they're generating 

from their casino operations because they use it to subsidize 

other venues, whether it be horse-racing or other agricultural 

projects that they embark on.  They take their percentage of the 

profits from the table games.  At this point government, 

through the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, is 

taking all of the revenue from the video lottery terminals in the 

interim casinos. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you for that explanation, Mr. 

Minister.  I didn't know that the VLTs were distinct from the 

slots that will be in the casinos themselves. 

 

Now answer the question.  During your explanation, 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

you forgot what my question was, which was precisely: how 

was the sharing of the VLT profits or slot profits with the 

exhibition associations determined? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well there are a number of 

variables.  Firstly, we indicated in our casino expansion policy 

that we wanted to strike arrangements and agreements with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the aboriginal 

community actually, which includes the Metis, the exhibition 

associations.  And we had in the course of putting together this 

policy, we're looking at the involvement of charities in terms of 

revenue sharing. 

 

We hadn't at that point -- nor have we as a matter of fact at this 

point -- established what the role of the exhibitions in both 

Regina and Saskatoon will be; simply because, as you will 

know, city council passed unanimously a decision to zone a 

request for a casino to be built in downtown Regina.  There is 

some interest in having the exhibition association involved in 

the management of the casinos, so it's not possible at this point 

to determine how the 25 per cent that is allocated in this Bill to 

other entities will be shared.  Because we don't at this point 

know what the role of the Regina Exhibition Association will 

be. 

 

Now having said that, we are expecting within the next weeks 

to put together requests for proposal that may involve . . . and if 

the exhibition associations are successful in terms of putting a 

proposal together that would be accepted by government, they 

may in fact act as managers.  We don't know that yet because 

we're going to go through a request for proposal and an open 

bidding process for the involvement in the casinos.  That as yet 

has not been defined. 

 

So in terms of how we established revenue sharing for the 

exhibitions, keeping in mind firstly that we gave them the 

commitment when we initiated our policy that we would 

attempt to maintain their revenue as it has been, and what we 

have indicated is that we would be willing to look to a five-year 

average of their revenue.  We certainly didn't want to see a 

decrease in revenue. 

 

What has in actual fact happened, as I understand it, that the 

revenue from the table games has increased fairly dramatically, 

and that is basically their portion of the revenue of the 

temporary casinos.  So having all of this in mind, that's how we 

came to the conclusion that we did.  And that process now has 

been ongoing for, I think in the neighbourhood of two months, 

and it continues on based on the information that I've just given 

you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, where does that put the 

exhibition park in so far as their willingness to get their share 

of revenue through the management of the casino?  Where is 

that at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As you will know and as I've 

indicated, the city council in Regina has passed a motion 

requesting that we select a downtown site and that the 

exhibition association be involved in the 

management of the expanded casinos as they operate into the 

future. 

 

We haven't yet determined who will be the managers.  We 

haven't yet determined a site location, nor have we determined 

the development and which entity will in fact be the 

development.  We are in the process of designing and putting 

together requests for proposals, meaning that we would ask 

interested partners in the . . . with respect to site, with respect to 

the physical development in the design of the casinos and with 

respect to the management of the casinos. 

 

We're putting together requests from interested parties to put to 

us their vision of how these casinos would be managed; in the 

case of the exhibition association, how they would manage 

them.  And that process will take place in the near future. 

 

What we will do is bring the interested parties together and 

explain to them where we would hope to see this development 

go, not in terms of location, but the type of management that 

we would want to see. 

 

As an example, in part of this Bill is an agreement with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations that there be a 50 

per cent aboriginal employment component.  We would want to 

see through their proposals how they would attempt to achieve 

that.  So at this point we're well aware and have indicated that 

we would certainly rely on the recommendation from the city 

councils, and in Regina they've made quite clear, and we will 

rely on that input.  We're developing the request for proposals 

now and hopefully we will come to an agreement that'll be 

satisfactory to all parties. 

 

(1815) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I think before we fall into a trap 

here, we tend to concentrate on the effect that these casinos will 

have only on Saskatoon and Regina and their exhibitions, and 

to my way of thinking and to my knowledge, we're talking 

about what is classified as the "A" fairs, and we want to take a 

look at some of the "B" fairs -- the ones in, for example, in 

Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Yorkton, North Battleford -- fairs of 

this . . . and how they are affected. 

 

So in the larger context, Mr. Minister, was there any opposition 

to these arrangements that you have so far, from any of the 

exhibition associations in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me say, Mr. Chair, in terms of 

the role of the exhibition associations in the province -- and I 

would like to make this clear because I'm not sure if it's 

understood universally, so I would like to be able to clarify this 

today -- I have met personally with exhibition associations 

throughout this province, with Yorkton, Battlefords, Prince 

Albert, golly, I couldn't recall now how many, but lots.  And 

during the course of the conversations we have indicated to 

them that because we have chosen the sites -- and I would want 

to indicate as well my officials have met with them on an 

ongoing basis, 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

many of them -- that with respect to the decision that we would 

establish a casino in Regina, and in Saskatoon, and no other 

place, it became clear there would be some exhibition 

associations outside of the main centres who may be impacted 

more than others. 

 

We have put together, and we've done on a few occasions, as 

an example in Moose Jaw, we have put video lottery terminals 

on a special occasion basis in their casino, in their existing 

casino operations, to attempt to maintain the revenue that they 

had been generating with their casinos over a period of time.  

The period of time that we use is perhaps, I think a reasonable 

one, in that we look at a five-year average. And as the 

temporary casinos have been introduced here in Regina and in 

Saskatoon, we're monitoring quite closely the impact on the 

casinos in the outlying areas. 

 

I think it's important to know that not all exhibitions involve 

themselves in casino gambling, and some to a very small 

degree.  I believe the Prince Albert Exhibition Association 

generates somewhere in the neighbourhood of $250,000 a year.  

There are others that generate less than $50,000, so really not 

big players. 

 

But the commitment that we give to them is that we will 

attempt, in as much as they relied on casino gaming, we would 

attempt to minimize the impact of the two casinos that will be 

established in Regina and Saskatoon.  Part of it we're going to 

do through the temporary video lottery terminal program that 

will run in conjunction with special events in their casinos.  If 

there are other measures that are necessary, we're willing to 

look at that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A little bit more 

specifically what I want to get at -- and I'm glad that you 

mentioned that you had some personal contact with some of 

these exhibition associations, and particularly I think you 

mentioned Battleford, North Battleford -- was there any 

direction given by your government or yourself to any of the 

exhibition associations regarding how or when they should 

respond to media inquiries, either by yourself or by some of 

your officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can say to the member that we 

don't instruct exhibition associations as to how they handle 

media on any issue.  And I'm not sure what the member is 

trying to get at.  But in terms of our interaction with the 

exhibitions, I guess how they would handle media inquiries, 

that would be their responsibility and their decision, as to how 

they handle and what kind of comments they make. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, we've been informed that a 

letter was sent to officials of the Battleford's Exhibition 

Association, directing them not to make any comments 

regarding gaming to the media unless they went through your 

government first.  Can you confirm this?  I'll give you another 

chance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can confirm that to the best of my 

knowledge, a letter of that nature has not 

come from my office.  I am told by the president of the Liquor 

and Gaming Authority that he is not aware of any letter that 

would have . . . or that was sent by him or any of his officials. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So let me get this perfectly straight, and for 

the third time now I'll be asking you this.  You are denying then 

that any letter of this sort exists.  Am I clear on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm saying, to the best of my 

knowledge, I am not aware of any letter of that nature.  If the 

member from Rosthern is aware of a letter of that nature, I 

would be certainly interested in having a look at it.  And if he 

has one with that nature of content, I would certainly appreciate 

him sending a copy across to me. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I just wanted this to 

be on the record, so it is on the record.  Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Minister, was there an official agreement reached -- for 

instance, was there a deal signed by you and the FSIN? -- or 

was it a verbal agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We have, the officials have, 

negotiated the contents of a document, of an agreement.  It has 

been signed by the negotiators on both our side and by ours.  

The agreement has been taken to cabinet.  Cabinet has endorsed 

and approved the agreement.  On our side we then took it to the 

caucus who have approved the agreement. 

 

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations held their 

Legislative Assembly, I believe, last Thursday, a week ago 

Thursday and they ratified the acceptance of the agreement.  I 

believe it's a document that has 17 clauses.  We will be signing 

formally within the next few days and those arrangements are 

being put in place by the officials today and the oncoming 

days. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Mr. Minister, if this agreement was ironed 

out and worked out between you and the FSIN and that it is a 

signed agreement as you have just said, then there are going to 

be a fair numbers of taxpayers' dollars going in there to 

substantiate what that agreement is that you have signed. 

 

So I think it's fairly legitimate for me if your government, if 

you as a cabinet minister, your officials, all of cabinet . . . and 

you just said that all of caucus, your government members, 

have seen this legislation, and since we are in the process -- not 

the legislation but the agreement -- but since we're in the 

process here of legitimizing that agreement by establishing this 

Act, this Crown corporation through this Act, then I'm glad to 

see that your official is already scurrying to the back to get a 

copy of that agreement because that is precisely what I would 

want -- is to be able to have a look at it.  And I'm sure the third 

party also would like to have a look at this. 

 

So if you could just get to your feet and make that commitment 

we can get on. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, my officials are at this 

point bringing in copies of the agreement and I will be passing 

the copy on to the Leader of the Third Party and to yourself, sir. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and we're 

making progress.  That certainly saved a lot of time, that 

decision.  And I'll tell you when other decisions would save us 

time so that you could act accordingly. 

 

Mr. Minister, who were the individuals involved in the 

negotiations themselves from the government and the FSIN?  

And while you're getting that information, were there any 

consultants involved at any time during your discussion, any 

consultants involved?  And if you answer yes, then I would 

want the names of those consultants and where they are from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, the negotiators on 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan were John 

Yeomans from the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority; Ron Stengler who's from Executive Council; Ray 

Clayton, an employee of Energy and Mines; Larry Anderson 

from Justice; and on behalf of the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations, Chief Barry Ahenakew, Chief Ray Ahenakew; 

Vikas Khaladkar and Mic Ryan were the other two negotiators 

on behalf of the FSIN. 

 

There were no consultants and therefore there were no 

consultants' fees. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  During these 

negotiations I guess it's not surprising the people and the folks 

that were there; although a legitimate question, I think, would 

be why Mr. Clayton from Energy and Mines would be on this 

-- I don't see that relationship, but I'm not really asking that 

question either but you may have an answer for that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Because he's a good negotiator. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Because he's a good negotiator.  Well a good 

negotiator . . . I guess that'll depend on when we see the deal 

and take a look at the entire deal.  Because my next question is: 

if you had these kinds of people involved in negotiations, why 

were exhibition associations not included?  Why were the 

charities not included, and why were the Metis not included in 

these negotiations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, at the outset of the 

discussions with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, the Metis Society, the exhibitions, we indicated quite 

clearly that we would be negotiating at separate negotiating 

tables; that we would negotiate with the FSIN at a separate 

table and a separate agreement from the agreement that we 

would hope to reach with the Metis and with the exhibitions. 

 

And that's what happened.  We felt that it was important that 

we negotiate firstly an arrangement with the FSIN.  They were 

in the position to negotiate 

with government and were anxious to negotiate, so we started 

with them. 

 

The role of the exhibitions, as I've indicated, is less clear in that 

we didn't believe it made any sense to have people who were 

going to share or do the management be part of the profit 

revenue sharing.  So we started with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and I would want to say that 

we're quite pleased with the arrangement that we have been 

able to negotiate with them as are they. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well how can you say that the FSIN was 

ready to do the negotiation but the exhibition associations 

weren't ready?  Answer that question. 

 

And secondly, how could you at that point have presupposed 

that the exhibition associations were going to be part of 

management?  I didn't think that that was an issue at that time 

when you started the whole negotiation process.  There's an 

inconsistency there, Mr. Minister.  Explain that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we have done 

some negotiations quite clearly with the exhibition associations 

in that we have negotiated the establishment of the interim 

casinos at both Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment that we had given the exhibition 

associations was only one, and it was a very simple 

commitment that we would help them to assist in maintaining 

their revenue base -- that was the commitment.  And we have 

held true to that and we will continue. 

 

(1830) 

 

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations were anxious 

to strike an agreement.  Some of the issues that were 

outstanding with respect to jurisdiction, we felt could be down, 

certainly minimized, if we were to be able to strike an 

agreement.  So it became for us a priority, as it was a priority 

for the FSIN. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Mr. Minister, now answer the 

question.  How could you presuppose at that stage that the 

exhibition associations would be involved at the management 

end of it?  You used that as a reason for not including them in 

the negotiations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Because they told us they were. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well my information is that this was only 

concluded very, very recently, that in fact they are going to be 

assured their amount of revenue, as it was before, guaranteed 

through the management process.  And if I have that wrong, 

you're finally going to be able to enlighten me on something. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, the conversations and 

the discussions that we had with the exhibition associations, 

both in Regina and Saskatoon and other areas, happened a long, 

long time ago. 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

I've been in Saskatoon on a number of occasions and met with 

Mr. Sakorski and Mr. Keith, representatives of Prairieland 

Exhibition Association.  And the commitment that we gave 

them at that time was that we would ensure that their revenue 

would be maintained whole, because we know the positive 

work that that association does in that community. 

 

We have given the same commitment to the people in Regina, 

both from the officials' level and from my level, that we would 

maintain the revenue.  They have made no secret of the fact 

that they wanted to be involved in the management of these 

casinos.  They in fact -- and the comments are in the media and 

have been in the media over the past weeks -- folks in 

Saskatoon are wanting the casino established on the exhibition 

site and they do want to manage it.  It's been no secret that they 

wanted to be involved in the management.  The agreement that 

we have reached with the FSIN is that they will be in as 

partners but they won't take, as we understand it, the hands-on. 

 

So there was some differences, but in terms of the 

government's position as it relates to the exhibition 

associations, that hasn't been a secret for a long, long time, and 

we've been very open in our conversations and in our 

discussions with them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the last time I asked you a 

question in question period, yesterday I think, I got an answer 

to a question which was the fourth answer.  And finally, after 

I'd been given four different answers on four different 

occasions to the same question, you said, and I may paraphrase, 

you said, aw shucks, let's include all four of them.  And the 

agreement, and the question that I'm referring to is $1.75 

million that is considered to be an upfront payment to the 

SFIN.  How much of that money is going towards payment of 

costs already incurred by the SFIN as part one of your answers, 

and what are those costs specifically, the exact cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

correct the member opposite.  He keeps referring to this $1.75 

million as taxpayers' dollars, and I need to correct you on that 

because it's not the first time you've used that terminology. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I didn't say taxpayers' dollars now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well this is money that comes from 

the profits of the interim casinos; it is profits from gambling.  

And we're both clear on that now, that we have said for a long 

time that there will be no taxpayers' money in the development, 

in the building of these casinos.  And this government's 

position will not waver on that.  The money that goes to the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Indian Nations is $1.75 million.  It 

comes as a result of the negotiations where their position was 

that they wanted a share of the revenue from the interim 

casinos. 

 

There were some variables in terms of when the Saskatoon 

expansion would take place.  The variables 

were that we didn't know how much revenue these would 

generate, so rather than negotiate a percentage, we negotiated 

with them a dollar value that it appears after seeing these 

operations run for a while, will work out to roughly . . . I can't 

remember the figure, but it's irrelevant now.  But it was a 

reasonable agreement we believe we've reached, and the 

number is $1.75 million. 

 

Now in terms of explaining to you how this money will be 

spent, I think it's important to look at the legislation and how 

the first nation fund deals with the expenditure.  There is a 

six-person board, nominated by the chiefs' Legislative 

Assembly and ratified and passed by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, who will be responsible for managing and operating 

the funds.  The money is designated for economic 

development, social development, justice, and there are other 

initiatives.  And we can discuss these in more detail when we 

go through clause by clause.  So basically it is a group 

established by the chiefs' Legislative Assembly to deal with the 

distribution of the funds. 

 

They also are in the process of putting together a 

revenue-sharing formula that is based on a fair and equitable 

revenue sharing that will ensure that all Indians in all parts of 

this province have a share of the $1.7 million of revenue that 

comes from the video lottery terminal profits. 

 

I don't know the exact numbers as to how the chiefs' trust, 

board of trustees, will divide this and I don't have those details.  

But what I am told by the federation, that they expect in excess 

of $1 million to be distributed to the 74 bands throughout the 

province and that the balance will be used for administrative 

costs and for ongoing costs that they will incur between now 

and when they will be sharing the revenues from the expanded 

casinos, which we hope to open next summer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What's an interim casino? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The interim casino, and I guess we 

refer to them as, is what it is is the historical table game 

operations that are functioning and have been functioning at the 

Buffalo Buck Casino and the casino in Saskatoon.  As I've 

indicated earlier tonight, we have added to those casinos and to 

that physical location 200 video lottery terminals in each 

location both in Regina and in Saskatoon.  The money that we 

have in this agreement agreed to, comes from the profits from 

the video lottery terminals that are operating in those two site 

locations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So there are two interim casinos in the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes.  We have for two months now, 

I guess, or three, in the case of Regina, we have had these 

casinos, these video lottery terminals operating in conjunction 

with the table games, both in Regina and in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you answer my question that I 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

asked you two questions ago without too much addendums?  

How much of that $1.75 million of upfront money to the FSIN 

is going toward payments of costs already incurred by the FSIN 

and what are those costs?  Because that is one of your multiple 

choice answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I am told that the breakdown 

is $1 million to the band level.  That leaves a residual amount 

of 750,000.  I am told that they have incurred in the 

neighbourhood of $300,000 of costs to bring together the 

chiefs' Legislative Assembly to deal with this issue, and I'm not 

aware of what the other costs are. 

 

But I can tell the member from Rosthern that through this Bill, 

and when this Bill is passed, that every cent of this expenditure 

will be open to the purview and to the scrutiny of the Provincial 

Auditor.  It will be open to the scrutiny of members of the 

opposition and members of the government in Crown 

corporations estimates, and there will be in great detail, if the 

members ask for it, an accounting for this money. 

 

I want to indicate to the member that this money has not been 

signed over yet.  We haven't final . . . certainly everyone has 

ratified the agreement.  We haven't had the official signing and 

until the official signing takes place no money has changed 

hands. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How much of that money is going to 

developing the partnership, as your multiple choice (b) answer 

was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I'm told, to answer your 

question, that there is in the neighbourhood of $300,000 of 

costs incurred.  I can't tell you what that is for.  I haven't had a 

breakdown of that nor have I asked for a breakdown of it but I 

am told that's roughly the amount that has been incurred. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We want the 

complete breakdown.  And you're committing yourself to give 

us that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can't give you a breakdown of 

expenditures for money that hasn't been spent nor been 

allocated.  What I can tell you is that the accounting process 

that has historically been used with the expenditures from and 

through Crown corporations will be put to this Assembly.  You 

know the process for Public Accounts.  You know how that 

functions and how that works, that there's an annual report 

presented, and there will be an annual report in which every 

penny that is disbursed through this Crown corporation will be 

accounted for.  It will come to Public Accounts and you will be 

able to review that in a very timely fashion, the same as you do 

with other reports from Crown corporations that we table in 

this legislature. 

 

I can't give you a breakdown of daily expenditures on a daily 

basis from either the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority or other funds.  You're asking me to give you a 

breakdown for funds that haven't even been spent. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Then how do you know the funds are going to 

be spent?  Where did you come up with your 1.75 million then?  

Because surely to goodness there's got to be a mechanism in 

place or an accounting or a balance sheet or a budget or a cash 

flow or something that has been shown to you that this is a 

legitimate amount of money.  That's all I'm asking. 

 

Surely you must have seen something more than just, by golly, 

I think it's going to be 1.75 and that that's what you're basing it 

on.  I know how the accounting procedures in this place work.  

All I'm asking from you is some kind of an indication as to 

what legitimatizes the 1.75. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess what legitimizes the 

1.75 is the agreement that we struck.  And I've indicated to you 

quite clearly, it is revenue that is in lieu of revenue sharing on 

the interim casinos.  And that's how the figure was arrived at, 

through negotiations. 

 

In terms of how this money is spent, I've outlined the process.  

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations will select a 

board of trustees of six persons -- of no more than six persons 

-- to deal with the way this money is divided. 

 

I've indicated to you that they will be setting a revenue-sharing 

formula, the same as municipal governments do.  Money is 

disbursed from the provincial government to municipal 

governments.  Their formulas disburse this money around the 

province.  And that is exactly what will happen with respect to 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Indian Nations with the money 

that we are, through this agreement, going to be prescribing for 

them. 

 

Now I can't give you any more.  I can tell you what the process 

is.  I've already told you that a million dollars of that, they tell 

me . . . and I have no reason not to believe the word of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations; there are some in 

here who may not and who may not have that trust, but I do.  

They have told me that a million dollars will be going to band 

level and that $750,000 will be going into costs incurred and 

costs that will occur between now and when the casinos, the 

expanded casinos, are open.  And the revenue will start to flow 

to them through the agreement that we have reached, which 

will give them 25 per cent of the net profits.  Now I don't know 

how much more detail the member . . . what more detail would 

satisfy the member. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, by what specific 

criteria will you and your cabinet colleagues determine the 

location of the two casinos -- I know we talked about that a 

little bit previously -- as exactly where those casinos will be in 

Saskatoon and in Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I want to say to the member, I 

guess there are two aspects to this.  One is that we want to be 

satisfied that the site selection will be one that will select a site 

that will not encumber the 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

economic development and the economic opportunities in the 

communities and that will not disrupt their long-term plans for 

economic development and for development of these kinds of 

projects.  So that quite clearly is one of the criteria.  The Regina 

City Council has told us that they will endorse a centralized, a 

downtown location, downtown site.  And we intend to comply 

with that. 

 

The second criteria, in terms of specific site selection, will be 

based on many criteria.  One is the time frame in which the 

developer can put together a proposal for us; the reliability of a 

proposed contractor to develop a site; traffic flow; parking; all 

of these kinds of things that would be taken into account with 

any other kind of development.  What we want to do is 

maximize the business opportunities for these casinos and we 

have indicated that we want to work with the cities to 

determine the locations.  And that's the process that we're 

embarked upon.  But the bottom line is that we're going to put 

together a good business deal and we're going to put together 

casinos in locations that are going to work and that are going to 

serve the people of this province well. 

 

(1845) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, why did you renege on your 

original commitment to consider casinos in other parts of the 

province?  You made a specific commitment to the proposal 

from Battleford and yet you reneged.  Why was that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, I think you're maybe 

misinterpreting something here because let me tell you what the 

people in North Battleford and Prince Albert and Yorkton and 

Melville and Swift Current and Moose Jaw and any other 

community that we talked with were told. 

 

We told them that we were looking at the concept of 

developing smaller, regionalized casinos, on a much smaller 

scale than we would do if we were to centralize, which is what 

the policy is at this date.  We knew that there would have to be 

a limited number of those because we couldn't have two dozen 

casinos operating because they couldn't compete against each 

other and still maintain economic viability. 

 

And when we were out we told them that this a concept we 

were looking at and that's exactly what we did.  We had 

proposals from a number of different communities and we put 

them all together and ultimately we made the decision that to 

maximize the opportunities that we saw in this industry, that 

the market share . . . and that we could develop a much more 

economically viable casino if we were to situate them in 

Regina and in Saskatoon.  And based on that we put together 

the policy. 

 

But I'm sorry I must differ with the opinion of the member 

from Rosthern.  That is not the case. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, understand the member from 

Rosthern is not expressing his own opinions here.  We're doing 

the work of the people. 

And this is what we are told from the folks from Battleford, 

North Battleford, and other areas.  And that's why we're still 

very interested in your comments about that letter that I was 

referring to previously. 

 

On another topic, Mr. Minister.  You're going to be keeping 50 

per cent of the hold as it's called and the profits of the casinos 

and so on.  Is that the only revenue that you are contemplating 

from the casinos that is going to accrue to the Government of 

Saskatchewan?  Or are there other aspects to it where you will 

be reaping a windfall?  Mainly I want you to address the PST 

(provincial sales tax), the 9 per cent.  How is that going to 

apply?  Will you be getting more taxation as well as the 

profits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me say to the member from 

Rosthern that what we will be doing as a government is 

benefiting in spin-offs; yes, we will.  We'll be benefiting in the 

spin-offs by virtue of the fact that we're keeping Saskatchewan 

dollars here in Saskatchewan and spent back here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But in terms of the percentage, the only percentage that we will 

be taking is the 50 per cent of the net profits.  Twenty-five per 

cent will go to the FSIN and the other 25 per cent will be 

shared by the other entities that are detailed in this piece of 

legislation, in Bill 72. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I could pursue that a little bit more.  But what 

I want to do now, Mr. Minister, then, is go on to another topic, 

and that is some of the make-up that this Bill proposes in terms 

of the corporation and who's going to be heading the 

corporation. 

 

You're telling us that the corporation will consist essentially of 

seven persons appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council.  In other words, cabinet is going to appoint seven 

people.  And we know already that three of those people are 

going to be nominated by the FSIN.  However, that leaves four 

other people on the board, Mr. Minister.  Who is going to 

appoint those?  Right now it stands as if the government is 

going to have a total say as to how this corporation is 

established. 

 

Would it not make sense, Mr. Minister, for those other four 

people then to be comprised of an all-party committee where, 

because of the significance of this venture and because you 

want the people of this province to be assured that everything is 

going to be operating properly, that in fact, as I could see the 

situation unfolding, you would have, of those remaining four, 

two people and one from each of the other parties, or whatever 

arrangements could be made --  that in fact all citizens of the 

province, through their representatives here, would be part and 

parcel of that committee that would run the corporation or be 

part thereof. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we intend to 

structure the board and to appoint members to the board based 

on the same criteria that we do in other Crown corporations, in 

both Treasury Board and CIC Crowns.  This will eventually be 

a board that will 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

have public representation, and it will be based on gender 

equity, it'll be based on regionalization, it'll be based on the 

expertise of the appointments to the board, whether that be in 

the accounting background, whether it be gaming, or whether it 

be legal profession.  There are a number of different things that 

I think make good board members and that other members of 

our government believe make good board members.  But the 

bottom line is the board will be representative of the province 

of Saskatchewan and of the the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations are basing 

their appointments on similar criteria to what we will be using 

when we make our appointments. 

 

And yes, the member is right, they are approved by order in 

council.  So the final decision in terms of how the board is 

comprised is done by order in council. 

 

And I would want to say that the cooperation that we've had 

and that the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations have 

shown us thus far in the negotiations and in the discussions, tell 

me that we will be able to work very closely with them in 

developing a board that has regional representation, that has 

gender equity and gender parity, and that represents the 

interests of the Crown corporation that will ultimately be in the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I suppose by now I should know better than to 

expect any other kind of an answer from you, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Bill also indicates, Mr. Minister, that the corporation may 

enter into and participate in arrangements or undertakings 

related to establishing, managing, or operating casinos, or other 

related businesses and activities.  What is that?  What other 

activities are we talking about?  Are we talking about 

restaurants?  Are we talking bars, gift shops, hotels -- what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well this is pretty much a standard 

clause, as I understand it, in terms of the objectives and the 

mandate and the establishment of the administration.  What it 

would do is give the opportunity that if the corporation made 

the decision to involve itself in ancillary services, that they 

would be able to do that. 

 

As an example, if the decision was made that incremental 

parking would be required, that this corporation would have the 

opportunity to involve itself in a parkade, in coat check, valet 

service, those types of things.  So that's what this portion of the 

clause allows for. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Excuse me, Mr. Chairman.  The Government 

House Leader was just making me an offer here that I could 

hardly refuse -- trying to sell me some chocolates.  But anyway, 

Mr. Minister, these ancillary activities that the corporation 

might be embarking upon -- where would the profits go? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I mean you raise a hypothetical 

question here, but if there were profits that would come from 

ancillary services, they would go to the corporation in the same 

fashion as profits from the activities of the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority profits, go from there to the Consolidated Fund, and 

then ultimately they would end up in the hands of the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh nonsense, Mr. Minister, that's not a 

hypothetical situation.  You just admitted that there could be 

ancillary operations and you gave a whole list of things, so 

obviously there will be profits.  My question was: where will 

those profits go?  It's another addition and more of the money 

grab for the government, is the point that I was getting at. 

 

You also say, Mr. Minister, that, "The corporation shall obtain 

the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council before 

establishing any casino."  Why would this not have to have 

legislative approval, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 

member from Rosthern that that's the intent of this Bill.  This 

Bill gives the corporation the approval to put together casinos.  

That's what we're doing right now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I would like you to comment on 

this, because what I see in this Act, in this Bill, is the total, 

omnipotent powers given to cabinet -- Lieutenant Governor in 

Council -- where it says simply that you as a cabinet can make 

regulations defining, enlarging, or restricting the meaning of 

any word or phrase used in this Act.  You can change 

willy-nilly anything you want, prescribing any matter or thing 

authorized by this Act to be prescribed in the regulations.  You 

have total control of that, cabinet does, respecting any matter or 

thing that the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers 

necessary for the purpose of this Act. 

 

There's nothing that cabinet cannot do, Mr. Minister, in 

response to this legislature enacting legislation to set up this 

Crown corporation.  But after that you can make any changes 

that this legislature has made.  Again there's a total 

inconsistency to the democratic process.  Why would you allow 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member, you 

know along with governing comes some responsibilities in 

terms of decision making.  We don't come to this House for 

approval to build a new liquor store.  That's a decision that's 

made at an administrative and a cabinet level. 

 

This Bill allows us the vehicle to do a similar process with 

respect to the development of casinos.  It's a framework that 

allows us to work through that process. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the omnipotent powers go 

beyond what is normally done because we're going through the 

process here in this legislature of creating, of passing a Bill 

with a lot of clauses in it, 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

whatever number of clauses it is, and yet you're saying now it's 

well within the mandate of cabinet to make any changes that 

they see fit.  I'm questioning that.  I don't think that's right . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes you can.  Yes you can.  You 

can make any changes, but I just read it to you, the articles and 

the numbers and the words in this Act.  And if you want me to I 

can repeat that.  We won't, because you know what I'm saying. 

 

Mr. Minister, again I hesitate to be specific as to what clause, 

but if you happen to turn to page 7, and 22(2), you'll know 

what I'm talking about.  Now, Mr. Minister, there's a problem 

here that I can see, and that is where: 

 

 . . . the Minister of Finance may pay, out of monies 

appropriated by the Legislature for the fund, . . . not 

exceeding 25% . . . 

 

Why, Mr. Minister, if you are making the commitment that 

there will be 25 per cent paid out, why are you including the 

word, may?  And I think this is exactly the same section that 

the Leader of the Third Party also has a concern about. And she 

has an amendment coming up, an amendment that will address 

that. 

 

But why would you not . . . if you've made the commitment 

that you will put the word "shall" in, instead of using the 

discretionary "may", would you be amenable, when we come to 

that clause, to in fact accepting the amendment by the Leader 

of the Third Party? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am told by the officials that if 

you'll go on to clause 3 you will read that it says, at the end of 

each fiscal year of the fund, the Minister of Finance shall 

determine -- shall determine -- the net profits of that 

corporation for that fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well let's go back to this one.  What does this 

mean then, the Minister of Finance may pay out monies 

appropriated by the legislature for that purpose? 

 

(1900) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What the clause do is indicate that 

the Minister of Finance will make an estimate of the profits, 

okay?  She makes an estimate, and at the end of the year -- and 

if you go through this clause by clause -- you will see that there 

is a requirement in here that 25 per cent of the profits will be 

paid to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  If the 

estimate is short at the beginning of the year when she makes 

the estimate, that shortfall will be picked up in the next year, at 

the end of that year, okay? 

 

And that's articulated, if you go through here, and I can tell you 

that the legal representatives of the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations are quite comfortable with the fact that they will 

be generating 25 per cent of the net profits.  Their officials have 

looked at it; their legal people are quite comfortable with the 

fact that we have in the legislation a 

commitment for 25 per cent of the net profits of the casino. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, then put it in.  Why is the 

"may" there?  Let's not fiddle around.  If that's your 

commitment, then agree to "shall" and we'll go on.  Why not 

make that commitment today in all of the aspects of the Bill?  It 

doesn't make sense to have "may" all of a sudden appearing in 

one particular section. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Basically what this whole section 

does is it is a "shall" clause; it's not a "may."  But what it does 

is gives the flexibility, as I'm told by the legal people I have 

here with me, to be able to put an estimate, to put some upfront 

money into the hands of our partners, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  But that this clause, and as the 

lawyers interpret it and as the federation's lawyers have 

interpreted it, is a "shall" clause.  It's not a "may" clause.  But 

the front gives flexibility in terms of an estimate to what the 

revenue will be. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I'm not a lawyer and I've always said 

thank heavens for that.  So I guess it's not my position to argue 

the legalities of the situation.  But to my layman's way of 

thinking, it doesn't make sense. 

 

Mr. Minister, another question that I have, and I want to talk a 

little bit about the associated entities fund that has been 

established, where you say that again cabinet, the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, shall appoint a board of trustees of not 

more than six persons.  Why not make it -- and I know what 

you're going to say, that they may be included -- but why 

would you not establish that board in legislation, that it shall be 

made up of, and then . . . made up of the members with the 

vested interest instead of leaving it open to the members of 

cabinet to pick that?  Why not do what you did with the FSIN 

so that the associations that are going to be participating in this 

funding would also have the opportunity to make their 

nominations to that board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, let me say to the 

member from Rosthern that the board of trustees that we will 

be putting together can and should have, in my opinion, 

representatives of those entities that are going to be sharing the 

revenue. 

 

At this point we don't know whether the exhibitions will be 

involved.  That's a variable at this point.  We don't know which 

charities may be involved.  That is a variable as well.  So in 

terms of naming, first of all, the number, in terms of naming the 

associations or the entities where these would come from, what 

we have attempted to do in this is establish a board of trustees 

that will be representative of the entities that are involved when 

we have finalized the negotiations as to who will be part of the 

associated entities fund. And we'll handle this in a similar 

fashion to what we do with board appointments and 

commission appointments, in that we want them representative 

of the people that they impact on and we want a broad base, as 

broad as we can.  And that's what this board of trustees will do. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, it just seems to me . . . and this 

is actually appalling that you're telling us now that you want to 

set up an associated entities fund as part of the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Investment Corporation and you don't know who your 

partners are. 

 

You just told me now that as far as you're concerned, the 

exhibition associations are not part of it.  That's what you just 

finished saying.  You don't know whether they're going to be 

part of the make-up; you don't know if charities are going to be 

part of the make-up; you don't know if the Metis are going to 

be part of the make-up.  That's what you just told me. 

 

And if your partners in this deal are not . . . or is that not what 

you told me?  You're shaking your head.  What did you tell 

me?  Start again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What I was attempting to explain to 

the member was this.  If the exhibitions are involved in the 

management of the casinos, there would be no need for them to 

be sharing revenue from the associated entities fund because 

the commitment we gave them was that they would maintain 

their revenue whole.  We would attempt to do that. 

 

Now if they're maintaining that revenue out of the opportunities 

in management, there may be in fact not be a need for them to 

be part of the associated entities fund.  But we don't know that 

at this point because we need to go through the request for 

proposal process that you and I discussed earlier in terms of 

establishing who'll be the management, who'll be the developer, 

and where the site will be. 

 

So, shortly put, if they're involved in management, they may 

not be involved in this revenue sharing of this 25 per cent.  So 

we need the flexibility and we understand that that may be the 

case.  That's why this was put together in the fashion that it was 

and that's why we can't articulate how this board will be 

designed because we just don't know whether they will be there 

or whether they won't. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me now is that in fact if 

the exhibition associations are not part of it because they're part 

of the management, if charities are not part of it, if you can't 

come to an agreement with the MNS, there's nobody to share 

that money with.  Is that what you're telling me, that this board 

appointed by cabinet, not by the folks that are going to be 

involved, there's no money to pay out? 

 

Where will this money then be paid out, or to whom will it be 

paid out -- this so-called 25 per cent?  If these organizations 

that are in doubt right now in fact and indeed turn out not to be 

part . . . are not part of this associated entities fund, who will 

get that money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, let me take the 

member to clause 30, and I'm sure you'll forgive me for going 

because it's a clause by clause; I don't want to do that, but that's 

the only way I can explain it.  And it says: 

 Subject to any directions given by Treasury Board, the board 

of trustees may make payments from the fund: 

 

 (a) to charities and exhibition associations in Saskatchewan; 

 

 (b) to any organization or association representing Metis 

people in Saskatchewan; 

 

 (c) to any person, organization or association in 

Saskatchewan prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council . . . 

 

So the charities are in there, the exhibitions are in there, and the 

Metis are in there.  And that's, I think, clarified enough; I 

would certainly hope it is. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh, quite on the contrary, it didn't clarify 

anything; it opened up a whole kettle of fish that I was coming 

to anyway, so I appreciate you for doing that. 

 

Now what you've just said . . . and you neglected to continue 

on, because (c) and (d) of that says Treasury Board now -- just 

go back and make sure -- yes: 

 

 Subject to any directions given by Treasury Board, the board 

of trustees . . . 

 

But notice that -- subject to direction of Treasury Board.  So 

you cabinet guys are the ones . . . and gals, are the ones that are 

going to be making that determination.  However you're saying 

now, first of all, on (b) that: 

 

 (b) to any organization or association representing Metis 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Do they like that?  Do they like that?  You can give it to 

anybody -- (c) and (d): you can direct it to be given: 

 

 (c) to any person, organization or association in 

Saskatchewan prescribed by (cabinet); or 

 

 (d) for any purposes prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. 

 

In other words, the funds can go to anybody at any time for any 

reason, subject to what cabinet wants.  Those are the 

omnipotent powers that you've given yourself.  Right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the powers that 

we have given this corporation and the board of trustees is that 

they can in fact involve the charities in this 25 per cent.  They 

can involve the exhibition associations in the 25 per cent.  That 

they can involve any organization or association representing 

Metis people in Saskatchewan.  And that's quite clearly the 

intent. 

 

Now if you're suggesting that if we would draft this with 

respect to just -- let me use the example of the Metis 

component -- to the Metis Nation of 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Saskatchewan, and if that would be identified and articulated as 

the only vehicle to share casino revenues, then I guess we have 

a little problem.  Because we're not satisfied with the 

accounting and there are some issues that I'm sure you're well 

aware of, surrounding the way . . . the audit report.  And 

government at this point is not in the position to be putting 

money in that area. 

 

I'm hopeful that that will be cleared up soon, but at this point 

it's not.  But I tell you this: the government is committed to 

putting money for economic and social development into the 

hands of Metis people in Saskatchewan, and that's why this 

clause is in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Complete power by cabinet, bottom line -- 

complete power.  Now the other question I want to ask you 

now is that, first of all, you have said that the government is 

going to keep 50 per cent of the pot.  You're going to get 9 per 

cent and a whole host of things added to that pot, of PST taxes 

and so on.  Of course you are.  And everything that's sold, 

you're going to get . . . any of the ancillary actions that we were 

talking about, you're going to get that.  So don't argue that.  All 

right.  I'm glad I finally got your attention to agree to that.  

We're making headway here, Mr. Minister. 

 

But the issue that I really want to bring up now is this: 50 per 

cent for you, 25 per cent for the FSIN -- if they can enforce the 

rules that you have given then to your favour as we have just 

discussed -- and then 25 per cent for exhibition associations, for 

charities, and for the MNS, the Metis Nation.  Is that right, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I think you're close.  The revenue 

sharing is 50 per cent government, 25 per cent FSIN, and 25 

per cent for the associated entities fund. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Where does it say, Mr. Minister, in this 

legislation, that it's 25 per cent for the associated entities fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think 

it's any secret -- I've said it here and I've said it outside of this 

Assembly -- that we intend the 25 per cent component for the 

associated entities fund to go to exhibitions and to the Metis 

and to charities, is the policy of the government, and it is the 

policy of this government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm not going to accept that and neither will 

the people of this province.  What are you telling me?  That it's 

the policy of this government, at this day, at this stage, right 

now?  What I'm concerned about: what is your policy 

tomorrow? 

 

That's not good enough.  Put it in here.  Put it in here, because 

the charities don't trust you.  I don't trust you.  I don't think 

anybody trusts you.  So if that's the policy of your government, 

then put it in. 

 

Where is that 25 per cent written?  Oh you've got it written for 

the FSIN; you've got your 50 per cent probably written in here.  

As a matter of fact, I'm not 

sure.  You do?  Okay.  So where is the 25 per cent for these 

other funds?  Put it in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Would 

you make it?  Would you make that commitment, that not only 

is the FSIN's 25 per cent written in stone, but also for the 

associated entities as well?  Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, and the member feels, 

it appears, quite strongly on this.  And I want to say to him that 

this government feels very strongly with respect to the 

revenue-sharing percentage.  We are more than happy and 

pleased to be able to put 25 per cent of the profits to the 

associated entities fund. 

 

And if the member has some recommendations in terms of 

what he thinks may be appropriate . . . you know, are you 

satisfied with 25 per cent?  We've said it publicly, and I 

continue to say that we're more than willing to . . . and the 

intent certainly of this, it's not . . . the government's 50 per cent 

isn't articulated in this Bill nor is the 25 per cent for the 

associated Metis fund or for the associated entities fund. 

 

The only thing that's articulated in here in terms of percentage 

is the 25 per cent for the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations.  And we have indicated, the government has agreed 

and would want 50 per cent of the revenue, 25 per cent for the 

FSIN, and other entities, 25 per cent. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well of course, Mr. Minister, the whole thing 

is making sense.  It's all falling into place.  I can see why you 

did not restrict yourself to 50 per cent.  You didn't want to put 

50 per cent in because you could see yourself getting 60 and 65 

per cent because, on the other hand, you haven't legislated 25 

per cent either for the associated entities.  So what they lose, 

you gain.  So why would you want to restrict yourself to 50 per 

cent?  That's what you're doing here, Mr. Minister, the game is 

fairly obvious and quite simple. 

 

Would you be, Mr. Minister, if that's the policy of your 

government, would you then accept an amendment that we will 

put forward, or an amendment that the third party . . . it doesn't 

matter to me who gets the credit for this.  But one fact is 

definite -- there is no 25 per cent for the other side of the coin. 

 

Now if that's your policy and if you're committed to it, then I 

would suggest that you would have no problem with limiting 

the associated entities to 25 per cent, but at least they know that 

they are getting 25 per cent.  And then the various percentages 

of that 25 per cent could then be allocated by agreement or by 

negotiations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I am willing to 

entertain a House amendment.  As a matter of fact, I'll propose 

a House amendment if it will give you more comfort.  I would 

have to admit that we are committed to the 25 per cent, and if 

you're not satisfied that this Bill prescribes the 25 per cent, then 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

we're willing to put it into legislation.  When we go through the 

clause by clause, I will introduce an amendment that I'm 

certainly hopeful will satisfy you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I don't care who 

does the amendment.  We brought it to your attention.  It's a 

concern that people have.  You say you are endorsing that basic 

concept; so whether you do it, or the member of the third party 

does it, or I can draft one, it's no problem.  We have the 

Legislative Law Clerk to help us, and we can get that drafted in 

short order.  So what do you suggest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me suggest that in section 32 is 

the one that deals with the payments required to the fund under 

the associated entities.  I see no reason that we couldn't do a 

direct parallel to section 22, which articulates the first nations 

fund and make it . . . and put it in compliance with what will 

work with respect to the associated entities.  Would you be 

satisfied with that? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, usually what happens when you 

make an amendment to a Bill, there are some consequential 

problems that might be created.  If we take a look at clause 

32(1) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm glad to hear now that 

the officials are informing the minister that the amendment has 

been drafted with all the consequential problems associated 

with it. 

 

That explains to me the minister's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. well we're making progress, Mr. Minister.  And I'm sure that 

you would have suggested this on your own if I hadn't 

hammered away at you, in order to get this issue resolved.  So I 

can assure you that we will be supporting that amendment -- 

reluctantly that this whole business is in front of us in the first 

place. 

 

All right, Mr. Minister.  There's one other amendment while 

we're at it perhaps, that you might consider, that just came to 

me as I was looking at page 10 of the Bill, as I have it, in part 

IV, where it says, "Consequential Amendments and Coming 

into Force."  Would you be amenable perhaps to accepting an 

amendment that would read: the coming into force not to take 

place until one year's time?  Would you be accepting that 

amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that is unfortunate.  

And I say it's unfortunate because as we have been going 

through question period day after day and as we've been going 

through the various parts of the Bill and the problems that are 

existing, and the things that are not ready, and the things that 

are not in place, and the casinos that are maybe going to be 

coming up, and so on, that there's so many, such a large host of 

unanswered questions pertaining to this particular Bill that I 

think that, although I made it somewhat facetiously, obviously, 

the six-month hoist or whatever you want to bring into a matter 

like this, that I think we should pause and we should reflect 

upon what we are doing to this province. 

And I guess I could, as the official Opposition House Leader, 

say well we are going to pause and we are going to reflect and 

simply by 55.1 request a three-day hoist on this issue -- would 

then of course bring it into next week, Wednesday, to give you 

an appropriate period of time to really reflect upon what you're 

doing to this province.  And while I am tempted to do that . . . 

members are saying, no, Bill, you wouldn't do that. 

 

This is a serious issue, Mr. Minister, that we are working on.  

And I get the distinct feeling, as some people in the press have 

said, that gambling policy flying by seat of the pants.  And I 

think this is a problem that we're experiencing here, is that 

you're so gung-ho on this whole issue of gambling that you're 

bound and determined to institute it whether you're ready or 

not, whether the people of this province are ready or not. 

 

I've asked you a great deal of questions during question period.  

The city of Windsor, for example, has just instituted their 

gambling policy.  The response from the city council and from 

the government was totally different than what it has been in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Regina and Saskatoon said 

you're putting casinos into our place, you're bringing in a whole 

host of concomitant problems with this new investment that 

we're going to have to have more resources to face those 

problems whether it be traffic problems, whether it be 

prostitution problems, whether it be racketeering problems, or 

whatever it happens to be.  And we don't have the resources. 

 

Are you going to be able to turn some of your 50 per cent profit 

to counter that?  We heard today that you're spending $550,000 

a year to combat the addictive problems that you are admitting 

are going to be there, while we came up with an alternative that 

would cost $77,000 a year but be much more effective. 

 

And the minister, Associate Minister of Health, could only say, 

well I haven't had time to look at it.  That's the problem exactly.  

We don't know what we're getting ourselves into, Mr. Minister.  

There are so many issues out here that have to be resolved, but 

you're so bound and determined to get your greedy little hands 

on the loot and the booty and the pot at the end of the rainbow, 

that you're not doing due diligence to the social consequences 

and in fact the economic consequences of this problem. 

 

You think it's going to do something for the province.  I heard 

the Premier here before.  I heard the Premier say that we've got 

to keep the bucks in the province and that's part of your 

rationale, otherwise they may go to Deadwood.  Where is 

Deadwood, he asks? 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, let's face one thing.  The expendable 

dollars in the budgets of many people is very, very limited.  

And I'm assuming, and I hope that you would assume, that the 

monies that you're going to generate, the $80 million and the 

$248 million or whatever you're projecting for the future years, 

where is that money going to come from?  Answer that. 

 

Is it going to come out of the expendable budgets of 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

people?  Will they be using only that money that is 

discretionary spending on their part?  I don't think there is that 

much discretionary spending in this province.  It's a finite 

amount; it's limited.  But by feeding on the hopes, feeding on 

the aspirations of the people, you will undoubtedly loosen up 

more money than that which is spent on gambling now. 

 

Because of -- mark my word -- there could be a feeding frenzy 

going on.  People who should not be spending so much money 

will now be spending that money on gambling.  Because with 

the proliferation of expanded gambling opportunities, it will 

happen. 

 

Because I have an economic theory of my own which is that 

supply creates demand.  If the supply is there, if the availability 

of it is there, there will be those people who will access that 

supply -- people who should not, people who should not.  And 

we know that from experience.  We know that from what 

happens at the bingos.  We know that happens and nobody can 

hide that fact. 

 

So by you going out and making this supply available, you 

think that you're going to create and generate revenue for the 

province.  Well you might, but what are you doing, Mr. 

Minister?  What is your government doing?  I think what your 

government is doing is not creating one cent of wealth.  

Nothing.  What you are counting on is the redistribution of 

wealth.  A typical socialist philosophy.  Perhaps that's why that 

fits in with what you are doing.  You are not creating one dime. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if you think that you're going to keep the 

gaming dollar home by creating a casino in Regina and a casino 

in Saskatoon, think again.  Oh I'll grant you a certain 

percentage will stay home, but the people who go to Reno and 

the people who go to Vegas and the people who go to 

Deadwood will still do that.  Because you know and I know 

that that is a diversion for them, that is a holiday for them, it's 

the sun for them, and they're still going to be doing it. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, what we are witnessing here is that an 

attempt to rectify the dismal job creation strategy that your 

government has not had; you haven't got a job creation 

strategy.  You have not created jobs.  We've got 6,000 jobs 

fewer than when you took office.  So what are you saying now?  

Well the first time that you try to tell me is if you're going to be 

against it, you're against jobs, you're against jobs for the 

Indians. 

 

I do not begrudge one job that the Indians get out of this -- 

more power to them.  Chief Roland Crowe did what was right 

in his eye and I don't blame him for pushing you for getting 

some jobs.  Because there were no other job opportunities.  

You have created nothing, you have created absolutely nothing.  

The Minister of Economic Development has only created jobs 

for the airlines industries as he goes around, tooting around the 

countryside and around the world.  That's the extent of the job 

creation, Mr. Minister. 

 

And now you're seeking a way out.  And I think it's going to be 

a dismal, dismal failure because I've asked 

you what are the social impacts going to be? 

 

I've cited some.  You create the supply and you're going to 

create the demand.  And you mark my words, there's going to 

be milk money and there's going to be children's clothing 

money that's going to go into the VLTs and into the casinos, 

because people who are on the verge, on the economic verge, 

will look for that pot at the end of the rainbow.  And on 

occasion I go buy a lottery ticket for 6/49 because I think well 

maybe my ship is going to come in too.  I can afford a dollar or 

two that way. 

 

But a lot of these folks are going to be pulled in to the 

gambling syndrome simply because of their economic status.  

And part of that money, part of that pot of 50 per cent and 25 

and 25 per cent that we've been talking about, is going to be 

made up of that money from those people.  And you are 

actually fighting the deficit of this province and you're fighting 

the debt of this province, created by us or by Thatcher or by 

you, you're going to be fighting that deficit and that debt on the 

backs of those poor people. 

 

Because mark my word that is going to be a major portion of 

the revenue that you're going to generate by this ill-founded, 

ill-conceived plan of yours to fight the fiscal restraints that we 

have on this province, and you're going to use the Messiah and 

the saviour of your economic woes based on gambling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I say to you that any 

government that for a moment thinks that they are going to 

solve those kinds of problems by going to gambling is creating 

a major, major bigger problem and headache for them down the 

road by using that particular example.  It's not going to work.  

Many of the things that you've done thus far, it's going to in the 

long run prove counter-productive. 

 

And I challenge you, Member of Prince Albert Northcote and I 

challenge the Premier that when history takes a look at what's 

happening in this province over the last couple of years and 

some of the actions that you have perpetrated on the people of 

the province, when history has a look at that, it will be more 

condemning of you, I suggest, Mr. Minister, than it ever will of 

us.  And history is not . . . Well, I'm not going to get into that. 

 

(1930) 

 

But, Mr. Minister, the legacy of your government, the legacy of 

this member from Riversdale, who is now the Premier of this 

province, is not going to be that of the gentleman whose bones 

you like to dig up from time to time and roll around.  Tommy 

Douglas's legacy will not be equalled by your government.  

Because your legacy will be the destruction of the society as we 

know it in this province at this time.  That's what is going to be 

your legacy, Mr. Minister. 

 

And do you know what?  The end result of all of that is that our 

problems will not be solved.  That's the sad 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

part.  If indeed you could fight the deficit and balance that, if 

indeed you could raise enough money to pay off that debt, then 

there might be some justification, Mr. Minister; then there 

might be some justification, and never mind the social ills that 

it would have created in the meantime. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, we have here an article from the News 

Weekly of April 9, 1994, and it's an article of a country that 

tried this process that you're undergoing.  Now you're fond of 

quoting things like New Zealand did to get their debt under 

control; the citizens bit the bullet there, as it were, and now 

they're on the road to recovery. 

 

Well this is not out of New Zealand, but it is out of Australia, 

and it is called: Australia -- a casino-led recovery?  And it's an 

interesting article, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, because in 

part . . . and I will read in part: 

 

 Apart from that (it says), the only significant change in the 

state's fortune and the Kennett government's only obvious 

achievement seems to be a huge increase in gambling. 

 

That's what happened in Australia. 

 

It goes on to say that there were some problems: 

 

 Both solutions turned out to be nothing of the kind as the 

economy's underlying problems of growing debt, high real 

interest rates and industrial decline remained unaddressed. 

 

 For the nation as a whole, the gambling boom is the tip of an 

economic iceberg, as spending across the economy on 

long-term investment is falling. 

 

Mr. Minister, it continues on and it becomes a little bit more 

dramatic.  It talks about: 

 

 Victoria's spending figures show that while consumption may 

be rising, the percentage of consumption going into more 

useful parts of the economy is falling while gambling 

consumption rises.  Politicians, at the same time, are 

encouraging both trends. 

 

Gambling turnover in Victoria grew by 56 per cent last year, 

$5,000 per adult per year.  Now, Mr. Minister, that is indeed a 

great deal of money that was being spent on gambling.  

However, the interesting thing to note is that the only 

consumption increase in the economy was the consumption 

revolving around gambling.  And it goes on to say:  

Government expects to collect $968 million from gambling. 

 

That figure, of course, is irrelevant to the Saskatchewan scene 

because of our different situation.  But whatever that figure 

happens to be, it's equivalent to 14 per cent of total revenue 

from taxes, fees, and fines.  In other words, a tremendous 

increase in revenue to the government where gambling 

revenues now form 14 per cent of their total revenue. 

And it goes on to say, however: 

 

 But while the government has licked its lips over the 

gambling boom, spending trends in more productive areas of 

the economy have been more disquieting. 

 

And that's what was the essence of some of my previous 

remarks, that it's going to be counter-productive in the long run.  

In the seven months . . . I'm just going to give you a few 

examples here.  In the seven months to January 1994 -- so it's 

fairly up to date -- in the seven months to January 1994, 

expenditure by Victorians on groceries -- now notice this -- 

expenditures on groceries, confectionery, and tobacco has 

fallen by 1.2 per cent.  Spending in clothing and fabric stores 

has fallen by 5.7 per cent.  Spending in domestic hardware 

stores and jewellers has fallen by 19 per cent.  Jewellers, well 

that's more expendable type again, discretionary type, so that's 

the first to go.  Spending in hotels, liquor stores, and licensed 

clubs has fallen by 4 per cent.  So again less revenue for the 

government, I suppose. 

 

The point, Mr. Minister, is that there is a finite amount of 

money.  I don't know why we would want to reinvent the wheel 

in Saskatchewan when we have examples in the countries 

around the world that have tried it, and they have found now 

that the answer, the panacea, was not there as they had 

anticipated, because of the concomitant problems involved and 

by the counter-productivity.  Because there's that finite amount 

of money that you're going to be able to expend upon. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I reiterate again, this is not job creation.  

This is not an economic boost to the province.  All you are 

doing is rearranging the chairs on the Titanic.  That's what's 

happening here, Mr. Minister.  And surely to goodness, you 

should recognize the fact that what you are preparing to do is to 

go down as those chairs went down, because it's not the answer 

that this province is looking for.  We are looking for 

meaningful, real growth where there's a creation of wealth, 

where there's a creation of goods. 

 

What you're doing with this legislation is the quick fix.  That's 

all.  You're doing the quick fix that in the end is going to be 

disastrous, in my opinion, to this province. 

 

And you have the support of a lot of people in the province for 

this; I grant you that.  But it's all the people who are looking for 

a means.  They're looking for a means to recoup and recover 

some of the funding that they have lost through the other 

strategies that your government has employed. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, again I say, you're off on the wrong track.  

And all I can ask for you is to just pause, consider, give it more 

time, come back after the people of this province have spoken, 

because you have no mandate for what you are doing.  You did 

not fight the last election on this major change in the fabric and 

direction this province wants to go.  And so what you should 

do then, Mr. Minister, is recognize that and give the real people 

of this province a chance 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

to react. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  The 

other day when introducing the Act to establish the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation, the minister 

referred to this as being an historical legislation.  And given 

that we are being pressured in the dying hours of this legislative 

session to examine the very recently introduced legislation to 

create a Crown corporation to manage casinos and, of course, 

hopefully you are wanting us to pass that legislation, I'd be 

more inclined to characterize this not as historical legislation 

but as hysterical legislation. 

 

The timing is very suspect.  And it raises concerns in the 

public's mind, for sure.  This truly appears to be something that 

has been dreamt up on the back of a napkin at the 11th hour.  

And unfortunately what it does is reflect much of what I have 

raised as concerns during question period, Mr. Minister, that 

this kind of behaviour is indicative of what happens when there 

is no strategic plan. 

 

It has been very difficult to review this Bill and to propose 

amendments for the simple reason that there has been such 

insufficient time.  And as well, there's insufficient information 

about what form the casino ventures will take to determine if 

this legislation actually suits its purpose. 

 

Now some things are evident.  First, this is not simply a tidy, 

regulatory body set up to receive the profit cheques from the 

casinos once they're in operation.  This is in fact very much like 

an investment corporation with all the powers of SOP Co, or 

whatever it's going to be called, or any other economic 

development corporation. 

 

This is legislation that answers questions which haven't been 

asked yet and yet it fails to answer questions that have been 

asked for years.  It does not deal with jurisdiction by first 

nations people, or the eventuality, in fact the promise by some 

chiefs, that casinos will be opened on reserve land, perhaps in 

cities, despite whatever agreement has been signed to create 

this corporation.  And it does not deal with the partnership for 

the remaining 25 per cent of the casino deal; does not spell out 

clearly who the partners are and what role they will play. 

 

Now as recently as this week, a decision was made by the 

Regina casino . . . or that the Regina casino would be built in 

the downtown area of Regina, but that the exhibition 

association might manage it -- and I underline, might. 

 

As recently as this morning, Mr. Minister, neither casino had 

met with your government since the announcement of this Act, 

to understand how it actually applies to them, what their 

revenue share would be, or how they would fit into the 

partnership with a charitable component and the Metis Nation.  

So I don't think that my assessment that this is pretty 

last-minute stuff is very far off the mark. 

 

In reading through this Bill, there are warning bells 

that go off in several places.  And I do hope, Mr. Minister, that 

you will be able to provide some answers this evening that are 

going to settle some of those alarms. 

 

The government has indeed attempted to shrug off different 

kinds of questions as though what they are being posed for is 

nothing but political digs.  But I do believe that all of the 

questions asked, particularly related to expanded gaming in the 

province of Saskatchewan, deserve reasonable replies.  The 

concerns are real, and they have been raised because they are 

very real, and real to many, many people. 

 

There are three components, as I view it, to this whole issue.  

There is the social issue of addressing the potential for 

addiction, and crime, and poverty.  And I think that you already 

have the views of both the official opposition and the third 

party; and I would hazard to guess, people within your own 

caucus, Mr. Minister, who have raised this and their concern 

that perhaps this has not been adequately addressed. 

 

There is the economic component of whether our society, 

whether our economy in the province of Saskatchewan, can 

support gaming and to what levels. 

 

And I won't go in at this point the difference between the kind 

of exporting province we are, which deals with an open 

economy, versus the fact that we are a closed economy when it 

comes to gaming in the province of Saskatchewan and the 

implications for that on our economic development and growth. 

 

I do believe that some of the comments that have been made by 

the Premier about this topic have been indeed nave -- nave to 

make statements about the concentration of gaming in 

Saskatchewan.  And while the Premier alluded not only today 

but last evening as well that my position is illogical when I say 

that -- and this is his quote, that bingo is okay, horse-racing is 

okay, and some VLT's are okay, but casinos may not be okay -- 

what I think he fails to understand is the interrelatedness of the 

various forms of gaming, and what can be termed the 

cumulative effects of gaming and the fact that there is, believe 

it or not, a saturation point to every single activity. 

 

Now let me use an analogy for just a moment between 

gambling and alcohol.  Now it's like saying it's okay to drink 

beer, it's okay to drink Scotch, and in fact it's okay to drink 

wine, and most people probably would not argue with those 

statements.  But what happens when you drink scotch on top of 

beer and then you drink wine on top of that?  There is what one 

would term a cumulative affect, and there is a point at which 

one passes beyond the ability to tolerate a certain concentration 

of both the amount of alcohol and the mixture, the mixture of 

alcohol. 

 

And gaming, Mr. Minister, is quite similar to that.  When 

gambling was introduced in Saskatchewan and expanded 

according to the demand, more or less, and according to the 

permissiveness of the government of the day, there were certain 

variables that took place at 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

that time.  And it took many, many years for the changes to 

take place. 

 

Now I spoke at some length about this during the private 

members' day when I had a motion brought forward, about the 

evolution of gambling, and in fact spent considerable time 

walking through that evolution in the . . . how it had transpired 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  So when we introduced 

lotteries to the mix, horse-racing had already been up and 

running for a couple of decades. 

 

Lotteries did have a significant impact on the racing industry 

and from which in fact it never totally recovered.  Now there 

was the introduction of commercial bingos and that dealt 

another blow.  It had an impact as well on some of the gaming 

that had already been present.  But after seven or eight years, 

it's interesting, because with some innovation and some support 

from government and some real insight on the part of the 

participants in the horse-racing industry, that industry began to 

show recovery even though that recovery was somewhat 

measured. 

 

(1945) 

 

Then all of a sudden there was the proliferation of the video 

lottery terminals.  And I find it rather astonishing, one of the 

things I've been asking for of course is measurement to take 

place; to provide yourself with enough time to simply measure 

the effects of what has been transpiring. 

 

The effects of the introduction of VLTs was felt almost 

immediately.  Nevada ticket sales plummeted, and this has been 

acknowledged not only by the hospital lottery foundations but 

yourself . . . the hospital foundations, pardon me.  Horse-racing 

handles did a nose dive, and I think that you've alluded to that 

as well.  And now, it's interesting that the people who are 

always talked about as somehow VLT-saving, and those are the 

hoteliers, bar owners are now seeing their liquor sales drop, 

which I'm sure your officials can talk with you about with some 

authority. 

 

Hoteliers in fact are calling me quite frequently, talking about 

the horror stories. And this is one that came in yesterday, so 

this is the one that's most clear in my mind.  About the 

$500,000 -- that is the profit being sent to your government, sir, 

on VLTs from the town of Bengough.  Now the member from 

Bengough-Milestone may find this a very interesting piece of 

information.  I would be surprised if she doesn't know it.  That 

community is 527 people -- that's $500,000 in VLTs, and that 

wasn't over a twelve-month period, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now nobody is measuring the impact, and we have no idea at 

all about whether this will get better or whether it will get 

worse.  But one of the things we do know is that trend lines are 

being established, established as we speak, established as we sit 

here this evening; they are being put in place.  And while all 

this is going on, the provincial government decides to expand 

casino gaming knowing full well that this is going to deal yet 

another blow to different parts of the 

gaming industry. 

 

But the concern that I have is that there continues to be a 

persistence, a persistence in moving on without a full 

evaluation.  Does this indicate that you really have not looked 

at all of the component parts with great care?  One in fact has 

to draw that kind of conclusion. 

 

Now you know -- as government, you have to know -- that 

Saskatchewan will indeed have a saturation point.  Whether 

you admit it today or not becomes irrelevant.  But in fact there 

will be a saturation point.  But still the government moves on, 

presses on, and appears to be very oblivious to the fact that the 

people who will build two $40 million casinos will not likely 

agree too easily to bail out their investments if the government 

suddenly realizes that they in fact have been participants in a 

bad decision. 

 

And now, as I said, at the 11th hour, the government is 

scrambling together legislation which does not address the 

interrelatedness of all of the players who have been involved 

since day one of the gaming industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I just simply don't think that Saskatchewan is 

ready for this Bill in this form.  And I know that there is an 

inevitability to all of this and that's one of the reasons why I put 

some amendments together for this evening.  The inevitability 

comes from the fact that you do have a 53-member majority 

government and we're going to get this in the province of 

Saskatchewan whether some of us like it or not. 

 

Before I get into clause by clause, I would like to ask a few 

questions about the agreement that you passed over this 

evening to us, your agreement with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations; and I do appreciate that you 

gave this to the official opposition and myself.  I am interested 

in whether the agreement has been made public.  In fact I will 

sit down and just let you respond to that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, let me say to the 

member from Greystone that as I've indicated earlier this 

evening, we haven't made this a public document.  This is an 

agreement between the government, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations; it's been ratified by all levels on 

the government side and agreed to.  The Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations has indeed ratified and agreed to 

the document.  It has been signed by our negotiators, by our 

officials, but it has not been officially signed by either 

government or the federation. 

 

We intend to have the signing ceremonies take place very 

shortly.  We wanted to wait until this legislature had had an 

opportunity to review the Bill.  I thought in the interest of 

maybe a better understanding of what we had achieved with the 

federation, that we would share copies of this legislation with 

the Leader of the Third Party and the Leader of the Opposition.  

I would certainly hope that you would respect the confidential 

nature of the agreement, but I wanted to send it over so that you 

had a better understanding. 



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

And I'm sure that the federation will have no problems in that 

they feel it's an agreement that was struck on behalf of the 

interests of not only their members, their band members and the 

bands that they represent, but a good agreement on behalf of all 

of the people of Saskatchewan.  It hasn't been released to the 

press.  The only two copies outside of government and the 

federation are yourself and the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I note in the 

agreement, and I quote: 

 

 that the government agrees to place expeditiously before the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, either at its present 

session or in its next session, legislative proposals creating 

the corporation. 

 

Mr. Minister, given that you had that option, according to the 

agreement with FSIN, to present this in the next session, can 

you explain your logic then in not forming the rest of the 

partnership to the satisfaction of all the other participants, given 

that you were actually provided with some leeway in your own 

agreement with FSIN in when you would bring forward this 

legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well in response to the member, let 

me say that upon the request of the member from Rosthern who 

asked that . . . and was quite adamant with respect to having the 

legislative authority to ratify this agreement and to enter into 

the expanded casinos, we made the decision that after signing 

the agreement with . . . and formed . . . reaching the agreement 

with the FSIN, that we would in this session introduce 

legislation that would give legislative authority through a 

Treasury Board Crown, an entity that would be established, the 

opportunity to embark on the purposes for which this Treasury 

Board Crown is intended. 

 

On one hand, the members of the official opposition are asking 

for us to introduce legislation, which we complied with.  That's 

the reason it's before you.  There seemed to be and appeared to 

be at that time no rush by the opposition to end the session.  As 

you will know, the opposition members are the people who 

ultimately decide the adjournment date.  And it was our 

position that while we were here, we may as well get some 

work done, and so the Bill was introduced and that's why we're 

debating it right now. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I did need an injection of humour this 

evening, so I'm glad you provided it for me.  I found that . . . 

and it is time for a little bit of levity.  You've been putting in a 

considerable amount of time since late this afternoon on your 

ministry this evening and late today. 

 

It's curious that you would raise that, Mr. Minister, because the 

House Leader for the official opposition was quite articulate 

this evening and quite adamant about his concern that this was 

introduced last Friday at the end of a legislative session.  And 

now what 

you're suggesting is that this entire exercise was at the bidding 

of the official opposition.  And I'm not going to be speaking on 

behalf of the official opposition, but I would suggest that I'm 

sure that they're thinking you're taking liberty with what their 

intentions were. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, what I was asking about was the fact that 

the agreement that you signed with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations gave you the leeway.  They 

actually provided you with the leeway of not introducing this 

until a later date.  My specific question to you was not about 

the official opposition at all; it was about why is it when you 

were given that leeway with the one set of partners with whom 

you have signed on the dotted line, that you would not spend 

the rest of the time allotted you in this agreement to indeed 

bring the other participants on side who could be given the 

same opportunity to talk about what their interests were and 

what they would like out of a partnership with your 

government as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I want to say to the member 

that in terms of the clause in the negotiation and in the 

agreement, that the reason that clause is there is because we 

weren't sure of when this agreement would be ratified or even 

if it would have been ratified by the federation.  Had the 

session been adjourned -- and we had no knowledge of when 

the opposition members may choose to leave the legislature, to 

adjourn -- we needed to give ourselves the ability within the 

agreement to be able to deal with this in a subsequent session 

of this legislature.  That is why that clause is here. 

 

The fact is that we signed this agreement.  We therefore had the 

ability and the opportunity to introduce the legislation and deal 

with it in this session of the legislature.  We were here, as I 

said, and while we're here we felt we may as well try and 

achieve and accomplish as much work as we can on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say that this is in fact an agreement that was signed 

with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  We have 

indicated, and through government policy, that we wanted to 

share the profits of these casinos based on the formula of 25 per 

cent for the federation, 50 per cent of the profits for 

government, and 25 per cent for the other entities, as is 

evidenced in this legislation. 

 

I find it interesting that over the days that we debated this issue, 

the Leader of the Third Party consistently indicated her concern 

for the charities and the fact that there may not be a charity 

component.  What we have done in this Bill and in this Act is 

we have guaranteed a charities component.  We have 

guaranteed a component for the Metis and we have guaranteed 

that the exhibitions' revenues will be maintained whole. 

 

And I want to say that my interpretation of the agreement that 

has been signed and what history will show, differ quite 

dramatically from the member from Greystone in that I believe 

we have for the first time shown the Indian people in our 

province that we 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

truly do believe in their right to self-determination and we do 

believe in their right to economic freedom and we do believe in 

their ability for themselves to create jobs through their 

government structure.  And I think really that's what history 

will show. 

 

With respect to the direction in this area and your comments in 

terms of the social impact, we recognize and we understand 

that there is and there does come about social consequences as 

a result of gaming, whether it be bingo, horse-racing, lotteries, 

whatever form of gambling. 

 

There are people who will find themselves in difficulties in this 

area and we recognize that, and I want to say that I appreciate 

the concerns and the issues raised by the members of the 

opposition as well as yourself.  That's why we established 

months and months ago, an advisory committee to deal with the 

social impact.  And that's why we have implemented in almost 

every occasion at this point the recommendations that they've 

put before us. 

 

Now you may argue about the inevitability of gambling and 

you can mount an argument on either side of this issue, and I'm 

familiar with both.  I think what we have done is taken the 

visionary approach in terms of our dealings with the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the Indian people in this 

province.  And I think we've done the appropriate thing given 

the circumstances that we're faced with. 

 

Now whether we are able to deal with the jurisdictional issue 

through this agreement and whether we are able to have a 

resolve to that issue, I'm not sure.  But I know this, without 

putting together this kind of a partnership and this kind of an 

agreement, we would be guaranteed to be facing that issue. 

 

(2000) 

 

And I think that the fact that this province is built on 

cooperation and understanding and working together -- 

agricultural community working with the urban community and 

the Indian people working with non-Indian people -- that's the 

history and the nature of this province as I know it.  And I think 

that this is an agreement -- and it's embodied in this legislature 

in legislation in Bill 72 -- is an agreement that will be recorded 

in history in a different light then I think you may interpret at 

this point. 

 

But having said that, I say to the member that the agreement 

was signed.  We had the opportunity in this session of the 

legislature to introduce the Bill and to pass the Bill and its 

enabling legislation that allows this corporation to conduct 

gaming activities.  That's why the Bill's before us. 

 

The negotiations and the discussions with the other parties, the 

associated entities, will take place.  We have a year until this 

casino is established.  So we have a year to have those 

discussions with them, to negotiate, and to monitor the impact 

of the interim casinos and the video lottery terminal programs, 

and 

we expect to do just that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well actually I 

think there could have been a much more specific answer to my 

original question which was,  given that the agreement that you 

had with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

indicated that you could do this either this session or next 

session, I shall repeat this.  What was the reason why you did 

not take the time to form the rest of the partnership to the 

satisfaction of the other participants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me say to the member from 

Greystone that this agreement in no way jeopardizes the 

negotiations with the other entities.  We have a year before 

there's any revenue at all that'll be generated with the new 

casinos that this Bill refers to. 

 

And I guess I echo the comments of the Premier.  Are you for it 

or are you against it?  Do you support this legislation or don't 

you?  How many casinos do you want?  Do you want them 

sovereign?  Do you want them off reserves?  What really do 

you want?  We're not clear; we're not sure. 

 

I say to you, ma'am, we have taken a position.  We have put 

forth a policy that establishes two casinos in this province.  

And after that we wouldn't be establishing any other until we 

have in fact determined the impact of these casinos. 

 

Now our position is clear; we're on record.  This Bill indicates 

where we're at with respect to casino development.  Our 

position is clear.  But I want to say to the member from 

Greystone -- I've listened to you time after time, day after day, 

week after week, as a matter of fact even session after session, 

and you have never once had the courage to stand up in this 

legislature and tell the people of Saskatchewan who you 

support. 

 

I'm not clear to this day whether you support the horse-racing 

industry but not the VLT program.  And I'll tell you what.  The 

members of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

who sat in this gallery about a week ago have got a clear 

understanding of where you come from.  They understand quite 

clearly. 

 

Now I tell you, you may fool some, you may do that.  But I can 

tell you what you're not going to do.  You're not going to fool 

them all.  And I tell you especially, you're not going to fool the 

Indian community in Saskatchewan.  And you, madam, are 

going to pay a severe price come election time. 

 

You who aspire to be the premier of this province, who can't 

even put together, can't even put together an articulate direction 

in terms of your political party, you can't articulate where 

you're going -- or you won't.  So I tell you, your lack of 

inaction is a clear indication that you don't support the 

involvement of Indian people in profits from gambling.  You 

don't support the involvement of the Metis people in gambling. 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

I tell you what you support.  You support your own political 

initiatives and that's fine.  But the people of this province will 

see through you and they will act accordingly come election 

time.  And I suggest to you, madam, that you shall never sit in 

the Premier's chair, taking the Premier's office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I always welcome comments just like 

those made by the minister in charge of gambling for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I do welcome the fact that the 

Premier is now sitting in this House, letting me know again that 

indeed we must be doing well or he wouldn't expend the energy 

that he does saying what he does.  And if people are wondering 

indeed who sits on what side of the fence, it was this very 

Premier of Saskatchewan, who was then leader of the 

opposition, who in Moose Jaw indicated that there would 

never, ever, ever be casinos under his administration because 

they would destroy Main Street, Saskatchewan. 

 

If we want to talk about friends of people who may end up in 

important places in gambling, I shan't start naming names in 

this legislature of people who likely will end up on the roll 

along the way, who actually sat in this very legislature as New 

Democratic members.  I think one of the things . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why don't you start naming names?  

Name the names. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Oh well, my goodness, perhaps what we 

should do is get back to the questions of the minister.  I'm sure 

that you can, sir, answer some of these questions.  It would be 

very . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You name the names. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, for 

taking over.  There has been some talk of a casino in Prince 

Albert.  And I do recognize that this is your home constituency, 

so I wonder if you could indeed tell me where those discussions 

are at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I am firstly going to 

ask the member from Greystone to name the names, to name 

the names.  I tell you, the performance that you put on in 

question period yesterday with respect to your accusations 

against the Justice minister tell the members of this Assembly 

and the people of Saskatchewan just who you are -- not who 

you say you are, but who you are.  You sat in this legislature, 

you stood in this legislature tonight and you made allegations 

that people who were involved with this government, who sat 

in this legislature, are involved and part and parcel of these 

discussions and of this agreement.  I want you to stand in your 

place -- have the courage to name the names. 

 

If you aren't willing to name the names in terms of the 

allegation you're making, I'm asking you to withdraw 

your statement because that is absolutely unacceptable. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I am indeed here to ask the 

questions this evening, and perhaps what we will do is get 

back.  If you'd like to read Hansard tomorrow, you go right 

ahead.  Because one of the things that I indicated, it will be 

interesting to note who will be involved in this in the future.  I 

never at any time indicated they would be, as we speak. 

 

And I find it most interesting that the Premier of this province, 

and you, sir, never hesitate to raise the names of individuals 

constantly who cannot defend themselves in this legislature.  

You do not hesitate to raise those things.  I really would like to 

pose my questions to you tonight and perhaps what you could 

do is attempt to answer them. 

 

I'm wondering if you could tell me where the discussions are at 

as far as the Prince Albert casino is concerned, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am going to say to the member 

from Greystone that I am asking you to name the names who 

were involved in the allegations that you just made.  You put 

the names before this Assembly or withdraw that statement. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I shall pose my question 

again.  In Prince . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, you're going to withdraw the names. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I never named any names, Mr. Premier.  

You indeed, sir, are the person who has named names this 

evening.  I have not raised anyone's names.  I think perhaps that 

you protesteth too much.  You're the individual who's been 

naming people in this legislature, name after name of people 

who cannot defend themselves.  So if you're suffering from 

guilt, that's your problem. 

 

There is talk of a casino in Prince Albert, which is your home 

constituency.  I'm wondering if you could tell me, please, 

where those discussions are at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam, I am going to ask you one 

more time.  I think before we can carry on a meaningful debate, 

I need to know where you were going.  You have smeared in 

the last few minutes a whole category of folks, as the Premier 

said, and you have made some allegations of involvement by 

former members of this legislature, is what you said and I heard 

you well. 

 

And I want you to have the guts to stand up and name the 

names of those who you are alleging are involved and stand to 

profit from casino development.  I am asking you again:  you 

name the names, you . . . or withdraw the statement.  Those are 

your two options.  And we'll continue with the discussion. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you would like to be 

here for the next several hours, that's your 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

prerogative.  All right?  I am here this evening to talk about 

different aspects of gaming, particularly as it relates to the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation that you want 

to have as a baby brother to the family of Crown corporations 

for the province. 

 

Now if you would like to proceed with why we are here 

tonight, so be it.  If you would like to continue in the vein in 

which you have been behaving, so be it.  But what I'm going to 

do is pose the question again.  And the question is: for your 

home constituency of Prince Albert, do you in fact have an 

opportunity to share with us this evening where the discussions 

are at with any proposed casino or if indeed there even is one in 

your constituency of Prince Albert? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, the member earlier 

tonight indicated that there will be people in high positions who 

stand to profit, who will benefit.  No names would she put 

before the House.  Yesterday the smear campaign you were on . 

. . knowing full well what the judicial process is and how it 

works, how it functions, you stood in here and made allegations 

that you wouldn't repeat outside this legislature.  And I'm 

saying to you, you may have hid from them yesterday but I 

want you to stand in here today and either name the names of 

the people who you are alleging will maintain high positions, or 

withdraw. 

 

I'm going to ask you that for the last time.  If you haven't got 

the courage to do that, or if you haven't got the decency to do 

that, we'll move on with the questioning, and I will answer to 

the best of my ability the questions that you put before me. 

 

But I ask you the last time, stand up and have the courage, the 

decency, to either withdraw or name the names. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I am not going to discuss 

yesterday, I'm not going to discuss any part of history other 

than the fact there was not one thing raised in this legislature, 

sir, that is not an issue in the province of Saskatchewan.  None 

of those things were raised by myself; they are realities in the 

province of Saskatchewan that people are asking for a status 

report on. 

 

So what we are going to do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 

isn't this most interesting, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair, that the 

Premier of this province continues to interject and raise 

people's names, people who are not in this Assembly, people 

who cannot defend themselves publicly, and that is a 

disgraceful performance.  I find this most interesting. 

 

Mr. Minister, I do pose one more time to you that you have a 

home constituency of Prince Albert; in your Prince Albert 

constituency there has been talk of people being interested in a 

casino.  And I wonder if you would please discuss with us 

where any of those deliberations are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, madam, let me tell you where 

it's at in terms of Prince Albert, in terms of North Battleford, in 

terms of Yorkton, and other areas. 

 In case you haven't been watching, we have enunciated what 

our policy is and what our position as a government is with 

respect to the expansion of casinos in the province.  We are 

going to expand in Regina and in Saskatoon. 

 

We've indicated quite clearly that until we know what the 

social and the economic impact of those casinos will be, we 

don't believe that we are in a position to license casinos in any 

other location including Prince Albert.  And that's the state of 

the negotiations.  We've had discussions with the exhibition 

association in that community, with the Prince Albert grand 

council, and with the community at large.  They're well aware 

of the policy.  I would have hoped over the weeks that this was 

discussed and debated in here that you would have understood 

where the policy was.  So if now I've been able to help you in 

terms of understanding that, I'm pleased. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I'm sure the people in Prince Albert, 

in your own constituency, will be very pleased to hear that 

you've articulated a position because they have been somewhat 

confused.  Is there any extension clause that would blanket 

other casinos or extend this partnership further? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam, the people in Prince Albert 

are not confused with the policy.  You may be, but they aren't.  

They're well aware of the fact that we have as a policy decided 

to establish only two casinos until we know the social and 

economic impact of those casinos.  We're not in any position to 

expand beyond that area. 

 

Now I think that's quite clear.  I think that's quite easy to 

understand.  And I can tell you that there were some who were 

disappointed that we didn't decide to establish casinos in North 

Battleford.  There were some who were disappointed that we 

never chose Prince Albert as the location, some in Yorkton, 

some in Moose Jaw.  And I understand that.   But it makes no 

economic or social sense to establish casinos in every 

community in the province.  It just wasn't workable. 

 

We looked at regional casino concept over a period of time.  It 

became quite clear to us that in terms of maximizing the profits 

of the casinos that we'd need to centrally locate them.  The 

overhead costs with regional casinos wouldn't be appropriate.  

And we felt that these two casinos had by far the best chance of 

success of any locations in the province. 

 

Based on that we put our policy together.  The communities in 

the regions around the province understand quite clearly what 

the policy is and that is where we stand with respect to that and 

that's where we'll be until we know what the social and 

economic impact of these two casinos are. 

 

(2015) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I take it then, Mr. Minister, that you're 

saying that there is no possibility of an extension clause that 

could blanket other casinos and that you don't have a capacity 

with this particular 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

piece of legislation to extend the partnership at all.  That's what 

I heard you say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We have the ability in this 

legislation to establish casinos in other locations.  It doesn't 

limit us to two; it gives this corporation the ability to develop 

and manage the operations from the government and from the 

FSIN's perspective.  It doesn't limit us to any number of 

casinos.  But as government policy has been enunciated, we are 

establishing only the two -- one in Regina and the one in 

Saskatoon -- until we know the social and the economic impact. 

 

The corporation has the authority to do that, but we choose not 

to exercise that authority at this time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because 

that's precisely what I thought the legislation said.  And 

although you haven't given us any definitive study on profit 

projections or the number of visits that are required to achieve 

any particular mark that you have laid down, I'm sure that you 

would agree that any projections assume that you don't have 

any competition from anywhere else within the province. 

 

Has your department done any evaluation as to what level of 

competition the casino, let's say in Saskatoon, would be able to 

withstand if there were competition from another casino that 

happened to come into Saskatchewan or be erected in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well there are a couple of points to 

be made.  First of all, the licensing authority rests only with the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority.  It's our intention 

to license only two casinos in the province -- one in Regina, 

one in Saskatoon. 

 

In terms of the competition factor, quite clearly casino gaming 

competes with the Western Canada Lottery Corporation's 

operation, with the bingo halls, with other forms of gambling.  

We went through that in terms of the pressure on the 

horse-racing industry by other forms of gambling.  And that's 

how it works. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, I'm not going to get into the 

debate with you in terms of what information would be 

required to satisfy you, because the only thing that will satisfy 

you is a political victory in this province, which I don't think is 

attainable in the near or in the distant future. 

 

Let me say to you this: we have put together the information 

based on people in the industry who understand and know the 

industry.  We've put together information from other 

jurisdictions.  We've done internal studies from Justice, from 

the Department of Economic Development.  We have studied 

this in depth.  We are taking a very conservative approach to 

expansion, as we have done with the video lottery terminal 

program.  Market saturation by . . . all of the experts in this 

province tell us that this market can handle 7,000 video lottery 

terminals.  We chose to put in 50 per cent of what market 

saturation is -- a very conservative approach; I  

think a very good business approach.  We're doing the same 

with the casinos.  We're putting in 1,000 slot machines, and 

based on that we will develop the casinos.  We don't believe it's 

market saturation.  We think we're well below market 

saturation which will guarantee, we believe, their success. 

 

And I want to say, madam, rather than having dollars flow 

outside of the province to build health care and educational 

programs in North Dakota and Montana and Manitoba, we 

have partnered with Saskatchewan's first nations to ensure 

some economic benefits for their people at the reserve level.  

We expect to do that for and with the Metis and we expect that 

we will be able to deal with the exhibitions and the charities as 

they are a component of the revenue share of both of these two 

casinos as well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, what action would you plan 

to take to protect your interests then, and those of the 

partnership, if in fact there were the threat of competition, if 

this were posed by someone who was not governed . . . their 

casino was not governed and given permission, not governed 

by this particular agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There are two aspects.  In the first 

place, as the Criminal Code of Canada stands, the authority for 

licensing casinos and operating casinos lies with the 

Government of Saskatchewan and that's our position.  The 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations have a different 

position.  Quite clearly that is one of jurisdiction.  That's an 

argument that will ultimately be settled either by amendments 

to the Criminal Code of Canada or a challenge in the courts.  

We have partnered and an agreement has been reached that will 

give us the largest markets and the most lucrative and the most 

profitable markets. 

 

If I were to . . . I can't think of a hypothetical scenario, and 

maybe you can, and maybe if you have another situation in 

mind you would want to share the details of those with us 

tonight because I'm not sure where you're headed.  But I can 

only say to you that the only body that has the authority under 

the Criminal Code of Canada to license casinos is the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority.  And they intend 

at this point to license only two, one in Regina and one in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think, Mr. Minister, that you know 

precisely what I've been leading up to -- and we could have of 

course been beyond page 6 a long time ago in my questions -- 

what agreements have you reached as to the process to settle 

jurisdictional agreements with aboriginal peoples on reserve 

casinos? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- This agreement and this legislation, 

neither piece, the agreement that we passed on to you earlier 

tonight, nor Bill 72, deals with the jurisdictional issue. 

 

It gives no solution to that, to my knowledge.  The only 

solution to the jurisdictional argument will be settled in the 

courts or by an amendment to the Criminal 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

Code of Canada. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- All right.  Well I didn't think those 

questions were all that painful, but it sure took us a long time to 

get through this small handful of them. 

 

I want to look more directly at the Bill itself now.  We've talked 

a bit about unforeseen and unplanned competition but we really 

haven't spent too much time talking about your government's 

plans.  So moving to page 2, section 4(a), speaking specifically 

about the objects of the corporation, which is, and I quote: "to 

establish and operate casinos in Saskatchewan", I am 

wondering, how many casinos?  Do you actually have a limit 

on the number that you've been discussing, and who's going to 

decide in fact if there will be further casino developments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The policy, to the member from 

Greystone, is that there will be two casinos established.  There 

will be two licensed -- one in Regina and one in Saskatoon. 

 

We have indicated that we would not entertain the expansion of 

the number of casinos until we had done an analysis of the 

social and economic impact in our province.  That clearly will 

take some time after the casinos are up and running, and until 

that time we are not entertaining the idea of expanding beyond 

the two that we have already announced in our policy. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I take it then that it is this corporation that 

would decide if there would be further casino developments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No.  The Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority would be the vehicle and the body that 

would decide whether or whether not a licence is issued to 

another casino application. 

 

What this legislation allows us to do is separate the 

management and the development of the casinos, and I guess 

you could refer to it as the economic development side, from 

the licensing and regulatory side, which remains with the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 

 

So you have two separate entities: the operator, the builder, the 

manager; and you have on this side the Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority, who is a licenser and a regulatory body. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I contend that the 

objects of the Crown are somewhat unclear.  And I understand 

that the corporation is being put in place to establish casinos in 

Saskatchewan.  That's a mechanism whereby casinos can be 

established.  But what I'd like you to do is to help those who 

are observing this evening to understand whether this Crown is 

being formed to operate the casinos or whether it will simply 

own shares in the operations of the casinos or whether there's 

some other derivative that perhaps is remaining unclear to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Basically what we have is a 

Crown that will be established as a revenue stream; the money 

will be funnelled through, the profits will be funnelled from the 

casinos through the corporation to the Consolidated Fund; the 

Consolidated Fund will divide it into the trust funds that we 

have articulated in the Bill. 

 

Basically the other role of it would be to enter into agreements 

with developers, managers, those sorts of things.  The board of 

directors, as you will know, is a seven-person board, and that 

would be the role of the corporation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, Crown corporations are 

typically established to provide services to the public which are 

considered to be essential services most efficiently delivered by 

a public Crown.  And the existing family of Crown 

corporations were created to address the delivery of services or 

the administration of resources. 

 

So the question which arises for me is whether or not gambling 

is considered to be an essential service.  It calls into question, 

of course, the role that your government is playing in this.  And 

do you have in mind that this is simply a vehicle to set up a 

way to receive the government's share of the profits?  And I'm 

just wondering how this all fits into the context of a Crown as 

we've traditionally known them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I'm not sure what your 

definition, or your purpose, or your understanding, of the 

reason for Crown corporations is in the context of some of the 

Crown Investments Crowns, or other Treasury Board Crowns.  

I can tell you what the intent of this Crown corporation is.  It's 

a Treasury Board Crown that is going to be established to allow 

us to comply with the requirements of the Criminal Code of 

Canada.  And that is to establish a body that has the legal 

authority by the Criminal Code, the federal government's 

Criminal Code, to operate, to involve itself in gaming. 

 

We have one other vehicle, that being the Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority, but we have made a conscious decision 

that we would want to see the Liquor and Gaming Authority as 

a regulatory and a licensing body, therefore as the Premier 

announced earlier today, we entered into a partnership.  We 

agreed that we wanted to structure a board of directors with 

other members on, and therefore that's the reason that we felt it 

necessary to introduce legislation to establish this Crown 

because we want to be in compliance with the Criminal Code 

of Canada, and at the same time have the developmental side of 

the casinos separated from the licensing and the regulatory 

side. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I find that quite interesting.  How involved 

then is this going to be in providing the management?  Is it 

going to be involved at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The role of the corporation is not 

hands-on, day-to-day management.  It would be contracting 

management from . . . it may be a partnership arrangement with 

the exhibition 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

association and another management entity.  We don't know at 

this point.  We're putting together the request for proposals to 

see what will come forth in that regard and we will determine, 

based on those proposals, which would be the best deal to enter 

into in terms of management of the casinos. 

 

They'll also enter into development contracts with developers, 

and I guess depending on which site, which proponents for 

which site, we don't know yet who they will be entering into 

contracts to build these casinos with, and design and all of the 

things that go with that. 

 

The other aspect, and I would want to remind the member that 

under the Criminal Code of Canada, it is only the provincial 

government under that code, in our interpretation of the code, 

that has the right to operate slot machines. 

 

This is not an unusual Crown that we're setting up.  There are 

other models.  Manitoba has established a Crown corporation 

to do the same thing that we are establishing this Crown for.  

Manitoba has done the same, as has Quebec.  Their 

interpretation of the Criminal Code is in . . . very much similar 

to ours; they've established their Crowns to do the same that 

this Crown will do. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much.  I'd appreciate 

it if you'd be able to define for me the specific role that the 

board of directors then plays.  I mean do they have any 

hands-on role at all as far as management of the casinos are 

concerned?  I'm just very interested; and if you could, sort of 

operationally define what their roles are. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well as I indicated before, they will 

involve themselves in contracts with the operational aspect of 

the casinos and with the development of the casinos -- the 

physical development of the casinos.  They will be overseeing 

on a day-to-day basis the ability of the management team that is 

contracted with to deliver, in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan, a good management, a good management 

scheme. 

 

We are certainly feeling that the board that will be set up will 

be, as this whole initiative evolves, that they will in fact be 

representative of the people of the province, as we attempt to 

do when we establish other boards.  So basically I think what 

you have here is a very important board, I think, with the 

involvement of the federation and, as well, government 

appointments, appointments from government. We have a 

chance in practice to build a working relationship on a 

day-to-day basis with the first nations people and the 

Government of Saskatchewan or the people of Saskatchewan 

through their government. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, how 

will you decide then the representation, what representation the 

partners will have on the 

board?  Have you come to some decision about how you will 

go about doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As the member will know, there are 

at this point some grey areas in terms of the involvement of the 

associated entities, whether or not the exhibitions will be part 

of the revenue sharing, or whether in fact they will be part of 

the management as is proposed by the Regina City Council.  So 

that is a bit ambiguous now because we don't know who in fact 

will require funding. 

 

What I can say is that the board will be . . . as we do when we 

put our boards together, it will take into account gender, 

regionalization, background of the board members in terms of 

their expertise in their private lives.  As well, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations will be appointing three members 

who in fact will be representative, and I'm assuming in my 

discussions with Chief Crowe that they in fact will be regional 

and that they will, in the best of their ability, be appointments 

that will be representative of Saskatchewan's first nation. 

 

I want to say, in terms of direct involvement by other people, as 

you will know, in the sections that refer to the first nations fund 

and in the section that refers to the associated entities fund, that 

there will be an appointment, a board of trustees -- six members 

-- which will, in our opinion, give an opportunity for the 

involvement by, I guess, people with a more focused interest on 

. . . in terms of how the casinos are operating. 

 

So we've got the board level of the corporation, we have the 

board of trustees in terms of the associated entities fund, as 

well as the first nations fund.  So I think it's a structure that will 

give accountability; it will give fair representation for all of the 

players involved, and we felt it was as good of an arrangement 

as we could put together, and I believe it will serve the people 

of Saskatchewan well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

wondering if you achieved an agreement with the exhibition 

boards, with the charitable component, and with the Metis, that 

the Crown would be created while the details of their 

involvement were yet to be determined. 

 

I was just wondering if you had come to some agreement with 

the exhibition boards, with the charitable component, and with 

the Metis Nation, and that was of course that the Crown itself 

would be created, but that the details of their involvement 

weren't yet going to be defined. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As the member will know -- let me 

go through this sector by sector -- the charity component, 

firstly, is to assist areas of the charity who are relying now on 

existing forms of gambling to fund their operations.  We don't 

know for a certainty who is going to be impacted nor by how 

much. 

 

I do know this -- and you and I have discussed this -- that there 

appears to be some problems in terms of the 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

portion of revenue that come from the break-opens and are 

funnelled to the hospital foundations.  And I think that that is 

one area that's quite clearly, at this point, going to give us some 

trouble.  And that's why the charities component is in there.  

But we don't know who in fact or which areas of the charities 

sector we would want to involve, so it's difficult to know who 

to negotiate with, with respect to that. 

 

So we took the position that as part of the 25 per cent for the 

associated entities, that we need to have that charity component 

there.  And that certainly is there. 

 

With respect to the Metis, the commitment that we have given 

the Metis people of this province is that there will be a portion 

of the revenues from the casinos that will be there to satisfy the 

economic and social needs of Metis people. 

 

As the member will know, there is some difficulties with 

respect to an audit that is being done on the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, and there are some problems associated with 

that.  And we have taken the position that we would not release 

funds until we are assured that there is an accounting process in 

place that will satisfy the needs for scrutiny by the Government 

of Saskatchewan to ensure that all of the funds appropriated to 

that body would be in fact spent in a fair and an appropriate 

fashion.  We haven't been negotiating with the MNS simply for 

that reason, and have indicated that we don't believe 

government is in a position to do so until some of these areas 

have been cleared up. 

 

In terms of the exhibitions, and I've indicated this just a little 

earlier, we're not sure whether or not they'll be involved in the 

management.  They -- both bodies, Regina and Saskatoon -- 

have indicated an interest in managing the casinos if not having 

the casinos situated right on site.  It's less ambiguous in terms 

of Regina.  The decision by city council has been made that 

they would prefer a downtown location and that they have 

asked that we include in management the exhibition 

associations.  That will be part of the request for proposals 

situation. 

 

So we don't know whether or not they'll be involved in 

management.  If they are, then quite clearly there's no need to 

involve them in the 25 per cent share of the revenue that has 

been set aside for the separate entities.  Because they can, 

through the management and management profits, maintain 

their revenues at a level that they have come to expect 

historically through their operations with the existing casinos.  

And that's the commitment that we made to them, that whether 

it be in management, whether it be as a portion of the revenue 

sharing directly, they would be looked after. 

 

So that's why we can't appoint or name specific groups that 

would be appointed to the board of trustees or the board of 

directors.  That's really why we haven't been involved in the 

negotiations.  The exhibitions will probably, and I'm assuming, 

be involved in the discussions in terms of the management 

contract. 

So it's a pool of capital, a pool of profits that we have set aside.  

The revenue will not be flowing to this for perhaps a year if we 

get the casinos up and running by, say, June of next year.  

Profits would flow subsequent to that and we would have had 

to have in place before the revenues flow a determination as to 

exactly how we share that percentage, other than . . . We could 

just hold it in trust but I think it would be much more preferable 

to have these details decided by the time these casinos are up 

and running. 

 

And I'm . . . this is such . . . it's rather detailed, as you will 

know, and I'm trying to make my answers short but at the same 

time give you answers to the questions that I know you have 

been looking for.  So I'm trying to talk a little faster and 

condense my answers here. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think your comments regarding the 

charitable component and the Metis Nation is . . . I mean that's 

a very fair analysis.  I can understand where there would be a 

lot of complexity because of what's been transpiring with the 

latter and of course the unknown variables in the former.  And I 

was particularly interested of course in if there had been an 

agreement reached with the exhibition boards that the Crown 

was actually going to be established, but whatever was going to 

be worked out was going to be worked out later with them, 

their involvement. 

 

Now in the language of the Bill, of course, what comes up in a 

particular clause is that the corporation will consist of seven 

members.  And we know that three of them will be nominated 

by the chiefs' Legislative Assembly of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and then that there will be four 

other persons. 

 

Will representation on the board preclude those individuals or 

the groups that they represent from being directly involved in 

the day-to-day management and operations of the casino? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I think if you're asking if employees 

of the corporation would be involved at a board level . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The exhibition?  Maybe you could 

rephrase that for me.  It's been a long evening. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Actually I would definitely agree with you 

on that.  It has been a long evening.  It's been a long session. 

 

I'm wondering if anyone's representation on the board as an 

individual or if they're representing a particular group . . . let's 

say the exhibition board.  They had representation on the board.  

They were one or two of the seven members or, for example, 

the fact that there are going to be three sitting members of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations on the board -- 

does this preclude them from being directly involved in 

management or the operations of the casino? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well we're quite . . . we're well 

aware of the potential for conflict of interest when we do 

appointments to this, as well as other 



2818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

boards.  The agreement that we have signed with the FSIN 

stipulates, as one of the parts of the agreement, that they will 

not be the operators; therefore, it wouldn't be a conflict of 

interest to have representation from the FSIN on the board that 

oversees the management because they're not going to be the 

management. 

 

We would, I think, take the same approach . . . well, I shouldn't 

say I think, I'm certain we would take the same approach when 

we would look at appointments to the board from other sectors.  

I can't tell you specifically where they'll come from at this point 

but quite clearly we wouldn't want to put ourselves in a 

position where there was a conflict or an appearance of a 

conflict of interest. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think that's fair enough as well.  I just 

want further clarification if I may.  Are you saying then that if 

the Saskatoon and Regina exhibition boards are involved in the 

management or in submitting proposals for management that 

this would restrict them from holding a seat on the board?  Like 

I just want to understand this better.  Or would they be able to 

nominate people as well and still participate in the proposal 

process? 

 

I'm just wondering how all this is going to be shaking down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told by my officials, and as you 

know I'm not involved in the day-to-day discussions with the 

different entities, but I am told that the exhibition associations 

have been told by the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority officials that they would not be appointed to the 

board. 

 

They are going to be, as I understand it, making application for 

both management and construction and so for those reasons 

they wouldn't be appointed as government representatives to 

the board. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much and bless you.  I 

really had that idea, you know; I really thought that was the 

case when I was reading this and I'm interested in this because 

of the clause in the FSIN agreement states and this is a direct 

quote from it: 

 

 One of the qualifications for developers shall be that they be 

Saskatchewan-based, based on criteria established by the 

corporation and approved by the government. 

 

Does this mean then that the board will be proposing criteria to 

the Legislative Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, I believe the process would be 

that the board would develop criteria for the request for 

proposals for management, for the building of the physical 

facility and for the design -- all those things.  The process 

would be that the request for proposals would be designed.  

They are in the process of being designed right now; not this 

evening but this week and next.  They would then call the 

interested parties in and explain what we're looking for, what 

the corporation is looking for, in terms of the 

different requests for proposal. 

 

And then I guess I asked them to go away and come back at a 

prescribed time with a proposal for their involvement in each of 

these areas.  Then there would be an analysis done of the 

proposals.  Based on the analysis, the appropriate body or party 

would be chosen and then I would assume, subsequent to that, a 

management contract or a contract for development would be 

entered into and the development would go on.  And that's what 

I assume to be the process. 

 

(2045) 

 

What I can say is, in terms of this corporation, we have in this 

legislation embodied accountability.  The Provincial Auditor 

has access to this corporation as he would to any other Crown 

corporation.  It reports to the legislature through the Public 

Accounts Committee. 

 

The funds that will be established for first nations and for the 

other entities will all be accountable in the same fashion as any 

other expenditure that would come through the blue book or 

any corporation that is established by this legislature. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'm going to just 

find out sort of what you have in mind as far as the board is 

concerned because I'm sure you've given this some 

consideration. 

 

Do you plan to fill the positions then on an interim basis on the 

board in order for the criteria to be defined and then possibly to 

replace these individuals with representatives who will reflect 

the make-up of the partnership?  I'm just wondering how you've 

been thinking through this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, I can tell the member we will 

be appointing, in the initial phases of this corporation, a 

bureaucratic board from government's perspective.  I can tell 

you that there will be a representative from Executive Council, 

from the Department of Finance, from the Department of 

Justice, and the Department of Economic Development.  Those 

will be our four appointments. 

 

We want this all to have a chance to flesh itself out in terms of 

the subsequent agreements.  And I think in the developmental 

phase, it's really important that government, as an overall 

initiative, and the different departments have the opportunity 

for input and coordination as we embark on what are some 

clearly significant developments -- expenditures of 25 

million-plus. 

 

So quite clearly, we would like an overall . . . and an overview 

from different aspects of government as we embark upon the 

development of these proposals. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I note as well, Mr. Minister, that the FSIN 

agreement, it's quite clear in its statement.  In fact there's a . . . 

it indicates that a Saskatchewan-based developer may -- and the 

word is "may" -- include arrangements under which the 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2819 

Saskatchewan-based entity enters into a partnership or joint 

venture arrangement with an entity which is not 

Saskatchewan-based.  I think that's the correct quote. 

 

I'm wondering exactly what that means.  I mean could it 

conceivably mean that if an American casino company could 

be partners with, let's say, the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations, if they wanted to invest in building one or both 

of the casinos, is that possible then under the agreement with 

them -- like under this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to answer the member in this 

fashion.  First I want to point out that the FSIN will not be 

involved in the building; they have exempted themselves 

through this agreement and through agreement with us. 

 

What we are trying to do is maximize Saskatchewan content.  

And quite clearly, I think in this kind of an initiative when 

you're looking at hundreds of construction jobs, when you're 

looking at ongoing management, the goal certainly must be to, 

first of all, employ the existing employees where that's possible 

in the existing exhibition-run casinos. 

 

But we do have some areas where there may in fact be a lack of 

expertise.  That one of the areas that are pointed out by my 

officials are that they don't believe the design expertise, design 

consultants in terms of the casino, that that expertise would be 

available in Saskatchewan and that that might be an area where 

perhaps a developer, a Saskatchewan-based developer, may 

want to go outside of the boundaries of Saskatchewan to 

wherever you would find these kinds of people and bring in 

that kind of talent. 

 

So basically that's the reason that it was drafted as it is, because 

we don't want to tie these developers to a position where they 

can't get top-notch people, and top-notch talent, top-notch 

ability, to put together a first-class casino operation -- so that's 

basically what it is.  But the bottom line is we really want to 

maximize Saskatchewan content. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I would like to say that I completely 

followed that, but I was somewhat distracted and I missed a 

portion of it.  Now what I'm trying to do is figure out here if . . . 

and I very much support the idea of having Saskatchewan 

content if you will, Saskatchewan-based developers and so 

forth.  But does it mean that one could in fact, as partners in 

this, bring in an American company then, if the expertise was 

considered to be lacking in the province in Saskatchewan?  Is 

that possible under this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The short answer is yes, and let me 

expand upon this and you will understand for obvious reasons 

why I'm going to expand on my answer.  We have expertise 

within the exhibition association casinos as an example, the 

operation of table games and so forth.  We will be looking at 

training programs for existing and for new employees of the 

casinos. 

Now that expertise may be required from outside of the 

province, and I don't think that we would want to limit 

ourselves to a cost-effective solution to that problem by 

limiting ourselves to Saskatchewan- or Canadian-based 

expertise.  If it's a requirement that we would have to, to get the 

best that we can in that field, go outside of the province, we 

would do that. 

 

But certainly when we're looking at all of these proposals or 

any of these proposals and we will be indicating to the 

proponents in the different aspects that we are interested in a 

Saskatchewan-based, in a Saskatchewan preference if you will, 

in terms of job opportunities for our people.  So the answer is 

yes, there would be the opportunity for the developers, the 

proponents, to go outside of the province. 

 

We will be looking though and we'll be viewing in a very 

positive fashion a proposal that would give more Saskatchewan 

content.  I mean if you're looking at X number of Saskatchewan 

content with contractor A, or X minus 2 with B, I'm sure the 

officials would be looking at the one that would certainly 

maximize the Saskatchewan opportunities. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- That helped.  It is interesting to me that the 

FSIN agreement that you sent over, it does clearly spell out that 

the developer and the operator will be responsible to finance, 

but in the Act . . . in fact neither in the Act nor in the agreement 

that was presented that -- with FSIN -- it alludes to what the 

percentage of the profits will go to the developer or the 

operator.  And I'm just wondering if you have a formula for 

that?  Like is it somewhere that I just haven't been able to 

locate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It's commonly held in experiences 

in casinos throughout North America and throughout Europe 

that the rule of thumb is that roughly the amount of dollars that 

come through, half are taken up by management and those 

types of fees, and about half of them are profit.  Within the 

portion of management would come management fees, those 

kinds of funding. 

 

I want to make it clear that it's not in this legislation, that there 

will be no provincial government money invested into these 

casinos.  It's government policy, it's cabinet's directive, that 

there will be no taxpayers' dollars involved in the development 

of these casinos.  These will all come from private operations. 

 

I can tell you that when we look at these proposals, we're going 

to be looking for the best buy we can get in terms of the 

management side because we certainly want to maximize the 

ability of this corporation to generate profits for the 

shareholders, for the partners that we've articulated in . . . as 

we've articulated them in this Bill. 

 

So I think if I can blow the bugle of government just a little bit, 

those who have dealt with us in the past will recognize that we 

are not . . . although not overly aggressive, we are fairly good 

negotiators and we run a fairly good, businesslike government.  

And this will 



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

certainly be, and I'm sure will be, evidenced in whatever 

agreements are reached by the board of directors of this 

corporation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- So if there are going to be separate builders 

and then separate operators of the casino, each, I take it then, 

will negotiate their share of the profits?  I mean I know you 

were talking about what is traditional or acceptable in other 

places, but I'm just wondering if there is some time frame that 

you have in which you intend to announce the structure of the 

profit sharing, or is this going to be done after you've seen the 

proposals and . . . I mean just how is this all going to work out 

in the end? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Okay.  Every once in a while I have 

to stop and consult with the officials, and this, I guess, was one 

of those moments. 

 

I want to say that in terms of the request for proposal that we 

will be putting forth, this is . . . it will not be open or an option 

for a management firm or a management entity to take part of 

the profits.  We will be putting to them a proposal that will ask 

them how much they're going to charge us for the lease per 

square foot, how much they're going to charge us for the 

management fee, how much the salaries are going to cost.  All 

of those things are going to be articulated in the request. 

 

And those, I guess, we'll wait and see what they put before us.  

In terms of whether or not there will be one request for 

proposal for management and for the development, the answer 

is they'll be separate. 

 

The fact that you may in fact be the developer of a site location 

does not necessarily mean that you or someone associated with 

you would be the operator.  We're looking for some 

competition in terms of the development and the management, 

and we think the wider we open this base the better proposal 

we're going to get in terms of an agreement. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Just to move to a 

little different area here, I'm interested in knowing whether 

you've set limits on the range of remuneration to be paid to the 

directors? 

 

In fact what I'll do is pose another question that goes along with 

this.  I am interested, and you may not be able to provide that 

for me . . . to me this evening, but I'm wondering what the 

current range of per diems and expenses happen to be that are 

paid to Crown board members at present.  And if you could 

provide in writing -- it doesn't have to be immediately -- but in 

some detail, what all the per diems and expense rates are for 

Saskatchewan Crowns.  And I don't even expect that tomorrow; 

I'm just trying to, at some point, look at some comparative 

analysis here. 

 

Have you determined then -- just to get back to my original 

question -- have you set limits on the range of remuneration 

that you'll be paying directors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I guess to answer to that I would 

say, that as an overall government policy we 

have set . . . we have different Crowns and different boards 

classified, based on the requirements for their expertise, the 

amount of time that they're going to have to spend on the job, 

and I guess the level of responsibility, and those are all rated 

within government. 

 

This Crown will be treated very much similar to that.  And I 

don't know what the rate or the per diem would be for the 

directors of the Crown.  I can undertake to get to you, in 

writing, answers to the questions that you have asked in terms 

of the rate. 

 

I just would want to say just briefly, in terms of the board of 

trustees for the operations of the first nation fund and for the 

separate associated entities fund, those funds,  the funds to pay 

their directors, their members of that board, will come from 

inside their fund.  Okay?  This one would be paid by the Crown 

in the normal process that we would deal with any other 

Treasury Board Crown. 

 

I think the maximum per diem that I can recall -- and I may be 

wrong, so don't hold me to this -- I think is something in the 

neighbourhood of three fifty a day.  But as the Crowns that I'm 

dealing with and that I look at, it's more in the neighbourhood 

of perhaps $150 a day plus travel. 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Well I am interested in being 

able to do some kind of comparison along the way, once you 

are able to establish what these amounts will be. 

 

The Act says the corporation shall employ a president, and 

since . . . And then there's a quote: the board shall constitute the 

corporation.  I'm wondering  if you can lay out the way in 

which you are seeing the corporation unfold, the time frame 

that you have in mind for looking at hiring a president, how 

you will ensure that this will be a non-partisan selection 

process, and that the person hired is paid a salary that's 

considered fair and reflective of both the responsibilities and of 

course the economic situation of the province. 

 

Do you have that in mind?  Do you have dates or a time line 

along which you're seeing the corporation being created with 

all of its component parts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well initially the employees that 

will come from the corporation will be seconded from other 

departments.  We have expertise within the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority.  They have been involved in the 

process of the development, the discussions, and they're well 

acquainted with the development of the casinos and all of the 

information that comes with it.  So we will be seconding 

employees from one department to work within this 

corporation.  So in terms of incremental employment, initially 

there won't be any.  Will there be any changes in the rate 

structure that we are paying these existing employees to be 

seconded?  The answer is no. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

I would believe that, as we do as a practice in this government, 

we will be using competition as a process for selecting the 

employees.  But initially we are going to be seconding existing 

employees. 

 

And I want to point out that we don't see this as a major or a 

large bureaucratic structure.  It is not certainly our intent to 

create employment opportunities within this Crown 

corporation.  Our goal is to create employment opportunities 

for people within the casinos, ancillary services that will be 

delivered to the casinos, new businesses that will be established 

to serve the needs of the casinos.  This is not the employment 

opportunities that we see; we think there'll be very limited 

employment and initially it'll be through secondment. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I am 

interested in the position of president.  And the Act says: "The 

corporation shall determine the president's conditions of 

employment . . ."  And I do think that people are genuinely 

interested in knowing what level of qualifications will be set 

out for the president of this corporation. 

 

Who's going to determine and set the necessary qualifications 

for the job?  And I am interested in whether or not it will be 

open to public competition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As is the practice of this 

government and the process, I'm assuming that the board and 

the minister in charge, would be looking at applications. 

 

Firstly, I think it'll take a period of time to determine exactly 

what quality of person that we would want, what calibre of 

person; always striving to find the best qualified person for the 

least amount that we have to pay of course.  But ultimately the 

minister would make a recommendation to the cabinet, to 

Executive Council; Executive Council would review the 

recommendation; discussion as always happens around the 

cabinet table in terms of major appointments and appointments 

to Crown corporations. 

 

And that would be the process.  It's not a matter of the minister 

by his or herself making a decision.  We will rely on the 

expertise that we have around us in government to help to do 

the analysis, but the final decision would be signed off by 

Executive Council. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- To just go back to the agreement that you 

sent over this evening.  I think it's in clause (j), there's already 

one board created to deal with gaming, and that's the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission.  I think that that board 

deals with this Crown, you know, I would think -- like to think 

of course -- that the board that deals with this Crown is not 

going to have any kind of political involvement.  And I'm 

interested in knowing to whom the board is going to report.  

What I'm trying to determine is whether the government's role 

is critical to the operation of the casinos, or if they simply will 

be sharing the profits that are produced by the operations 

that go on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I think, as with any Crown, 

there will be a minister in charge, a minister who is responsible 

for his or her actions to colleagues and the people of the 

province.  The board, certainly I would hope we would 

establish a board that would be built around the principles of 

the ones that we already established for Crowns.  We look at 

gender; we certainly take into account regionalization and 

having regional representation.  We want the most qualified 

people that we can. 

 

And I think if you look at the appointments, the committees 

and boards and commissions across this province, you will find 

that they are not done on a political basis.  Do we hire or do we 

appoint New Democrats?  We most certainly do.  The fact has 

been stated in the province on many occasions, 50 per cent of 

the people in this province voted New Democrat in the last 

election, and so some of them will ultimately end up on boards 

and commissions. 

 

But the criteria, the main criteria for employment that we are 

looking for with respect to the boards, is qualifications and 

their capacity to be able to handle the job. 

 

I think one of the most important things and the important 

initiatives that this government has embarked upon, and I think 

in some degree have achieved, is to try and re-establish in 

Saskatchewan a professional civil service.  We've had a look at 

. . . and I don't want to be political here, but I think history has 

shown that quite clearly political civil service won't serve the 

province of Saskatchewan over the long haul.  And what we are 

attempting to do with our appointments, the boards and 

commissions, and to senior positions, is to hire people who are 

qualified and whose loyalty is to the people of Saskatchewan 

and not to any particular political party. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'd like to move on to the powers of the 

corporation.  And it is indicated that the corporation may, and I 

quote: develop, construct, renovate, or equip any building 

facility. 

 

It appears on the one hand as though the government will not 

be financing the construction of casinos in any way, shape, or 

form.  And I can understand the empowerment to be able to 

equip the facility, because you made reference earlier about the 

need for you to be able to be in charge of the video lottery 

machines and so forth.  But it seems clear that someone else 

will build and will own the buildings.  That's how I've come to 

understand what it is you've presented to me tonight. 

 

If the two casinos planned will not require government 

involvement in the construction and if the government has no 

plans at this time to build any other locations, what is the 

purpose of this clause? Because it really quite confused me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I learned some things myself 

tonight, Madam Member.  My officials explain 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

the reason that this particular part, under section 9, clause (a), 

to "develop, construct, renovate, equip any building, facility or 

improvement," is because of the requirements of the Criminal 

Code of Canada that the province manage and control gaming.  

And I'm sure you're well aware of that part of the Criminal 

Code. 

 

Anyone who would be developing or managing or operating 

would be acting as an agent of this Crown corporation, which is 

empowered by this legislation to involve itself in gaming.  So 

that's the reason this particular clause is here, and basically it 

just would mean that the physical development and the 

day-to-day operation and management, those people, those 

corporations or entities, would be acting as agents of this 

Crown and thereby agents of the Government of Saskatchewan 

to comply with the Criminal Code. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Okay.  That's interesting because I actually 

wanted to build in some checks and balances in the process in 

this and I will be proposing an amendment a little later on this 

particular item. 

 

Now this raises a very interesting turn of events, because this is 

not the legal information that I received so I'll try to have 

someone go down and check into this at this strange hour. 

 

Let's move on then to the next section of this that I'm interested 

in.  The corporation may: 

 

 . . . enter into and participate in arrangements or undertakings 

related to establishing, managing or operating casinos or 

other related businesses and activities; 

 

That's the, I think, (b) of this particular clause, 9. 

 

Would you explain just what other related businesses that you 

might have in mind?  What might be necessary to have had this 

in the legislation when it was being drafted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me use as examples: it may be 

for parking, it may be valet service to serve the clients who will 

attend to the casinos, it may be coat checks. 

 

What we're doing is putting in place legislation that will give 

the casino corporation, the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, 

the ability to operate. 

 

It's nothing more than that; nothing less.  If there's a need to 

involve in other activities, this clause would allow that to 

happen and the examples that I've cited would be reasons that 

this clause would be here. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I guess that's what I was wondering, Mr. 

Minister, because it appears to me as though the private sector 

in Saskatchewan is going to respond to fill needs, if in fact 

there are needs to fill and if there are products to provide or if 

there are services that there are to offer, and it appears as 

though that this particular part of the Act will set the 

government up with an opportunity to be in 

competition with the private sector. 

 

So I would like your comment on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me comment really quite 

briefly.  It's not the intention of this Crown corporation to 

compete with private industry.  The intention of this Crown 

corporation is to comply with the Criminal Code of Canada, to 

allow the Government of Saskatchewan, with the partners that 

we have signed agreements with, to operate and conduct 

gaming. 

 

We have as you know . . . as part of government's direction, 

part of our policy, part of what we are building our economic 

development strategy on, we're relying heavily on 

Saskatchewan business for job creation and job opportunities, 

and it certainly isn't the intention, either philosophical or 

through accident, that we want to put ourselves in a position to 

compete with industry. 

 

Business does what business does best, and that's create job 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people.  This Crown 

corporation is being established for the simple reason that we 

need to comply with the Criminal Code, we want input from 

our partners in terms of the management of the casino.  There 

may be some things that we need to do over a course of time, 

and I think it would be near-sighted not to allow ourselves the 

clauses and the opportunities in here if at some point in time 

there was a requirement. 

 

But the focus here is on Saskatchewan business creating job 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people.  These powers are not 

inconsistent with other corporations that have been established, 

but we don't see this as a job creation opportunity, as I said.  I 

think you're going to see a small employment level in this 

corporation, and it's basically here to comply with the Criminal 

Code of Canada.  And that I guess would be my answer to that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  The other -- I'll just 

pass on the section (c), but to go on, it states the . . . to promote 

and market its casinos and related businesses and activities.  

Again, I guess this brings into question the job of this Crown, 

because my understanding was that it really should not go 

beyond collecting the profits of the casinos and overseeing its 

general operations in a way of ensuring that it can be 

accountable to the people of the province. 

 

If the operators want to maximize their profits, I think they will 

promote and they will market their products, just as any 

enterprising business person would do.  And if the government 

wants to promote the casino as an attraction, I think that's fair 

enough; I don't have any objection to that. 

 

I do question the necessity of government involvement in the 

promotion and the marketing when there will be professional 

management engaged to do those jobs.  So if you could 

comment on that section please, Mr. Minister. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to begin by saying that the 

regulations with respect to what would be or is appropriate 

marketing and advertising in terms of gaming and the different 

forms of gaming in the province is regulated at this point by the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and the ultimate 

decision in terms of what is appropriate for marketing and 

advertising will be done by the regulatory and licensing body 

which will, after the passage of this Bill, be separate and apart 

from the operation, the development, the management. 

 

So the ultimate decision in terms of what kind of advertising is 

appropriate, what kind of marketing will in fact -- and the level, 

as a matter of fact -- will be done by the Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority. 

 

The same comments that I made with respect to the managers 

being agents of the government and empowered by the 

Criminal Code of Canada, that they would act in this regard as 

agents on behalf of the Crown corporation, the government, in 

the same fashion that I suggest in clause (a), would be in terms 

of the development and the construction and the renovation and 

all of that sort of thing.  So basically the management is acting 

as an agent.  We've articulated the development in the 

construction phase.  This would handle in the same fashion the 

promotion and marketing of the casinos, but the ultimate 

regulator is the SLGA. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I'm just wanting to proceed just a 

little bit further because clause (e) in section 9 suggests that the 

corporation may, and I quote, "acquire and provide services."  

And I'm just wondering, I know that you have made some 

reference to these but I'm interested if you could provide some 

details as to what services it would be that the corporation 

would want to acquire and provide. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say this clause, clause 

(e), would do . . . I guess it could go both ways.  It says, 

"acquire and provide services."  As an example, if there was a 

requirement for a consultant with some expertise that is not 

available to the corporation through other arms of government, 

that they would have the ability to contract the proviso of that 

service. 

 

And on the other hand, the experience that will be developed 

through the establishment of these casinos could be shared for a 

cost, I would assume, to another jurisdiction or to other entities.  

So I guess to acquire, just as an example, consultant services 

and/or to provide consultant services, this clause would satisfy 

those opportunities. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  In clause (g) I 

think this gives the corporation the authority to "charge, to 

mortgage or encumber any of its property and" -- this part is 

noteworthy, I think -- "give a security interest in any of its 

property". 

 

I'm wondering if you could explain what is meant by 

that, Mr. Minister.  Does that open the possibility of selling 

shares in the casino at some point in the future if the board 

were to decide to do so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am told by the officials that this 

clause is consistent with other Treasury Board Crowns, but 

basically what it allows is for personal property security to be 

let by the corporation.  So that, I guess, is a sufficient 

explanation -- if there was a purchase made, that there would 

be a personal property security that could be let by this 

corporation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'm going to skip 

over a few sections.  In section 13 the quote is "Unless directed 

otherwise by Treasury Board, the corporation shall pay its net 

profits for each fiscal year to the general revenue fund."  End of 

quote.  What is the annual target that you have for profits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I think, member, the figure that 

we're thinking is quite realistic would about about $50 million 

in net profits.  Estimates can go anywhere from 30 million to 

$70 million, and some, I guess, even as high as $100 million.  

But I think a realistic and a fairly conservative figure is $50 

million.  In terms of how that $50 million is achieved, it's very 

much a product of the kind of casino, the style of casino you 

operate, and whether you've got good management, whether 

you've got bad management, what the market conditions are, 

what the economy is, what you're able to draw in terms of 

tourism dollars.  But I think to use the figure of $50,000, if we 

were budgeting that figure -- and I would want you to know 

that there is no revenue from casinos budgeted in this fiscal 

year -- but if we were to budget, I think a realistic figure would 

be in the neighbourhood of $50 million net. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Given that section 

that I just quoted, why would the Treasury Board direct the 

corporation to not pay its profits to the General Revenue Fund?  

Can you give me an example when that might be . . . under 

what circumstances that might happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am told that what it does is 

basically just allow Treasury Board to determine how much 

from the corporation goes to the Consolidated Fund.  There 

may be a year where they would want to retain reserves for the 

purposes of establishing maybe a corporate headquarters.  But 

those kinds of things -- it just gives Treasury Board the 

opportunity to determine.  This is not, by the way, inconsistent 

with the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority.  It's a 

pretty standard practice.  But that's what this clause allows. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- As a matter of practice, is it possible to 

earmark the profits of the corporation to specific types of 

expenditures?  I'll give some examples.  I mean certain things 

that we deal with -- job creation or health care or infrastructure 

projects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes.  Certainly it's possible to direct 

funds to health care or to education or to construction of 

highways or northern sewer 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

infrastructure programs.  All of that is possible.  But I think I've 

mentioned this in question period when the member has 

questioned.  We have taken the position that this money would 

go as -- the portion that would go in terms of government 

revenue -- would go into the Consolidated Fund and it would 

be divided through the budgetary process when we sit down 

and determine on an annual basis what our needs are for 

Education, for Health, for deficit reduction, that we have the 

flexibility to move. 

 

As you will know, studies have been done that will indicate a 

dependency when funds are earmarked and so what we're 

trying to do is allow that flexibility within government.  We're 

well aware of the dependency on charities of gambling dollars 

in this province, as you well know.  It's a very sensitive area.  

That's one of the things that I guess have been done in the past. 

 

What we're attempting to do within the context of the 

government's portion, not to identify it as either being health 

care . . . I mean it may be politically expedient to do that.  I 

mean I'm well aware of the fact that if we were to say that well, 

we're putting so many dollars into health care or we're putting 

so many more dollars into education or if we're putting together 

a job-creation program, that it's good politics.  But I don't think 

it's good public policy and that's why we have not designated 

these funds for any particular initiative. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Under the same section, Mr. Minister, it 

states that slot machines owned by the corporation be exempt 

from The Slot Machine Act.  I just wonder why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What this section does basically is 

allow us to lease the slot machines that we would be placing in 

the casinos but not a requirement to own them.  So that's why 

the exemption -- so we would be able to go into a lease 

arrangement with a supplier, and we wanted in the . . . 

(inaudible) . . . of this Bill to allow ourselves that opportunity. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Part III, sections 18 through 25, deal with 

the first nations fund.  I'm wondering if the fund is managed 

and operated, it says here by a six-person board of trustees, 

how did you arrive at the number six?  I know that sounds like 

a fairly unimportant question, but is it not tradition to have an 

odd number of trustees in order to prevent a tie vote?  I'm just 

curious. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- In the legislation it suggests that the 

board be not more than six.  If the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indians were to determine that the number five would be 

adequate to serve their purposes, then it would be five.  The 

other option is to put a non-voting chairperson in the number of 

six.  So I guess it's a decision that'll be made by the federation 

and they will determine how best this thing will function, I 

guess. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- In section 19, the remuneration expenses of 

the board of trustees come out of the fund. 

 How does the Act ensure that expenses are reasonable?  And 

will the board of trustees be subject to the same public scrutiny 

-- I think I know what the answer is, but I feel compelled to 

have to ask it -- the same public scrutiny as other Crown 

corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- You will notice under section 23, 

and we'll be getting to that -- I'm not trying to skip ahead here 

-- but that one deals with the Provincial Auditor and what the 

auditor's role is.  The Provincial Auditor will audit this fund the 

same as he will do any other entity that is under his purview, 

either the Provincial Auditor or a designate from private 

industry.  And it's audited annually and/or any other time the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may require.  So we have in 

place here a fund that will have the same audit characteristics 

of other arms that are dealt with. 

 

And in terms of establishing the board of trustees and their per 

diems, expenses, this would be done by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  We have put no qualifications.  

They are, as we view them, a separate governance structure.  

This is their fund.  And I am sure, as politicians, they will 

understand that they want to maximize the number of dollars 

and minimize the administrative costs.  Because they too face 

elections and their people will be holding them accountable as 

well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you for that clarification.  I just 

wanted to understand in my own mind that this actually means 

that the rates of remuneration and the allowable expenses then 

will be defined by the board of trustees themselves, not by 

regulation, not by any other group, but by the board of trustees.  

I understood that correctly? 

 

And it does mean as well then that the board of the corporation, 

it's a hands-off situation where they do not have the power to 

limit the remuneration of the board or the expenses of the board 

of trustees as well.  Okay.  I will indicate for the record that 

you nodded affirmatively.  Okay. 

 

In section 21, the board of trustees, it says, may invest the 

monies of the fund and may dispose of the investments and 

reinvest. 

 

What are the limitations on trustees under The Trustee Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told, madam, that it's basically 

for short-term investment, very conservative investments for 

the short term, and that's basically what The Trustee Act in this 

clause would refer to. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  That was actually 

my next question, and you anticipated it.  I just wanted to ask 

whether or not there's any guarantee that the investments would 

end up being subjected to any undue levels of risk such as 

being used for high-risk capital business ventures and so forth. 

 

We can move on to part IV, the associated entities 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

fund, in section 28.  The fund is managed and operated by a 

six-person board of trustees.  And again I have the same 

question as I had previously.  How did you arrive at the number 

six again, because of the tradition of using odd numbers with 

trustees to prevent tie votes?  And I'm wondering who 

recommended this structure for the associated entities fund. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The number was . . . and it's similar 

to what was in the first nations fund.  It's up to.  It's an 

appointment of up to six.  From time to time the number of 

members on boards of directors have different grounds for 

different reasons, are increased, decreased.  Some have the 

authority to appoint eight but will only, for whatever reason, 

appoint six or five or four. 

 

I think what we want here is a board of trustees that will be 

able to manage in a very positive and accountable way the 

funds that come in to this entity.  I don't believe that there 

necessarily will be six, but there may be.  But it just stipulates 

up to. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Okay.  I am interested, Mr. Minister, in if 

there happened to be someone who did recommend that a 

particular structure for this section, or pardon me, for the 

associated entities' board of trustees.  And I'm wondering with 

whom you consulted when you created this part of the Act, part 

IV? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The consultations, there really were 

no consultations.  The officials tell me that this part of the Act, 

part IV, was really modelled on the discussions and the 

negotiations that went on with the first nations fund.  So 

basically it's just modelled on the first nations fund.  But in 

terms of consultation there really haven't been any. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Okay.  Presumably this fund is the means 

by which the corporation provides for the management of the 

25 per cent share of the profits.  I think I'm correct when I say 

that.  And presumably this is the portion then that is to be 

shared by charities and as well as by Metis and others. 

 

So I'm just wondering why does the Act not require that the 

charities or the . . . and I know that you made reference earlier 

as to the complexity of this, like who represents the charities as 

well as the confusion around what has been happening as of 

late with the Metis Nation. 

 

But I'm wondering if there had been an attempt made to ensure 

that there would be representation on the board in this case, as 

there had been with Part III? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, I would want to say that with 

respect to the board and the make-up of the board, there is 

ample opportunity to put the players in this associated fund on 

that board.  I would assume that, as happens with other funds of 

this nature, there is fairly broad-based consultation and 

consensus within a particular sector as to how revenues would 

be shared and those sorts of things. 

 

So I think with the allowance of six people that there's ample 

opportunity for one sector to be represented at the board and to 

share the concerns of the larger body that they would represent.  

And so I think that they will be as well using the consultation 

process with their colleagues and partners and the people that 

they work with in terms of the position that they would take on 

this board of trustees. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- To move on to section 29, the 

remuneration and expenses of the board of trustees come out of 

this fund and I have the same questions here.  You were 

indicating in the previous section that it really was FSIN that 

was able to make a decision about their board of trustees and 

remuneration and expense accounts and so forth.  I'm 

wondering if the Act ensures that expenses . . . how there's a 

control in this section when nobody really knows who anybody 

is.  How will this be determined? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- These can be done and they can be 

controlled.  The amounts and the per diems, the travel, the rate 

of travel, can be done through order in council so government, 

quite clearly, can have an overview. 

 

And I think what we would want to develop is consistency 

based on the, I guess, the workload and based on the 

responsibility similar to what we would do with other 

appointments.  So ultimately, order in council would have the 

authority to scrutinize expenditures in this area. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The next section, Mr. Minister, that I have 

proposed, or will be proposing some amendments to, is section 

30.  And I have sent over, I think, the corrected amendment.  

We won't deal with that at this time. 

 

But I do recall that when the member from Rosthern was up 

earlier this evening, this was a particular concern to him as 

well, this section of the Act.  This is the section that determines 

the payments from the fund that may be paid to charities, 

exhibition associations, or the Metis Nation and others. 

 

And part III, as you know -- we're now into part IV -- but part 

III dealing with the first nations fund makes very, very clear the 

purposes for which the funds paid are to be used.  It lays out in 

fact a list of eight different specific areas in which this can be 

spent.  And I note that this is missing from part IV, and I'm 

curious as to why it is missing.  Does this mean -- I'll just add 

one more thing to this and you can answer both at the same 

time -- does this mean that the payments to the various agencies 

and groups can be used for anything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am told that these organizations 

are already under legislation in terms of where they can spend 

or where they cannot spend their money.  So there really is no . 

. . there's no reason to designate a specific target for funding in 

terms of these particular players. 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I guess I can follow then that what you're 

saying is that if you're dealing with exhibition boards, their 

rules they follow; if you're dealing with the different charitable 

organizations, they are already defined, that kind of thing, on 

which they can spend their money. 

 

Now you made reference earlier to what has been transpiring 

with the organization as far as the Metis Nation is concerned.  

How will government determine which organization represents 

Metis people?  Are you going to be just having to put this on 

hold until this is sorted out by the different Metis groups that 

are at odds at the moment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well we don't believe so.  Let me 

say, firstly, we're certainly hopeful that we can get it resolved 

to these outstanding issues that we've referred to earlier. 

 

And I think we certainly recognize that there are other entities 

that are representative of the Metis community.  As an 

example, there is a Metis economic development corporation.  

There's elected northern municipal councils that are certainly 

representative of Metis.  There are some inner-city groups -- as 

an example, the Indian-Metis friendship centres.  And those are 

all options. 

 

But I think the goal in what we're trying to achieve here is an 

economic and a social-based and a capital pool that will deal 

with the concerns and the needs of Metis.  To my mind, the 

most important and the most basic and the most fundamental is 

that it not be eaten up in program development or 

administration, but the people for which these funds are 

intended in actual fact receive benefit from the programs that 

these dollars will be able to sponsor. 

 

One only has to look at the poverty in the inner cities of Regina 

and of Saskatoon, and I guess I speak to my home community, 

the West Flat in Prince Albert is one area with a high 

percentage of Metis population and the poverty in there is 

clearly not acceptable.  And hopefully, with the allocation of 

funds, some of these funds and programs to Metis people will 

be able to alleviate and improve some of the living conditions 

for them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Will the payments 

be made to all exhibition associations?  And if not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There's two aspects of this, and I 

went through this briefly with the member from Rosthern 

earlier this evening.  We have made one overall and general 

commitment to the exhibition associations -- that we would 

attempt to maintain their revenue base and to assist them in 

maintaining their revenue base. 

 

We have, on special occasions, a video lottery terminal 

program that we have put in place in North Battleford and in 

Moose Jaw as well.  There are other communities that haven't 

taken us up on that offer to enhance their revenue.  But I would 

say to the 

exhibition associations, with the exception of Regina and 

Saskatoon who are in a bit of a different circumstance, our 

attempt is to maintain their revenue base for them. 

 

There are a number of initiatives that can be done.  We would 

want to base the amount that would be fair for them based on a 

period of years of revenue that they've generated.  This is not 

for incremental or expansion to their revenue.  What we are 

trying to do is maintain them whole.  And that's I guess, the 

purpose for which we see the programs that we put in place 

such as the seasonal or special event video lottery terminal 

programs.  And we think there are a number of things that can 

be done to assist them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm wondering 

how you are going to go about choosing which charities will in 

fact receive monies from this fund.  And I'll add a question to 

that: will the funding provided affect other government 

financial support for those particular charities which are 

chosen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The ultimate decision would be 

made by the board of trustees in terms of where that goes.  And 

as I've indicated earlier this evening, we're monitoring very 

closely the impact of expanded opportunities in gambling on 

the existing forms, the existing dollars, and the existing 

programs.  And I indicated that we believe there will be a bit of 

a problem with the hospital foundations and we certainly intend 

to as an example address any problems that may arise there. 

 

I don't know that we're going to be able to satisfy every charity.  

There is, as you have said, there is a finite number of gaming 

dollars that are going to be in this province.  There are more 

and more charities that are looking for access to gambling 

dollars.  The dependency is quite clearly there, and all one has 

to do is look at the reaction when consumer demand for one 

form of gambling shifts to another and the revenues decrease.  

There's a pretty strong reaction and we understand that. 

 

But the charity component is in here to minimize the impact by 

other forms of gambling and hopefully we'll be able to do an 

adequate job in ensuring that we at least maintain the status 

quo. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much.  I understand 

the complexity of how one would try to go about identifying 

who it is, which charity would receive some funds,  But I take 

it from your response, Mr. Minister, that at this juncture there is 

no way in place of being able . . . nothing in place to help you 

determine at this point who the charities will be and who they 

will not be.  Is that an accurate estimate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As I said, we've been monitoring 

the Liquor and Gaming Authority and it is certainly monitoring 

the revenue base for the existing forms, and I think we'll be in 

the process over the coming year.  Hopefully we can establish a 

final agreement here. 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

But we have a year until these revenues are going to be flowing 

in order to determine what the impact of the video lottery 

terminals is, to determine which are net losers, which areas are 

net losers; and through that process, we'll be able to enter into 

negotiations with the charities around the province and 

hopefully come to a fair and reasonable agreement. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Clause (c) of this section suggests that the 

Treasury Board could authorize payments to, and it states, any 

person, organization or association determined by cabinet.  I'm 

wondering what categories of individuals would you anticipate 

should receive funding in any way from this particular fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess it would be a separate 

entity.  We'd be an entity that is not a charity.  And I can't just . 

. . it's difficult to think of what that might be.  But if there is in 

fact a worthy cause that would arise, maybe on a one-time 

basis, we might be able to introduce some revenue into a 

solution for that worthy cause.  I don't know.  It might be a 

flood in the north-east corner of the province.  I just don't 

know. 

 

But the allowance is there, if there is a worthy cause that is 

identified that isn't a charity, that we would have the ability to 

deal with that kind of a situation. 

 

(2145) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, is it possible for the board of 

trustees in this section that it could actually make payments 

from this fund to the General Revenue Fund if it chose to do 

so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can't think of a reason that we 

would move from this fund into the Consolidated Fund.  It 

would be more likely the Consolidated Fund would allocate to 

this fund and then from this fund to the charities and so on.  So 

I think that would be the process. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- In clause (d) it indicates that the board of 

trustees may make payments to these organizations, and I 

quote, "for any purpose" decided by cabinet.  Will the purposes 

be described in regulations and what purposes for the funds do 

you, as minister, anticipate would be approved by cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What this clause gives is rather than 

specifying a specific charity, it could . . . or the Lieutenant 

Governor by order in council could specify a general purpose.  

It may be inner-city poverty or it may be goodness knows what, 

but it just gives the allowance for dealing with revenues for a 

general purpose as opposed to a specific entity. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm going to go on to section 31 and you'll 

probably be almost breathing a sigh of relief.  Why does the 

Act not stipulate that the associated equities fund receives up to 

25 per cent, but only a prescribed percentage set by cabinet? 

 

Now I know you made reference to this this evening and I'm 

wondering if perhaps I can get you to reiterate what you had 

stated earlier and we may be able to go 

through this fairly promptly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, I certainly can.  I didn't believe 

and I guess we just never thought it would be of concern in that 

we have on so many occasions, both inside the House and 

outside the House, specified that the special entities fund would 

be an allocation of 25 per cent of the net revenues from the 

casino operations. 

 

That appeared to be a concern for the member from Rosthern.  I 

think it appears that you have concerns with that and we will be 

introducing House amendments tonight that will specify the 25 

per cent for that fund. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  The board of 

trustees, it states, may invest the monies of the fund and may 

dispose of the investments and reinvest.  Are there any 

limitations on the board when deciding whether the monies are 

required for payments or whether the monies should be 

reinvested; or invested for that matter, not just reinvested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It's for surplus monies only and is, 

as I indicated in the other clause that deals . . . a similar clause 

in the first nations fund; it's for very conservative investments 

and for the most part it would be for short term.  This is not a 

matter of funds for speculative investment.  We're talking here 

basically a holding pattern, and so very conservative and for the 

most part it would be short term. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I'm assuming that all the 

questions I asked about the other fund in fact would apply in 

this case and I think you made mention of some of those, that 

are there limitations on the trustees under The Trustee Act and 

the forms of investments and reinvestments they can make. 

 

In section 34, the Act requires the fund to be audited and 

provide a financial statement to the minister.  I'm just 

wondering if this is going to be done through a simple 

accounting document or if in fact there will be a full report on 

the activities of the fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There would be a full report on the 

activities of the fund and we would be under the same scrutiny 

by the Provincial Auditor and be subject to the same 

requirements from the Provincial Auditor as any other entity. 

 

This would not be a half-baked financial statement.  It would 

be in full detail and, as we've indicated, has to be presented 

within 90 days of the fiscal year, and within 30 days of the 

preparation the board of trustees would have it.  And it would 

operate in accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act 

where they would have to be laid before this legislature, 

therefore ensuring the maximum opportunities for public 

accountability. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, we're bringing it on home now, sir.  

In part V, which is the consequential amendments and coming 

into force, it's actually 36(7) I have some questions about. 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

This amends The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act to 

permit the cabinet to make regulations regarding the terms, 

conditions, conduct, as well as the management, of lottery 

schemes. 

 

Does this mean that cabinet will determine the rates of pay-out 

on games of chance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes.  Under this section, section V, 

it does a couple of things.  It allows the Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority to act as the regulator and we can set the 

percentages in regulation. 

 

The other part that this particular section allows, and the 

changes allow, is it allows for our inspectors to access to the 

casinos to do the proper inspection, the required inspection, by 

the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority to ensure that 

the regulations and licences are complied with by the operators. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- What categories of individuals do you 

anticipate may be prohibited from participating in lottery 

schemes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well we already do have some very 

strict criteria.  Anyone with a questionable past in terms of 

criminal activity, people who are not financially stable and who 

would be a security risk, are quite clearly people that would not 

be candidates for employment in terms of these kinds of job 

opportunities. 

 

As you will know, we have former commissioner of the RCM 

Police in Saskatchewan, Mr. Egan, employed by the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority.  He is certainly 

well versed in investigations of this nature.  He has built good 

working relationships with the RCM Police and the different 

city police forces, with other jurisdictions in Canada and in the 

United States.  And so his ability to do the security checks 

really is second to none and we do really rely quite heavily on 

him with respect to employees, not only employees but checks 

with respect to the type of people we do business with. 

 

I think really it's quite important in terms of the Liquor and 

Gaming Authority and our licensing of gambling operations 

and opportunities that we ensure that there is not only inasmuch 

as you can ever guarantee someone's honesty and correctness, 

but that that perception is there as well.  And so we take great 

pains and we spend a lot of time in doing these kinds of 

investigations and that is the process that we take very 

seriously and we will continue to take seriously in the 

upcoming years. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  

It was ever so much easier to get through that when we finally 

engaged in questions and answers. 

 

I want to just go back for one moment to something that I had 

asked; I'd indicated I would have some people look into; and 

it's your reference to the Criminal Code.  And as you know, I 

indicated that I'd 

be proposing an amendment to clause 9(a).  I'm wondering if 

you can explain exactly which clause of the Criminal Code is 

being satisfied by clause 9(a) in which the corporation, as you 

stated, requires the ability to have the power to build and 

construct buildings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The section of the Criminal Code of 

Canada would be section 207. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Did I hear that correctly -- 207, did you 

say?  Okay.  I have just a couple of other questions then.  I'm 

wanting to know if all other casinos in the province have had 

this requirement of being managed by a Crown.  I mean, I'm 

curious as to why it is with this particular part of the Criminal 

Code that we've been able to in fact have this happen, and why 

we have existing casinos in the province that got built without a 

Crown. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There are different rules that apply 

when you introduce slot machines into these venues.  The 

existing casinos that have been operating around Saskatchewan 

for some 25 years can, under the Criminal Code, be allowed to 

operate, as they are an agricultural society and that is allowed 

under the Criminal Code.  But as soon as you introduce the slot 

machines it's a whole different picture. 

 

And the people who have looked at this for us have indicated 

that we really only had two options.  The one was to allow it 

through the Liquor and Gaming Authority which is mandated 

by legislation to do this, or to do it through a new corporation, 

which is what we are debating here tonight, the new 

corporation to allow for these gambling experiences to happen 

and be in compliance with the Criminal Code of Canada. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well one final question to you and if you 

can't answer this, this is fine; it's just a curiosity for me.  I'm 

just wondering if you could explain why in Manitoba, for 

example, that the lotteries corporation is able to operate the 

casinos and the VLTs, whereas in Saskatchewan we have 

hotels and the government that are involved in the partnership 

as far as the VLTs, and that's under lotteries, but we now 

require a Crown once we create our own casinos. 

 

And it's somewhat a circular, confusing situation.  But if you 

do have an answer for that, I'd appreciate it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well there's certainly a different 

situation between Saskatchewan and Manitoba in that in 

Manitoba they include no one in the partnership.  The 

Government of Manitoba generates all of the revenue for the 

Government of Manitoba, where we have tried to establish a 

partnership and been very successful thus far with our 

agreement with the FSIN. 

 

This required then a board of directors, and under the Criminal 

Code, as we've indicated before, we're required to have a 

legislated body to deal with this undertaking.  We couldn't put 

it into the only other 



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

vehicle that we had, that being the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority because it would be . . . the board would be 

of a different nature for a different purpose.  We want to see 

that as a regulatory and a licensing body.  On this side, we have 

included the FSIN as members of the board of directors and it 

will oversee and contract the management and the development 

of casinos. 

 

And the other point to be made is that Manitoba operates as a 

Crown, Ontario operates as a Crown, and Quebec operates as a 

Crown.  So all three jurisdictions have established Crown 

corporations to do the same thing that we are intending this 

corporation to accomplish for us. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  

And I do want to thank your officials for being so attentive this 

evening, as well as late this afternoon.  You've spent a very 

long, long time here and I thank you for it. 

 

The Chair: -- Before we proceed to clause-by-clause 

consideration, I've been provided with a list of amendments, 

and the first two amendments are to the long title of the printed 

Bill and to section 1, to the short title, and I just want to refer 

members to citation 706 from Beauchesne's, which states: 

 

 (1) The title may be amended if the bill has been so altered as 

to necessitate such an amendment. 

 

Therefore in my opinion we should begin clause-by-clause 

consideration at clause 2, proceed through the Bill, then come 

back to the short title, clause 1, and finally dispense with the 

amendment to the long title of the printed Bill. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we: 

 

 Amend clause 2(c) of the printed Bill by striking out 

"Investment". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 Amend section 3 of the printed Bill by striking out 

"Investment". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(2200) 

Clause 9 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, thank you very much.  I have in fact 

had enough discussion with the minister this evening and some 

of the indications are that section 270 of the Criminal Code is 

what requires this section. 

 

I am going to go forward and propose this, and I know that it's 

going to be defeated anyway, but I did have considerable 

concerns about the power that this really did lend to the new 

Crown especially as far as the potential of what some of the 

implications of this wording would mean. 

 

I'm going to have to assume that the government is doing this 

for precisely the singular reason that was pointed out, and that 

is to meet with the conditions of the Criminal Code of Canada. 

 

The clause 9, I move: 

 

 That clause 9 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) by deleting clause (a) and substituting the following: 

 

  "(a) equip any building or facility;" 

 

 (b) by deleting the words "or other related businesses and 

activities" where they appear on the clause (b). 

 

 and 

 

 (c) by deleting clause (d) and re-lettering clauses (e) through 

(k) as clauses (d) through (j) respectively. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 

member for her amendment, but I think her concerns have been 

addressed in our discussions and I would not support the 

amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 10 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I move that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 20(1) of the printed Bill by adding the 

following clause after clause (h), and it would be: 

 

  "(i) health initiatives". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Clauses 21 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I do want to make 

a short comment.  I'm going to introduce this amendment that I 

hope will serve to give at least some comfort to those groups 

that we discussed earlier, the exhibition boards, the Metis 

Nation, and different charitable organizations. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I move to: 

 

 Amend clause 30 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering the clause as subsection 30(1); 

 

 (b) by deleting all the general words preceding clause (a) 

whereby they appear in renumbered subsection 30(1) and 

substituting the following therefor: 

 

  "Subject to the agreements with the partners comprising 

the Associated Entities Fund under direction pursuant to 

those agreements given by the Treasury Board, the board 

of trustees shall make payments from the fund totalling a 

minimum of 25% of the corporation's net profits:" 

 

 (c) by deleting clauses 30(1)(a) (b) (c) and (d) and substituting: 

 

  "(a) to exhibition associations in Saskatchewan, the 1993 

net proceeds that those associations had earned, from 

casino activity generated revenue; 

 

  (b) after one year, if there has been an increase in the 

amount of casino wagering above the gross casino 

wagering for 1993, the guaranteed amount paid to 

exhibition associations will increase by that percentage; 

 

  (c) to any organization or association representing Metis 

people in Saskatchewan; or 

 

  (d) to charities, non-profit organizations, or associations in 

Saskatchewan prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council." 

 

 And 

 

 (d) by adding immediately after renumbered subsection 30(1) 

the following: 

 

  "(2) Subject to any directions given by Treasury Board, the 

board of trustees may make payments from the fund for 

any purpose prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council." 

 

I so move, Mr. Chair. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  

Again, I appreciate the concerns and the amendment proposed 

by the member from Greystone.  We are satisfied that the 

clause as it exists will satisfy the needs of the exhibition 

associations, the Metis, and other interested parties with respect 

to revenue sharing.  So I would not support the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 30 agreed to. 

 

Clause 31 agreed to. 

 

Clause 32 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As we 

have been discussing during the time that I had with the 

minister, we became concerned that while the section on the 

FSIN, the first nations fund, there was a definitive commitment 

for 25 per cent, but not in the next fund, Mr. Chairman.  I 

would like to make the following motion therefore: 

 

 Amend clause 32 of the printed Bill by striking out subsections 

(1) through (8) thereof and substituting the following: 

 

 "(1) At the beginning of each fiscal year of the fund, the 

Minister of Finance shall estimate the net profits of the 

corporation for that fiscal year. 

 

 (2) For a fiscal year of the fund, the Minister of Finance shall 

pay, out of moneys appropriated by the Legislature for the 

fund, an amount not exceeding 25% of the corporation's 

estimated net profits for that fiscal year as estimated pursuant 

to subsection (1). 

 

 (3) At the end of each fiscal year of the fund, the Minister of 

Finance shall determine the net profits of the corporation for 

that fiscal year. 

 

 (4) Subject to the Minister of Finance's right to withhold 

moneys to the fund pursuant to subsection (7), if the amount 

paid to the fund pursuant to subsection (2) for a fiscal year is 

less than 25% of the net profits of the corporation for that fiscal 

year as determined pursuant to subsection (3), the Minister of 

Finance shall pay to the fund an amount equal to that 

difference. 

 

 (5) An amount payable pursuant to subsection (4) shall be paid 

out of the general revenue fund. 

 

 (6) If the amount paid to the fund pursuant to subsection (2) for 

a fiscal year is greater than 25% of the net profits of the 

corporation for that fiscal year as determined pursuant to 

subsection (3), an amount equal to that difference: 

 

  (a) is a debt due to the Government of  



June 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

Saskatchewan; and 

 

  (b) is payable by the fund to the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 (7) The Minister of Finance may collect any debt due pursuant 

to subsection (6) by withholding an amount equal to the debt 

from any future amounts to be paid from the general revenue 

fund to the fund or in any other manner allowed by law." 

 

Thus far the amendment, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I think 

you will agree that this is a very legitimate amendment, 

because essentially what we have done here is taken out these 

and substituted for what you had the very same section as it 

was in the first nations fund essentially.  And therefore what it 

will do is ensure the compatibility of the two funds so that 

indeed each of these funds is being treated in a similar fashion. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I trust that the minister will see to it that he 

would support this amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I would want to say 

that I appreciate the efforts of the member from Rosthern and 

his amendment.  We have been going through this Bill clause 

by clause.  We have just passed clause 22, that in article (2) of 

section 22 uses -- and I'm going to quote from that: 

 

 For a fiscal year of the fund, the Minister of Finance may pay, 

out of moneys appropriated . . . 

 

May -- and I want to use the word, I want to emphasize the 

word "may" for the same reason that in the subsequent clauses 

the word "shall" in clause (4) of section 22 is used.  It indicates 

the same intent in the first nations fund, and the drafting would 

not be consistent if we were to accept the amendment of the 

member from Rosthern. 

 

So I would suggest, and I will propose an amendment that will 

be consistent with section 22, that in clause (2) uses the word 

"may" as opposed to "shall" because we need to be consistent, 

first of all, with respect to the first nations fund and the 

associated entities fund.  And if we use my wording, it will be 

consistent.  If we use yours, we're going to have an 

inconsistency here. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- We're not completely together on this but 

we're getting closer together.  So what I would suggest is that 

since I've read my amendment in already and you are 

concurring with it except for this -- the "may" to "shall"; the 

"shall" to "may" -- I suggest, Mr. Minister, that you make a 

subamendment to this particular amendment and then we're on 

the road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I would move a 

subamendment: 

 That under section 32(2), the word "shall" in the first line be 

removed and substitute the word "may". 

 

Amendment to the amendment agreed to. 

 

Amendment as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 32 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 33 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 36 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I move that we: 

 

 Strike out subsection 36(2) of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "(2) Section 2 is amended: 

 

  (a) in clause (g.1) by adding ', the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation' after 'section 207 of The Criminal Code'; 

and 

 

  (b) by adding the following clause after clause (u): 

 

  '(u.1) 'Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation' means the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation established pursuant 

to The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act'". 

 

 Amend clause 6(1)(b.1) of The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, as being enacted by subsection 36(3) of the 

printed Bill, by striking out "Investment". 

 

 Amend clause 14(b.1) of The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, as being enacted by subsection 36(4) of the printed Bill, by 

striking out "Investment". 

 

 Amend clause 28(1)(d.1) of The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, as being enacted by clause 36(5)(a) of the 

printed Bill, by striking out "Investment". 

 

 Amend subsection 28(2) of The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, as being enacted by clause 36(5)(b) of the 

printed Bill, by striking out "Investment". 

 

 Amend section 28.01 of The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, as being enacted by section 36(6) of the printed Bill, by 

striking out "Investment" wherever it appears. 

 

 Amend section 179.1 of The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, as being enacted by subsection 36(7) of the printed Bill, by 

striking out "Investment" wherever it appears. 

 

I so move. 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1994 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 36 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 37 agreed to. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 Amend section 1 of the printed Bill by striking out 

"Investment". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 Amend the long title of the printed Bill by striking out the word 

"Investment". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:24 p.m. until 10:26 p.m. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended on the 

following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Thompson Renaud 

Shillington Trew 

Johnson Serby 

Goulet Sonntag 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Cunningham Stanger 

Bradley Jess 

Lorje Langford 

-- 18 

Nays 

 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Toth Haverstock 

Britton Bergman 

-- 6 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation and to enact certain Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

(changed from Bill No. 72 -- An Act to Establish the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation and to 

enact certain Consequential Amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that 

the amendments be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move that Bill No. 72 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 

 

 


