




















































Hansard: April 20, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1695 

 April 20, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to lay petitions on the Table this afternoon dealing with the 

issue of underground storage tanks.  And I will read the prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up of underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from . . . mainly in the 

Luseland area, Macklin, Lougheed, Alberta, there is one as 

well, Moosomin, Rocanville, and Weyburn.  And it gives me 

pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to lay these on the Table at this time.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

from people across Saskatchewan regarding underground fuel 

tanks.  I want to present these today.  They come from 

Maryfield, Saskatchewan; Regina, Fairlight, and then Luseland 

and Denzil, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to present 

these to the Assembly today on behalf of these petitioners. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have petitions 

today to present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, who in 

their thousands, Mr. Speaker, have been petitioning this 

Legislative Assembly on the issue of underground fuel tanks. 

 

And today I would present petitions on behalf of citizens from 

the communities of Calder; Wroxton; Yorkton; Tramping Lake; 

Luseland, Saskatchewan; Steelman; Oxbow; Carlyle; Alameda; 

Frobisher; Glen Ewen; lots of people in the southeast, Mr. 

Speaker, Estevan -- obviously people all around the province, 

Mr. Speaker, who would like their views known to the 

Assembly and I would present them today, sir. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

dealing with the important issue of the underground storage 

tanks that is on the minds of a number of people around 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions come from Cupar, Dysart, Regina 

areas, Wolseley.  Mr. Speaker, they are from Torquay, Estevan, 

a number of areas, a number of communities in Saskatchewan.  

I'm pleased to present them on their behalf today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too have 

a number of petitions to lay on the Table.  And these petitions 

are signed by individuals from the south-east part of the 

province, eastern side of the province.  Communities like 

Tantallon and Wawota, Calder, Wroxton, Melville,  Mr. 

Speaker, and Waldron. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people are petitioning the government to give 

consideration to their legislation as they are concerned what 

will happen to the communities as well.  And I so present the 

petitions. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

pages of petitions dealing with the same subject.  And as the 

prayer has been already read, I won't read it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people pretty well 

across the province -- Luseland, Tramping Lake, Macklin, 

Primate; we go over to Yorkton, Saltcoats, Rokeby, Wroxton, 

Springside, and places like that, Mr. Speaker, pretty well across 

the province.  They're showing a very high interest in this, and I 

would like to lay this on the Table on behalf of those people.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today dealing with the underground storage 

tanks.  As evidenced by the meeting in Davidson, it's an issue 

across the province. 

 

These petitions comes from Stockholm, Yorkton, Round Lake, 

Theodore, Calder, Saltcoats -- quite a few from Saltcoats, Mr. 

Speaker.  I'd like to present them today. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well 

several pages of the petition with regards to the underground 

tank situation.  These petitions are exactly as the prayer read by 

the colleague earlier.  They come from Unity, Langham, 

Perdue, Grandora, Saskatoon, Asquith, and Biggar.  Most of 

these are from the Grandora area though, and I'm happy to 

present them on behalf of those people today. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions.  I think there's five here, totaling about 75, with their 

concerns over the burying of the varied underground fuel tanks.  

And I'll just cover a few of the towns. 

 

This page here is mostly from Cupar, Mr. Speaker; one from 

Regina and a couple from Lestock.  And then the other one is 

mostly Bethune area, close to my constituency.  Then I have 

Southey, Cupar, Southey, Markinch, several from Regina, 

Saskatoon, Saltcoats, Saltcoats -- quite a few from Saltcoats; 

Yorkton, as far away as Yorkton. 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure on behalf of these people to 

lay it on the Table for the minister's consideration.  Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly urge 

the government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my privilege today to introduce to members of the 

Assembly, with you in your gallery, and behind the bar, Mr. 

Speaker, some 50 seniors from Saskatoon, from St. Philip's 

Golden Age Group, who are visiting Regina today. 

 

Mr. Speaker and I had the opportunity to have lunch with this 

group. And I wish to advise the House that I was working very 

hard for them, serving coffee and tea at lunch time, so they 

observed me doing some work here anyway. 

 

I'd also advise the House that on a rare occurrence Mr. Speaker 

took all the questions, and I think he handled them fairly well.  

I would commend the group for offering support and 

socialization opportunities to seniors in Saskatoon.  Your 

generation has built a great province.  You typify the 

Saskatchewan spirit, and this institution is one that was built 

and continued within a fine tradition by your generation. 

 

And so we all welcome you here, and we hope you enjoy the 

IMAX Theatre.  Have a good day in Regina.  Thanks for 

visiting the legislature, and have a safe trip home. 

 

And I invite all members to join with me in welcoming you 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, today I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to the members of the Assembly 53 grade 12 students from 

Canora Composite High School.  Accompanying these students 

are the teachers, Larry Neufeld and Merv Tomski, and along 

with bus drivers, Joe Chairowik and Shirley Skoretz. 

 

These young people are just at the age where they're entering 

the realm of democratic process, and I encourage them to 

pursue that.  I congratulate the teachers for bringing them here, 

and I look forward to meeting with them for drinks and a short 

meeting later.  So thank you very much, and please welcome 

them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the legislature three members 

from the Saskatchewan Mining Association.  I believe they are 

seated in the east gallery here. 

 

We met with them this morning.  Our committee met with them 

this morning to discuss some of the relevant issues around the 

mining industry.  And we recognize certainly the importance of 

the mining industry to Saskatchewan.  And I'd like to ask all 

members to warmly welcome them here today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I would like to ask permission to also 

introduce some guests. 

 

I'd like to join the member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain 

in welcoming the St. Philip's Golden Age Group.  As I was 

indicating to the group when I was speaking to them in the 

cafeteria, this is the first time in 20-some years that a group has 

come down -- a senior citizens' group.  I was wondering 

whether they were trying to give me a hint that I should join 

them soon in the future, and I would accommodate you in that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- See, the members here agree with you.  I 

might accommodate them too. 

 

I would like to welcome you people.  We had a lovely 

half-hour down in the cafeteria.  And this is the first time in 20 

years that a senior citizens' group has come down from my 

constituency to pay a visit to the legislature, and I certainly 

welcome you people here. 

 

Many of them I know as colleagues in the teaching profession, 

others from my church in St. Philip's, others from the Knights 

of Columbus and some of course were former constituents of 

mine and some are now presently constituents of mine. 

 

So I do want to welcome you here.  I know the members will 

be on their best behaviour for the rest of the time that you're 

going to be here, not to embarrass the Speaker.  So welcome, 

and I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the seniors 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Drake Meat Processors 

 

Mr. Koskie:  -- Mr. Speaker, today I would like to advise the 

Assembly about another economic success story in my 

constituency.  Drake Meat Processors, located in Drake, is an 

example of a company providing economic benefits to both the 

local community and the province.  This is accomplished 

through consistent growth, a thorough knowledge of its market, 

and quality of its product. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

Drake Meat Processors have had a real impact on the 

community of Drake.  The company has brought 50 jobs to the 

town. 

 

The firm began almost 40 years ago as a very small 

meat-cutting plant, and in 1983 the plant was rebuilt and by 

1985 was producing a line of processed meats that were being 

retailed in large grocery stores throughout Saskatchewan.  

Drake Meat Processors claim that one of the reasons for their 

success was the "Saskatchewan made" campaign and logo. 

 

Drake Meat Processors now produce almost 200 varieties of 

processed meats.  Its workforce, as I said, has expanded from 6 

employees in 1985 to 50 in 1994.  Mr. Speaker, Drake Meat 

Processors is a fine example of success of small business in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Remarkable Recovery of Nearly Extinct Whooping Cranes 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The whooping crane is 

the best-known and most celebrated endangered species in 

North America.  The last known nest of whooping cranes in 

Saskatchewan was in the Kerrobert area in 1922.  Since then 

whooping cranes have only nested in Wood Buffalo National 

Park. 

 

The cranes migrate through Saskatchewan each spring and fall.  

The birds are currently passing through our province on their 

way to their nesting grounds in Wood Buffalo Park. 

 

For many years the public have reported whooping crane 

sightings to wildlife officials who monitor and if necessary 

offer some protection for these rare birds.  If anyone observes a 

whooping crane, they are encouraged to call the whooping 

crane hot line operated by the Canadian Wildlife Service in 

Saskatoon.  The phone number is 975-5595. 

 

Thanks to public cooperation and support and wildlife agencies 

in Canada and the United States pooling their resources and 

expertise, the whooping crane has made a remarkable recovery 

from a low of 21 birds in 1941 to about 270 whoopers in the 

world today. 

 

With dozens of species becoming extinct every day in our 

fragile planet, the recovery of the whooping crane from the 

brink of extinction demonstrates that conservation efforts do 

provide positive results.  At the same time the long and often 

painful recovery of the whooping crane shows that it is far 

more responsible and wiser to protect natural ecosystems to 

ensure the survival of all life-forms on earth before they are 

driven to the brink of extinction.  Thank you. 

 

80th Anniversary of The Fern Rebekah Lodge No. 33 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

take this opportunity to acknowledge 

two notable events which occurred in the town of Kisbey this 

past weekend.  The Fern Rebekah Lodge No. 33 celebrated its 

80th anniversary, and at the same time honoured a very special 

member, Alberta Smith.  The Rebekahs are a valuable service 

organization in Kisbey that strive to help others in the 

community by providing such things as support for minor 

sports, youth, the playground, and other community programs 

and projects. 

 

Alberta Smith, a member of the lodge since it was established 

in 1914, has held numerous offices with the Rebekah Lodge 

and although she doesn't attend every meeting, she's still a very 

active member.  Ms. Smith was presented with a veteran's 

jewel for being a member for the past 80 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a first for Saskatchewan and possibly for 

Canada.  In fact the Rebekah's central office has no record of 

ever presenting a member with an 80-year award before.  Mr. 

Speaker, I think that I should also mention that Mrs. Smith will 

be celebrating her 99th birthday this coming September. 

 

This being Volunteer Week, I would like to commend the 

Rebekah lodge in Kisbey and their veteran volunteer, Alberta 

Smith, for their valuable contribution to Kisbey and to the 

people of the Souris-Cannington constituency.  I ask all 

members to join me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Indicators 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly we all know 

the best-kept tourist secret in North America is our own 

province.  I'm happy to announce, Mr. Speaker, that the secret 

is out.  People are inquiring about Saskatchewan in record 

numbers and people are following up on their inquiries by 

coming in increasing numbers.  Those people who come are 

bringing their wallets and leaving jobs. 

 

For the following year of 1993, there were 203,000 tourism 

inquiries, up 28 per cent over 1992.  So far this year, Mr. 

Speaker, we are 63 per cent ahead of last year.  As I said, the 

people are inquiring, are coming.  Visitors from the States who 

stay at least one night are on the increase.  Visitors to our 

national parks are up.  Restaurant receipts are up. 

 

The recent announcement of the Clarence-Steepbank area in 

my constituency will attract even more tourists to northern 

Saskatchewan.  Attendance at special events like Buffalo Days, 

the Saskatchewan exhibition, and the Western Farm Progress 

Show, and Moose Jaw Air Show is up. 

 

All this is good news, Mr. Speaker, and I congratulate all those 

involved in the tourism industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan:  Leader in Health Care Reform 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Several countries are looking at Canada, and 

in particular Saskatchewan, as a leader and a desirable example 

in health care reform.  Representatives from Saskatchewan 

have been invited to visit various countries in South America 

and to give seminars on our health system and on our health 

reform initiatives. 

 

A recent example of this is our senior assistant deputy 

minister's visit to Bolivia and Panama to explain 

Saskatchewan's health reform plan.  The seminars were 

organized by the Pan American Health Organization, working 

through the Canadian Society for International Health. 

 

In Bolivia the seminar was held in La Paz where over 60 

participants from Bolivia, Peru, Chile, Columbia, and Ecuador 

listened intently to the presentations about Saskatchewan's 

health plan.  The other seminar, held in Panama City, attracted 

20 representatives from Panama, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, El 

Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala. 

 

At both seminars an overview of the Canadian health system 

was given.  There was a session on managing health systems 

information and health human resource issues were discussed.  

However, the delight and the highlight of the seminars was a 

demonstration of the new Saskatchewan community profile 

database.  This drew a great deal of interest since most of the 

countries have a very limited sense of vital statistics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should all be proud that the countries of South 

America and the world are looking to Saskatchewan for an 

example. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Waste Materials Exchange 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last week in 

Saskatoon the Saskatchewan Waste Reduction Council 

announced a new venture for Saskatchewan people, the 

Saskatchewan waste materials exchange.  This is a non-profit 

venture co-sponsored by the Saskatchewan Research Council 

and by the Saskatchewan Waste Reduction Council. 

 

The idea is really very simple, that one person's garbage is 

potentially another person's gold.  The council will publish a 

quarterly bulletin that will list surplus materials that are 

available, materials that might otherwise be considered waste, 

with materials that are being sought by other companies.  

Surplus by-product or off-spec material then from one 

company will be made available to another company for feed 

stock in their business. 

 

And what's significant then about this exchange is not simply 

the principle of environmental responsibility, but also the 

principle of economic opportunity.  Reducing costs for those 

who have waste will increase profitability for those who need 

these waste materials and can use them, thus enhancing the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan businesses and, as a 

bonus, reducing pressure on our landfills. 

 

Other provinces have had such exchanges since 1984, though 

not all of them.  I want to commend the Waste Reduction 

Council and the Research Council for their cooperative venture 

and also to congratulate SaskPower, Weyerhaeuser, and Sask 

Chemicals for their participation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

University Funding 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Education.  Madam Minister, when you sat 

on this side of the House, there was nothing you or your 

colleagues liked more than to criticize the funding levels for 

education. 

 

And I'd like to quote if I could please. The education ". . . 

system has been starved and we're paying the consequences 

(from) . . . it now."  And that was from the Premier on April 5 

of 1990. 

 

Another quote: "We're going to give education the top 

priority."  He said March 21, 1990. 

 

Or: ". . . what do you suggest that the president of the 

University of Saskatchewan do? . . . Should he increase the 

tuition . . . by 10 . . . (or) 20 . . . or 40 per cent or higher?"  

From May 7, 1990. 

 

Those comments were made at a time when universities were 

still receiving funding increases every year.  Madam Minister, 

as a result of your downloading, the U of R (University of 

Regina) tuition fees will increase by 6.4 per cent this year, 

bringing the total increase to 28 per cent since you took office. 

 

Why did you mislead the young people of this province prior to 

the last election by telling them that you would increase levels 

of education funding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to thank the member for the question.  As the member 

knows, that when this government took office in November of 

1991, we were faced with the reality of a $15 billion deficit.  If 

you look at the way government spends taxpayers' money, over 

66 per cent of taxpayers' money goes to third parties -- school 

boards, municipalities, schools, universities, technical schools, 

health centres. 

 

When a government is faced with a $15 billion deficit, and 

bankers not prepared to lend us money in order to repay loans 

taken out by our previous administration, the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) Party of Saskatchewan, then we ask all of our 

stakeholders, all of our partners in Saskatchewan, to help share 

the burden.  That includes universities, health organizations, all 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and that's what we've asked the 

university to do. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

Now we have been able to say in my colleague, the Minister of 

Finance's budget delivered on February 17, that there'll be no 

further funding reductions because we have got our fiscal house 

in order and we are now starting to turn the corner in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the fact that there may 

be no further cuts is small comfort when the students have 

received a 28 per cent increase and the Premier and your party 

knew what the budget numbers were prior to the election while 

you were being so critical about the funding.  Every time there 

was a cut you criticized and demanded more money, even 

though funding was increasing. 

 

I'd like to quote again from the current Premier of October 16, 

1990: "Increased education spending is a priority for the NDP.  

All I can say is we simply have to find the money." 

 

A quote from the member from Saskatoon Nutana: "When can 

the students and universities of this province expect adequate 

funding so that tuition fees do not have to be increased again?"  

October 22, 1991. 

 

A quote from you, Madam Minister: "I would like you to 

explain to the young people of this province how you can 

justify your government's decision to cut educational funding."  

April 2, 1990. 

 

Again, I'd like to ask you this question, Madam Minister.  I 

would like you to explain to the young people of this province 

how you justify your decision to cut education funding, 

increasing tuition fees by 28 per cent, given the promises you 

made and your government made while in opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I wanted to once again 

thank the member for his question.  The young people in this 

province, which no doubt are watching the proceedings today, 

are aware that our province is presently spending in excess of 

$840 million on interest payments alone on debt that you 

racked up. 

 

Now, Mr. Member, we spend $889 million on education in this 

province.  If we had allowed the debt and the deficit to continue 

out of control, we would have had to make further funding 

reductions.  Young people in this province would not have 

access to university and other post-secondary institutions. 

 

We have done this, sir, we have made the funding reductions so 

that young people in this province will have a future that will 

mean an education and will mean jobs, not unlike what our 

forefathers and mothers did in this province.  They scrimped 

and they saved because they knew that a penny saved was a 

penny earned.  And that's what we're doing today. 

 

Warman Volunteer Fire Department Mock Casino Night 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This 

afternoon I would like to direct my question to the minister 

responsible for Liquor and Gaming.  Mr. Minister, as you 

know, this is Volunteer Week and many of your colleagues 

have made statements in this House about how invaluable 

volunteers are to the communities, and we agree with that.  It is 

unfortunate that volunteer charities and non-profit 

organizations are finding it tougher every day to raise funds for 

their communities, since they have to compete with your 

government's gambling initiatives. 

 

Mr. Minister, a representative from your Liquor and Gaming 

Commission, a Mr. Gene Humenny, has informed John 

Thiessen in the Warman Volunteer Fire Department that if it 

goes ahead with the annual mock casino night, that a complaint 

will be filed and charges will be laid. 

 

Mr. Minister, maybe you don't know it, but a mock casino 

doesn't even use real money for Heaven's sake; it's play money. 

 

Could you confirm, Mr. Minister, that this threat has indeed 

been made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I will want to talk to 

the department responsible; the minister will want to look at 

this.  But I would be surprised if they have a casino that uses 

play money, or if they're doing monopoly, that there will be 

any problem with that.  But I will certainly check on that for 

the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, let me elucidate for your benefit.  This mock casino is 

the only fund-raiser the Warman fire-fighters hold each year.  

Last year they got between a thousand and fifteen hundred 

dollars.  Then the proceeds from that were used to purchase the 

jaws of life.  This year the money that they will raise is 

intended to go to equipment to help heart attack victims -- 

equipment that could raise the success rate of revival from 4 

per cent to 26 per cent. 

 

After the threat was made, the deputy fire chief basically said, 

go ahead and charge us.  We'll hock our jaws of life and use the 

money to take the government to court.  Then the next time 

someone has an accident we will tell the accident victim to sue 

the Liquor and Gaming Commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you think that's extreme, how about your 

government shutting down charitable organizations all across 

the province.  Mr. Minister, how in the world can you justify 

shutting down fund-raisers whose sole purpose is to save the 

lives of Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, here again we have, 

I'm sure, an exaggeration, extraordinary, talking 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

about shutting down all the charities across the province.  

There's no such intent; the member knows that. 

 

I have already indicated that on this specific issue that he's 

referring to, I'll have the department check on it.  But I'll tell 

you, when I talk about using play money, the $15 billion that 

we have in debt in this province as a result of that kind of an 

attitude, you would have thought . . . you thought it was play 

money while you were spending the billions of dollars in very, 

very strange ways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, it's obviously 

going to be hard to pin down an answer from this minister.  I'll 

be a little more specific.  Gord Thompson is the Warman 

deputy fire chief.  And he has requested written confirmation 

that he . . . and Mr. Humenny had told him this threat.  And yet 

he was told Mr. Humenny doesn't write letters. 

 

Don McRobb, manager of your department's inspection, said he 

wasn't sure how many organizations had been charged, but felt 

many had been shut down, Mr. Minister -- many had been shut 

down.  And I for one, as a former fire chief, volunteer fire chief 

of the Hague fire department, find the response of your 

government being quite unconscionable, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hundreds of organizations in this province hold mock casino 

nights with proceeds going to worthy causes.  Just when did 

you decide that competition from charities was too stiff for you, 

Mr. Speaker?  And just how many charities and volunteer 

organizations have you shut down, Mr. Minister -- how many? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This gets stranger and stranger.  On 

the one hand he says we're shutting hundreds of them down; 

then he says hundreds of them are operating, except for this one 

here. 

 

I think what is important here, that everyone take note that we 

will check out the issue.  Because what we're getting from that 

member opposite is absolute confusion, because I'm sure he 

doesn't understand the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the point is, these have been 

operating over the years.  They are in the process now of using 

threats and intimidation to close these down. 

 

Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Firefighters Association held a mock casino night, and that the 

member for Melfort participated?  Are you aware that a casino 

night was recently held by the Crop Insurance Corporation at 

their big $80,000 party that they had?  As well, Mr. Minister, 

there was a mock casino held in Saskatoon in appreciation for 

responders.  And these were held by the Saskatoon Health 

District Board. 

 

Mr. Minister, why weren't . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Will the member please 

ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, you're laughing.  But I'll tell 

you, the people from Warman and Hague who are watching 

these proceedings are not laughing.  The charities are not 

laughing. 

 

I'm asking you, why are you picking on them?  Why weren't 

those casino nights that I just mentioned raided and shut down 

by your Liquor Commission?  Would you please commit today, 

Mr. Minister, to reverse this outrageous decision that you are 

embarked upon, and allow charities and volunteer 

organizations to raise funds for their just cause. 

 

Or do you also now threaten those two ministers that I 

mentioned with legal action for their participation in this illicit 

gambling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I have clearly 

indicated to the member opposite that when it comes to the 

mock casino -- I believe it's in Hague although I'll check the 

record -- that we'll check into it.  But I would also tell the 

member that we'll absolutely check into all the members of the 

Assembly to make sure nobody is out there attending these 

mock casinos because we will want to make sure that that isn't 

happening. 

 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, I can't imagine what the member is so 

agitated about today.  Obviously there's an issue dealing with 

the Hague Volunteer Fire Department.  I said four questions 

ago . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Warman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- At Warman.  Well this is how 

difficult this is to understand because he gets so excited that it's 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh you were the fire chief at 

Hague?  Okay. 

 

I want to get this straight.  Because I want to tell you that we 

will check it out.  Obviously for Warman this is an issue.  I'll 

check it out. 

 

But for crying out loud, let's not get so excited we start an 

investigation into all the members as to whether or not they've 

been to mock casinos. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, there's a very simple point.  The 

simple point is that the people of this province want equity and 

fairness in the system.  Now, Mr. Minister, as this scene 

unfolds here it reminds me very much of the scene from a bad 

gangster movie.  We have "Lucky" over there, he gets wind 

that the Warman Volunteer Fire Department is trying to 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

muscle in in his gambling action, so he sends a couple of his 

gaming enforcers to shut them down.  That's the reality of it. 

 

And I'm being asked now, I'm being asked to question . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I wish the members 

would just calm down a bit and let the member ask his 

question.  And the member is taking a lot of time to ask his 

question; I wish he's ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, and government members, what 

the people of Warman are asking me, is this whole scenario 

your idea, Mr. Minister?  Or does it come from those mob 

bosses over there, whether it's "Pretty Boy Roy" or "Eddy the 

Torch" or . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think it might be time 

we recognize another member to ask a question.  I wish the 

member would ask his question seriously. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, to the people in this province 

who are trying to raise money to make up for the default from 

your government in terms of sponsoring good equipment, they 

are asking this question:  how far are you prepared to go to 

ensure that you and all of your comrades over there get every 

dime of gambling action that is in this province?  Isn't shutting 

down a volunteer fire department's mock casino night just a 

little bit extreme, even for your NDP (New Democratic Party) 

mafia over there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member for the fifth time, we will check into this issue of the 

mock casino in Warman. 

 

But I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, on a day that there is a 

great deal of speculation about the Liberals in Ottawa making 

huge cut-backs to funding to the provinces that we spend 

almost all question period on mock casinos.  I'll tell you that is, 

I think, the main issue of why that party finds itself at single 

digits in the poll -- simply out of touch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-Fault Insurance 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Because I'm 

unable to pose my question to the minister responsible for SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), I will ask the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government convened an eight-member 

panel to study no-fault insurance, and the panel included Roger 

Carter, who recommended no-fault insurance in 1976; John 

Green, the former president of SGI who recommended no-fault 

in 1976; three SGI lawyers who presumably had to go along or 

go home; and a doctor from Saskatoon who had been a vocal 

proponent of no-fault. 

 

From the very outset, Mr. Premier, it appears that they have 

had their minds made up, and it also appears that this particular 

panel was rigged to provide a particular answer that you 

wanted. 

 

What I want to know is, exactly which jurisdictions they 

studied in order to come up with their conclusions, and upon 

which jurisdictions they actually did draw their conclusions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I note again that with 

each day in this legislature, the Leader of the Third Party, the 

Leader of the Liberal Party, reaffirms her commitment to the 

old politics that she so denounces so often but of course 

practises daily.  Because the thrust of her question is not the 

substance of no-fault -- which I think is an evolutionary next 

step to take from the very good insurance plan that we've had 

and has been run fairly well  

_- but the substance of her question is to attack the motivations 

and the personalities of several outstanding Saskatchewan 

people who studied this and made a recommendation. 

 

Now if that isn't an example of personality old-style politics 

attack, I don't know what is.  This is a very damaging 

condemnation, I think, of the Leader of the Third Party.  Of 

course those of us who have been watching know full well that 

that's exactly what the Liberals are doing -- practising old-style 

politics, because they're one of the old-line parties. 

 

Your question specifically is: what have they studied.  I don't 

know what they've studied; the report will tell you what they've 

studied.  But I presume, since I have confidence in the integrity 

of these people, that they took into account the considerations 

of a variety of jurisdictions and a variety of competing views, 

from lawyers to head-injury groups to other groups, in order to 

make the recommendations. 

 

Please, Madam Leader of the Third Party, try to elevate the 

level of questioning a little bit from this old-style politics of 

personality attack. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Old-style 

politics, Mr. Premier, is when one accuses one of casting 

aspersions on people's character, when in fact all I did was to 

cite actual fact.  They have come forward in stating their biases 

since 1976 in the province of Saskatchewan -- I merely relate a 

fact to you, sir. 

 

One of the jurisdictions that your government has used for 

scrapping our public insurance system is the Sobeco Study, the 

Sobeco report from Quebec, the study of the Quebec no-fault 

insurance system.  And this report recommends the creation of 

the no-fault system. 

 

Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan bears no resemblance whatsoever 

to Quebec.  We are not rife with densely populated areas, we 

do not have a network of icy, 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

busy freeways, and we are not filled with drivers who are 

renowned for dangerous driving habits. 

 

Mr. Premier, why is it that your panel and SGI relies upon 

Quebec's answer for a Saskatchewan problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, again, I think this 

question by the Leader of the Liberal Party also is somewhat 

disappointing and I would say somewhat depressing, because 

what she does is she fastens in on the Quebec experience and 

tries to argue that our position is based on the Quebec 

experience.  And I won't ask out loud -- I'll perhaps ask, but I 

won't proffer the opinion -- as to why she uses that particular 

language, knowing full well that Manitoba, which is a province 

of similar population and similar considerations, has a no-fault 

insurance scheme. 

 

And why it is that she fastened on Quebec and not Manitoba I 

think is open for some speculation as to why she would do it.  I 

think the Liberal Party of Canada would be very concerned 

about that tone as well. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that no-fault insurance, as I said, is 

a people's improvement.  We respect the arguments which are 

advanced by the lawyers and by others who hold a contrary 

point of view.  We know the debates that have taken place, but 

when it's implemented in Manitoba, as it's been implemented in 

other parts of Canada, it is an improvement. 

 

Why?  Because it allows for at least a capping or controlling of 

rates.  It allows for expeditious settlements without necessarily 

long court hearings and it also switches the emphasis from 

injury -- although there's injury compensation -- to 

rehabilitation, which is the next step. 

 

And people who are injured want to be rehabilitated.  This is a 

family-oriented program, like labour legislation is; all of the 

things in this session -- that's exactly what the motivation is 

behind it.  This is the policy behind no 

_fault insurance. 

 

So please, if you ask your questions, take into account . . . and 

be fair about it.  Quebec has got a scheme; we think it's not 

perfect, but it's workable.  Manitoba does have a scheme too -- 

I mean it may not be exactly the same one that we adopt; there 

are other provinces in this area.  Be fair in your questioning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Perhaps, Mr. Premier, you 

consider being fair in your answers.  The reason why the 

second question was posed is because of the Sobeco Study, 

which was done from Quebec. 

 

Mr. Premier, when Ontario was considering no-fault insurance, 

a major study was undertaken by Judge Osborne of the Ontario 

Court of Appeal.  And since he had nothing to gain from the 

decision in Saskatchewan, we can consider, I think, this 

research an independent opinion.  After an exhaustive study of 

every insurance system of consequence on the North 

American continent, at a cost of $10 million in over 18 months 

of research, they concluded against the no-fault insurance 

system. 

 

Mr. Premier, please tell us how this particular study helped you 

and your government decide it was necessary to scrap our 

insurance system in Saskatchewan in favour of no-fault. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I find it interesting 

and if I may say so, wildly contradictory.  In the previous 

question, the Leader of the Liberal Party gets up and says, why 

did you take into consideration Quebec, which has absolutely 

no implication to Saskatchewan?  In this next question, she gets 

up and she says, why don't you consider the Ontario study, 

which presumably has every application to Saskatchewan?  I 

got to tell the Leader of the Liberal Party, that Ontario with 

nine million people and Quebec with six million people -- 

neither has very much applicability if that's the consistency 

which she advocates. 

 

The reality is we have to design a scheme which we think is in 

the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan.  And the thrust 

behind this Bill is for families -- I've said before -- to try speed 

up the nature of the settlements, to try to make sure that there's 

a switch from injury to rehabilitation, to try to curtail the rates 

which are a big worry and a big expense for everybody. 

 

There are good arguments on either side, all sides of the debate.  

We've taken this point of view; you may not agree but it doesn't 

surprise me.  Because in this session you and your colleagues, 

the Conservative Party, the official opposition, have opposed 

absolutely everything that we've done for ordinary families.  

You've opposed The Labour Standards Act, you opposed The 

Trade Union Act, now you oppose no-fault insurance.  Is there 

anything you support with respect to ordinary families or is it 

all for big, big, big business? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  For 

someone who has no appreciation for law and order, nor 

someone who has any appreciation for farm families, I find that 

rather ludicrous coming from you. 

 

Mr. Premier, one would expect that you would use professional 

input from the industry but you never asked for it.  And one 

would expect public hearings but when you were asked by the 

industry, you wouldn't allow for that to transpire.  At the very, 

very least I believe that the officials in SGI and in the 

department, in the government, and the advisers should have 

done their homework. 

 

Mr. Premier, I have a letter that is signed by Roger Carter, the 

chair of the panel that was set up to study no-fault insurance.  

And in it he indicates the studies he has never even read.  One 

of those was the most extensive, exhaustive research of no-fault 

in the 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

entirety of the North American continent.  And he states that he 

has never read this study.  It was free for the asking, Mr. 

Premier, and he never even bothered to read it. 

 

Why is it that SGI, the minister in charge and the panel in 

charge and apparently yourself has chosen to change the entire 

system of insurance in Saskatchewan without even doing the 

homework? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Third 

Party persists in her shameful personal attack on a 

distinguished former dean of the College of Law, an 

outstanding lawyer and an outstanding citizen in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Her attack . . . It's interesting that she will 

support an Ontario judge -- I have no complaints against his 

study because it suits her case -- but will attack those men and 

women who contributed to our study. 

 

I find this really a very shocking and very disappointing 

approach by the Leader of the Third Party and Leader of the 

Liberal Party, but not particularly surprising because we've 

seen it over and over again. 

 

Look, why doesn't the Liberal Party leader simply come clean, 

just come clean?  You're trying to out-right-wing the right-wing 

opposition which sits to your right.  You're trying to out-bash 

the working men and women in your opposition to The Labour 

Standards Act, to The Trade Union Act. You're trying to 

out-bash them with respect to no-fault.  You're out-bashing 

them in every way that you can in some, I would say shameless 

attempt, hopefully, to try to get a grab for power. 

 

I will avoid any comment, any comment, about whether or not I 

have any respect for law and order . . . with respect to whether 

you have any respect for law and order.  But I say, for 

somebody who believes in the so-called new politics, I tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, this legislature long ago now knows that that is 

simply words. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act respecting Representation in the 

Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, today I wish to move 

second reading of The Representation Act, 1994.  The 

Representation Act implements the report of the Constituency 

Boundaries Commission and gives effect to the motion that 

was passed by this House on April 13 of this year. 

 

As the members of this Assembly are aware, there were two 

amendments made to the report of the Constituency Boundaries 

Commission when it was 

debated in this House.  Those two changes had no impact on 

the boundaries recommended by the commission, instead they 

were changes to two constituency names - Wolf Willow to 

Wood River and Regina Victoria-University to Regina 

Victoria. 

 

The Assembly approved name changes to these two 

constituencies in the interests of making the constituency 

names more relevant and ensuring that the areas were more 

identifiable to constituents. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill simply follows from the motion 

that was passed by this Assembly last week.  We recognized 

and spoke to the goals of reducing the number of seats and of 

increasing the democratic principles of effective and equal 

representation during the debate on that motion, and I do not 

feel it necessary to repeat those in detail here. 

 

Suffice it say that we feel the commission did a commendable 

job and we accept the report as a substantial improvement to 

the electoral map of our province. 

 

It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of The 

Representation Act, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd just 

like to make a few comments before we adjourn and allow all 

members of the Assembly to reflect a little more on the Bill 

that's before us before we even expand it to Committee of the 

Whole and even a passage through the House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a number of things that were raised by the 

opposition when the government established a commission . . . 

and we raised three or four questions.  We brought in proposals 

and unfortunately found that the government wasn't willing to 

listen to the proposals. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the most important things that was 

raised in the discussion was the fact that when you allow a 

commission and appoint a commission, maybe what we should 

have done and this House should have done, instead of 

establishing and setting out guidelines and limitations on the 

commission, and basically laying out how many seats would be 

in rural Saskatchewan and how many seats would be in urban 

Saskatchewan, how large these seats would be, where the seats 

would be, and how they would be drawn up, we should have 

allowed the commission to ability to sit down and assess what 

the need was in Saskatchewan for, say number one, the number 

of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly); number two, 

how the boundaries would be drawn up; and number three, I 

think the most important issue is the fact that when you're 

looking at constituency boundaries, you should be looking at 

the electorate and the electoral vote out there versus the federal 

census where everyone is involved. 

 

And I think that's one of the . . . as we find . . . and this 

legislation passes the Assembly and the electoral 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

boundaries change, we might be very surprised to note, come 

the next provincial election, the major discrepancy that I 

believe we will see in constituencies as far as the electorate, the 

number of voters per riding. 

 

I believe you're going to find that a lot of the rural ridings will 

indeed have a substantially higher number of voters compared 

to some of the urban ridings.  No doubt there was an attempt to 

try and balance the number of residents per constituency.  But I 

think when you're looking at constituencies, you don't look at 

drawing boundaries around a consensus . . . or a census; that 

includes all individuals. 

 

And I think one of the reasons we suggest that we're going to 

see some discrepancies is because of the fact that the younger 

families are moving to the communities and certainly the larger 

centres where there are jobs available.  And so when you've got 

a family of four and there's only two of voting age, whereas in 

a lot of the rural centres we have a lot of seniors, it would seem 

to me that we're going to see a substantial change. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as we have indicated, it would have been 

more than fair for the government in appointing the 

commission . . . and I commend the commission for the work 

they were able to do and the guidelines they were able to come 

up with and the make-up of constituency boundaries, 

considering the fact that they were really limited.  They were 

basically hamstrung. 

 

Their review and their ability to go and talk to the electorate 

actually came into play, took place after this Assembly had 

already laid the guidelines.  And basically it indicated: number 

one, that there was going to be a reduction of seats from 66 to 

58; that the constituencies would be based, the number of the 

population, the constituency would be based on the consensus.  

And these were areas that the commission really didn't have the 

ability to go beyond and to do some major questioning and ask 

people what they thought. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, what we have here and what the 

minister has indicated, I believe the commission has done the 

best with the information that they had and in light of the 

guidelines that were set around them.  They've done a 

commendable job. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I think sooner or later or someday, Mr. 

Speaker, we're going to have to arrive at a position whereby the 

constituency boundaries are basically looked at in a format that 

is totally removed from the Legislative Assembly, if need be, 

Mr. Speaker, so it's taken out of the hands of whichever 

government happens to be in power of the day, the government 

of the day.  So that even though this government argue that this 

was an open forum, the fact is, it was very limited. 

 

And as I've indicated, I think it would be very appropriate for 

each one of us as MLAs and as elected representatives to allow 

the public a little more of an 

opportunity to voice their concerns with us, and to raise some 

of the concerns they've got on their mind, raise some of the 

issues, and throw out some ideas.  And possibly, before the Bill 

passes in the House, the government might reflect on what has 

transpired, give some consideration -- although I doubt it -- to 

some of the issues that were raised, and indeed add some real 

logic to the Boundaries Commission. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I 

would like to introduce, to my immediate left, Marianne 

Weston, the executive coordinator of the Women's Secretariat; 

immediately behind her, Joan Pederson, the assistant executive 

coordinator; and to her left, Pat More, director of administrative 

services, Saskatchewan Labour. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

have a few questions I'd like to go over with you in the next 

few minutes.  I think mostly what we want to develop and find 

out is what progress we have made in the Women's Secretariat 

over the last year.  Most of the questions I have today will 

probably be in that vein, Madam Minister.  We would like to 

develop some of the promises that you made in previous times 

and see just how far we've got with some of those things. 

 

Could we start off, Madam Minister, by indicating what you 

see as the mandate for the Secretariat is. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  As I 

have indicated on other occasions in the legislature, the 

Women's Secretariat works in partnership with all government 

departments and with the community to attempt to achieve the 

goal of equality for women in Saskatchewan.  So the Women's 

Secretariat works to integrate women's concerns into 

mainstream government planning and policy making. 

 

Government programs and services are available to 

Saskatchewan people through government departments such as 

Education, Health, and Social Services. The Secretariat's 

activities within government ensure that women's particular 

needs and perspectives are considered in the development and 

delivery of these services.  The secretariat will, for example, 

consult with women's groups and organizations as well as with 

individual women to ensure that the diversity of women's needs 

are considered. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

The secretariat provides public education and information to 

raise awareness and understanding of issues that impact on 

women. 

 

The secretariat also encourages economic self-sufficiency for 

Saskatchewan women in whatever way they can. 

 

The secretariat coordinates, promotes, develops, and 

implements programs and activities of the government relating 

to the status of women.  It provides policy development and 

research support and services to government.  It analyses trends 

to anticipate and predict women's future policy and program 

needs. 

 

So it has the mandate to work with other government 

departments to help influence their policy making to take into 

consideration the women's perspective.  It has the mandate to 

work with the public, with groups and individuals, to assist 

women's groups, and to assist women to achieve equality, and 

to listen and consult, receive their advice, and attempt to 

implement this at the governmental level. 

 

So it's a very broad mandate to work as a coordinator, if you 

like, perhaps is the best word, amongst government 

departments, amongst groups, amongst individuals to try and 

move us towards a society that's more equal than what it is 

now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I guess I 

neglected to welcome your staff; I'm sorry about that.  I 

appreciate the officials being here to help us through some of 

this. 

 

Madam Minister, last year I think the secretariat set a goal to 

develop a new mission statement and vision, I think is the way 

you put it.  What have the results of these been, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, what the Women's Secretariat has 

set out is that we envision a society which ensures economic 

equality and social justice for women, and which values 

women's work whether it is unpaid labour in the home or work 

in the paid labour-market.  We envision a society which 

ensures the safety and well-being of all women. 

 

And then the next question of course is how do we achieve 

these goals.  And the Women's Secretariat indicates that we 

attempt to achieve them by expanding employment equity to 

provincial Crown corporations and other government agencies; 

through the introduction of occupational health and safety 

legislation that prohibits harassment in the workplace, which 

we've already done. 

 

We also attempt to achieve these goals of economic equality 

through new labour standards legislation which provides added 

benefits and protections to part-time workers, the majority of 

whom are women. 

 

We have also introduced the victims of domestic violence 

assistant Act, which help women who are 

being abused by their partners.  In that way we achieve more 

social justice for women. 

 

Through the children's action plan, we are supporting 

community-based efforts to assist and enhance the well-being 

of the province's most vulnerable children, a matter that is of 

concern to women throughout the province, and to men, I 

might say.  But because women are still primarily responsible 

for children, we tend to think of that as more of a women's 

issue, although it isn't necessarily.  It is a people's issue because 

there are many men that share those concerns as well. 

 

The Women's Secretariat continues to undertake research 

policy development and public education on issues of concern 

to women.  This year the secretariat has been given additional 

resources to provide education and training on the issue of 

workplace harassment.  Those are some of the measures that 

the government has taken to try and achieve the goals of 

economic equality and social justice for women, and the goal of 

valuing women's work, whether it's in the unpaid labour force 

in the home or in the paid labour-market. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, I appreciate what you have said, and I listened, and 

you talked quite a bit about benefits, social justice, and things 

like that for women.  And I agree with you when you say that 

perhaps we men turn the biggest part of child raising over to 

the women.  I think we have to plead guilty to that.  And I 

think, Madam Minister, we also have to acknowledge that 

women do a good job in most cases. 

 

However, I didn't hear you once say anything about trying to 

re-establish the Sask Pension Plan, which was largely for 

women, mostly for farm women.  And you mentioned about the 

social justice and because . . . and you mentioned things where 

women were predominately in the factor.  And women were 

predominately in the Sask Pension Plan, which your party 

threw out. 

 

Tell me what you have done to convince your party that that is 

a good plan for women and what plans you have to reinstate 

that very good plan. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  I want to point 

out that the government has been able to make modifications to 

allow people to remain within the plan but at no cost to the 

taxpayer.  And part of the problem that we had with the pension 

plan was that the provincial government's contributions could 

potentially disqualify a person access to the guaranteed income 

supplement -- as I'm sure you are aware that that in effect was 

happening -- which was a federal income supplement program.  

So it was provincial money being put in that would ordinarily 

have been there from the federal government. 

 

Thus the provincial government dollars were being used in 

Saskatchewan to reduce the federal government's commitment, 

which doesn't make a great deal of sense for a provincial 

government to be 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

doing that.  That had to be changed. 

 

This government is concerned about a relative lack of women's 

pensions.  And The Pension Benefits Act, 1992, reflects the 

changing needs of our workforce and economy.  The Act, as 

I'm sure you are aware, came into effect on January 1, 1993.  It 

ensures that part-time workers will be entitled to join their 

employer's plan upon meeting certain conditions tied to hours 

worked or earnings. 

 

This Act, which was brought in by our government, improves 

post-retirement death benefits from 50 to 60 per cent of the 

deceased's benefits, prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, 

and provides guidelines with regard to valuation of pension 

benefits on marital breakdown.  This step was taken to ensure 

that more women will have pensions that contribute to their 

future security. 

 

Now this doesn't mean that this is perfect inasmuch as there is 

still many things that we have to do in Saskatchewan to bring 

social justice for women.  However it is a measure that has 

been taken that will ensure that more women, because there are 

so many women in the part-time labour force, that more women 

will have pension plans that contribute to their future. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, with all due respect, the taxpayer contributes to your 

pension and my pension at 9 per cent.  What would be wrong 

with contributing to women's pensions out of the taxpayers' 

purse?  I don't think I heard too much complaint from the 

taxpayer about the Sask Pension Plan. 

 

And you're talking about the low-wage earner, but you didn't 

mention the woman who does not work for a salary as such.  

She is a housewife or a home-maker or whatever term you want 

to use.  And I want to be very careful that I don't sound . . . not 

like I'm not giving them the full justice that they are entitled to 

staying home and looking after children.  Those women are 

non-wage earners and under the old Sask Pension Plan they had 

a chance to have a pension.  Where old Dad maybe just forgot 

to include his wife in a pension plan when he suddenly had an 

accident or something happened to him, then there was the 

housewife with no pension. 

 

And I disagree with you a little bit when you say that the 

taxpayers should not be contributing to a pension plan for a 

person who is not on a salary as we know it, because they are 

paying a lot of money into your pension and a lot of money 

into my pension. 

 

And incidentally, Madam Minister, I can't get out of it.  I tried 

to get out of the pension plan and I can't.  So the system forces 

me into a pension plan I don't want and yet you're telling me 

that the taxpayer is not willing to contribute a little towards a 

person that don't have any chance, any place that they can join 

a pension plan. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if you would reconsider your stand 

on this. 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member's opposite intentions are 

very good.  You know, like I agree that your intentions are 

good with respect to pensions for home-makers.  But let us 

remember that what the plan didn't do is analyse what the 

family income was. 

 

And what we found generally was occurring, although this I 

understand because data was never requested in that particular 

area by the former government, was very difficult to pinpoint, 

was that people with very high incomes where one spouse was 

staying at home because in many cases the spouses who stay at 

home have a fairly large family income -- because if they have 

a very low income, they could both be working -- the 

government was then funding pensions in many cases for 

people with very high family incomes. 

 

One has to ask themselves the question as to whether or not 

government should be funding pensions for people with 

incomes of 150,000 a year, for example.   But if the wife stayed 

at home, they qualified.  So we have to ask ourself . . . No, one 

has to . . . Now let me also state that this is relevant when you 

look at the deficit that was in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

The unfunded pension liability left by your government was 

$43.2 million -- the unfunded pension liability -- and it was 

projected that by 1995 it would be $80 million. 

 

Now when a government is faced with that kind of a situation, 

where the taxpayers are paying for pensions for people with 

family incomes of 80,000, 100,000, 150,000 a year, and you 

have an unfunded liability of 43.2 million, I think it is 

important for us to look at how we can increase the pensions 

for low income women.  The problem is low income women, 

because they primarily are the people that have trouble with 

security in their senior years. 

 

We want to make sure that people in the lower income bracket, 

and these are usually part-time workers, I say to the hon. 

member . . . most of these women who are part-time workers 

are very low income women.  This government has taken a 

number of steps to protect low income women through The 

Pension Benefits Act that I had mentioned earlier, through the 

labour standards amendments so that they can make 

contributions, and the . . . and so the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan wasn't the answer to the real problem, because the real 

problem is people at the low end of the scale.  That's where the 

problem exists with respect to future security. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, you again, I believe, either deliberately or 

inadvertently, missed the point.  You're talking about low 

income wage earners.  And I'm talking about women, and in 

some cases men, who don't have a salary; you're talking about a 

$150,000 wage earner. 

 

Madam Minister, you know very, very well that the 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

government's commitment was only $300 a year in any one 

year, and that was a diminishing contribution by income.  And 

you know that; you know that very well.  A person could put in 

$20 or they could put in $300, and after they went over a 

threshold of $30,000, if my memory's still working, the benefits 

were totally gone. 

 

You talked about unfunded pensions.  Well, Madam Minister, 

that pension plan didn't have time to create a surplus, because 

you killed it.  You talked about the high wage earner.  Madam 

Minister, you have over a billion-dollar deficit in the teachers' 

pension.  And they're high earners, but we still contribute to 

them. 

 

I have a person . . . I'd like to ask you at this time, I wasn't 

going to, but you have a Marianne Weston who you hired in 

1991, 1992, I guess in October, at $75,000 -- $75,000.  Madam 

Minister, what is that person earning today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to just comment to the member 

opposite with respect to his comments that we missed the point.  

Well I don't believe we have missed the point.  It would be nice 

for the government to provide every single person in the 

province with a pension, man and woman.  That would be nice. 

 

But when we are faced with a $15 billion debt -- $15 billion 

debt that was drummed up by the members opposite -- that 

virtually cripples this province, that made it almost impossible 

for the government to borrow money to pay the $800 million a 

year in interest on the $15 billion debt, we cannot continue to 

fund programs holus-bolus. 

 

It would be very nice for us to be able to just give everybody 

pensions throughout the entire province, regardless of status.  

But when we are faced with the kind of deficit and debt 

situation that we have, the government has to look at its 

programing and has to try and target its funding so that it meets 

the needs of those who require it the most.  And that's why 

we've tried to implement policies to help people, to help the 

working poor and to help people in the lower echelons of 

society.  That's why we are doing that. 

 

The government would like to do a lot more in that area, but we 

will do what we can afford as we can afford it.  And that is the 

same for the issue with respect to pensions.  It is important for 

us to do as much as we can and still manage that deficit. 

 

So what you have seen is a government that has brought the 

annual deficit down from something like its projected level of 

1.2 billion to 200 million.  And at the same time, we have been 

able to put in place a lot of programing to protect lower income 

people and poorer people. 

 

Now it's not enough.  I agree there's more that should be done, 

and as we can afford it, we will do more. 

 

Now as to the salary of Marianne Weston, what I have here is a 

monthly salary of 6,625 before . . . and that's gross. 

Mr. Britton: -- What was that figure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- 6,625. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, we'll just run that through and find out 

what that is.  That's 80,000 is it?  Yes, just about $80,000.  

Madam Minister, seventy nine five . . well if I were to round it 

out.  We'll do the same with that as you do with our debt, which 

is a totally false statement you made when you said that we ran 

up $15 billion -- 8 billion of that was yours, left over from your 

government and you well know it. 

 

So does Marianne get any top-up from the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer to her pension? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Marianne Weston, like everyone else 

working for government, would get a pension. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Madam Minister, according to your remarks 

then, she is one of the low-wage earners?  You said you were 

trying to help the low-wage earner?  She's entitled to get some 

pension help, but the lady that's a housewife, has no job at all, 

isn't entitled to anything.  Is that what you're trying to tell me?  

Madam Minister, I don't agree with your logic. 

 

The other thing I'd like to comment on is your statement that 

you reduced the deficit.  You know and I know and any other 

person that's out there listening that pays any attention knows 

that your billion-dollar deficit was bogus.  It was bogus.  And 

we'll be developing that a little later as to what you're using to 

get the deficit down.  So I wish you would stick to the truth, 

Madam Minister, and not lead the people off on a tangent. 

 

I have asked you what plan . . . what have you done for those 

people that you took off of a pension.  You're telling me that 

you have done great and wonderful things, but you have all of 

the . . . you talk about a deficit in the pension.  But you give the 

teachers, you give me, you give me help in my pension, but you 

won't give any help to those women, mostly, who don't have a 

chance to get into any pension -- nothing whatsoever. 

 

What is your plan for those people?  And please don't get up 

and talk about the people on minimum wage.  We're talking 

about people with no wage. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Now with respect to the member's 

comments as to how come we're paying employees' pensions 

when we don't pay women who are in the home pensions, and I 

want to say that obviously in government there are contracts 

with employees that require pensions to be paid.  And pensions, 

by their very nature, are paid for by the employee and the 

employer -- they're doubly contributed to. 

 

Now as to what are we doing for women who may have been 

on the Saskatchewan Pension Plan or who may be poor women 

or women of low income.  Let me tell you that government 

programs and services 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

directed specifically to women for this year totalled 26.7 

million, an increase of 12 per cent over last year. 

 

Now all government services impact on women directly or 

indirectly.  So if you took into consideration not just services 

targeted for women but all government services which impact 

on women directly or indirectly, it would be much higher than 

26.7 million. 

 

Now this year the budget contained the following:  a $4.4 

million to programs under Saskatchewan's action plan for 

children in the '94-95 budget.  What does this plan include?  It 

includes preventive programs and services and supports to 

vulnerable families.  It includes expansion of the screening 

program for breast cancer throughout the province, which is 

applied to any woman, it doesn't matter what her income 

bracket is.  It's the only one of its kind in Canada. 

 

We now have breast screening throughout the entire province.  

Screening services will be much more readily accessible to 

women in rural communities and northern communities. 

 

We've introduced amendments to The Labour Standards Act 

which include improved protection and benefits to part-time 

workers, a high percentage of whom are women.  We are 

improving maternity and family-related leave for women as 

well as other amendments to better working conditions for 

women. 

 

New legislation has been proposed which is intended to provide 

immediate protection to a victim of domestic violence.  And 

some of these women that you describe fall into the category of 

victims of domestic violence.  And we introduced legislation to 

provide them with immediate protection and to provide 

additional remedies for matters such as compensation for 

monetary loss that they might experience as a result of being a 

victim of domestic violence. 

 

(1500) 

 

We are allocating funding for '94-95 for community-based 

outreach services, support to existing services, and services to 

aboriginal families.  The government is working with 

communities on initiatives that will begin to provide services to 

victims of family violence in their communities.  Funds will be 

allocated for aboriginal services in northern Saskatchewan.  

Both of these areas were previously under-serviced for victims 

of family violence and sexual assault. 

 

It is usually women that benefit from this policy.  We are 

expanding as well, for these women that you've referred to, the 

approach and services of the Unified Family Court across the 

province to ensure that the justice system more better meets 

their needs. 

 

We are appointing a Children's Advocate who will engage in 

public education on the needs of children and youth.  And as I 

said earlier, this is also beneficial 

to women because children are of concern not just to women, 

but to men and women; but because of the way society is 

structured, women primarily accept this responsibility. 

 

In 1994-95 funding is being targeted at teen parents to ensure 

they are given the necessary supports to complete high school 

as a step towards independence and self-sufficiency.  That's 

some of the women that you're talking about, sir. 

 

Funding of 90,000 has been allocated to develop 18 additional 

teen-infant spaces.  Funds will be targeted to northern 

Saskatchewan.  In '94-95 over $1 million, a 10 per cent 

increase, will be provided to the enforcement of maintenance 

orders.  Some women in Saskatchewan have had difficulty in 

enforcing their maintenance orders.  We have increased 

funding to achieve this enforcement.  And I know that you 

agree with all of those measures because I've heard you speak 

about it in the legislature that you agree with that general 

direction. 

 

Financial assistance is provided through the forgiveness or 

remission of Saskatchewan student loans.  Many of those are 

women; the majority in fact of whom are women -- or single 

parents rather, of whom are women. 

 

We are pleased also to continue to support partnerships which 

have developed between school boards, municipal 

governments, community agencies, service clubs, businesses, 

and churches to respond to the needs of hungry and 

disadvantaged children.  And this helps women. 

 

So . . . and I mean I could continue.  The point is however, the 

point is there is some $26.7 million, an increase of 12 per cent 

over last year, in government programs that are specifically 

directed to women.  So the government has made a very firm 

commitment to work on improving the lot of women. 

 

What you will notice in the things that I have outlined, in most 

situations it is the lower income people that will benefit from 

this programing -- in most situations.  The breast screening 

program is province-wide.  And victims of domestic violence 

do come from every walk of life, not just from poor families; 

they come from well-to-do families, middle-class families, and 

poor families.  Those programs are universal, but much of what 

we do provide is targeted to women in lower economic 

brackets. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

you continue to amaze me. 

 

All of those things you talked about are commendable.  I didn't 

hear you use the word "pension" once, and I thought we were 

talking about pensions.  I'd like to know what all that big long 

diatribe, I guess, had to do with pensions.  You're talking about 

all the good things you're doing.  Why couldn't some of that 

money been diverted into the pension plan?  You're spending 

the money but the people are not getting a pension. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

Now I can see that you and I are going to go on all afternoon 

here trying to get you to tell me what you're going to do about 

pensions, and you're not going to do anything.  I can assume 

that because when I ask you a question about pensions you take 

me on a big trip around the world about what you're doing. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if you'd have kept on another two or 

three minutes, you'd have covered all the questions I needed to 

ask, because you never answered the question that I asked you.  

Will you change your mind and approach your colleagues and 

try to reinstate the Sask Pension Plan for those women who 

experience abuse and all those good things you talked about but 

in the same time after all that is said and done, when you've 

done all the good things you talked about, they still don't have a 

pension?  Can I get that through to you?  That was what I'd like 

to develop with you for a few minutes. 

 

Now if you're going to get up on your feet and say, no, fine, 

we'll carry on with something else.  So don't give me a bunch 

of garbage about what other good things you're doing.  I know; 

I have some quotes from you here, Madam Minister.  So I 

know all those things.  Would you give me a yes or a no on the 

pension? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have already indicated and the 

government has indicated to the member opposite that with 

respect to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, it was a question of 

the government dealing, number one, with the deficit, and 

number two, having to set priorities -- having to set priorities.  

When you have a $15 billion debt, it's important for 

government to set priorities. 

 

The government's priorities are dealing with victims of 

domestic violence, are dealing with teen moms, are dealing 

with ensuring that part-time workers receive benefits, most of 

whom are women.  The government's priorities are in dealing 

with making sure that women who have trouble enforcing 

maintenance orders can enforce those maintenance orders 

effectively.  They have to do with children who are hungry and 

who can be part of the children's action plan, children who will 

benefit from that.  It is a question of setting priorities. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan had a $43.2 million unfunded 

liability -- $43.2 million.  It's a question of priorities when 

you're faced with a debt that's crippling the province.  That's 

what the issue is. 

 

Yes, it would be nice to give everybody in Saskatchewan a 

pension.  Yes, that would be nice.  But when you have a $15 

billion debt, you say to yourself:  what are my priorities? 

 

My priorities are first of all victims of domestic violence.  My 

other priority is teen moms.  Another priority is children who 

need more advocacy, who are living in poverty and who can 

benefit from the children's action plan. 

 

Those are the government's priorities.  That is why the 

government decided to move as it did on the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan and instead put some $26.7 million 

-- 12 per cent over last year -- in the programs that I have taken 

some time to outline to you. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

take it from all that the answer is no, so I will accept that as no.  

But I can't quite understand why you talk about an unfunded 

pension of $43 million.  The school teacher's pension is $3.5 

billion in debt, in arrears.  Are you going to cut their pension 

off too? 

 

You've still got that . . . you've got about $17 billion debt now; 

two more billion tacked on since you've become government 

and you're still helping these people with a pension.  Why is 43 

billion -- or pardon me 43 million a big debt where 3.5 billion, 

going back to 1934, is no concern of yours?  Well that's not 

even talking about CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 

Employees), what their pension plan is in debt. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I guess from what I hear from you is that 

there's no use even talking to you about it.  It's like the mayor 

from Melfort said, I think it was Melfort, suggested that it was 

about the only way to get your attention -- and I won't repeat 

what he said. 

 

So let's go on to a few more things that maybe you'll answer. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, it 

looks like we get a chance at long last to discuss The Labour 

Standards Act.  And we certainly have a lot of questions about 

this Act.  It's rather a complicated Act with an awful lot of 

ramifications and implications for the people of our province; 

and of course, that covers the broad spectrum of people, from 

the workers who actually have to be in our province making 

their living to the businesses that of course can offer jobs, 

whether they be in Saskatchewan or located somewhere else. 

 

Unfortunately, while The Labour Standards Act wasn't 

amended for some years and there seemed to be obviously a 

need to have the Act updated to bring us into the 20th century, 

so to speak, it appears that you have swung your pendulum far 

past centre and have missed the centre of balance and 

reasonability from all points of view with one exception, and of 

course that exception being the leaders of the labour movement 

who find themselves in a position of achieving massive power 

take-over from government and from the people.  

Unfortunately this leaves the people in our province without the 

ability to actually find new jobs and work.  This legislation, as 

you have drafted it, appears detrimental, mostly to the workers 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

of our province. 

 

Now I will admit that most of the letters and correspondences 

that I've had have come from the business sector who have very 

vocally expressed their distaste for the Act and given us a good 

detailed background of the things that they find wrong with it. 

 

At the same time, I will say that even though I have had just a 

small amount of correspondence and conversation, personal 

and through telephone, with workers, their point is well taken 

even though not large in numbers; that those that I have talked 

to have had a very good point, and that is that they feel that 

they, the workers of the province, are more hard-done-by than 

business because of the mere fact that the legislation will drive 

their bosses out of business or cause them to relocate to other 

provinces, and as workers, they feel they may have to follow 

the employers to other provinces in order to get work.  In other 

words, they will have to abandon their homes, their roots, their 

families, and their way of life.  And they find this to be very 

distasteful. 

 

Many of them say that the machine that you were trying to fix 

wasn't quite as badly broken as the repairs that you're putting 

into it would indicate.  And so in other words, you're fixing 

something that wasn't broken.  I guess we're saying you're 

over-fixing it. 

 

You may be ahead of your time.  And perhaps in 10 years, if 

the rest of the world were to catch up to you, that's maybe what 

history will record.  Maybe they will record, Minister, that you 

were a man ahead of your time, that you got Saskatchewan a 

full stride ahead of the rest of society, and you may be touted as 

being a leader in society for that and you might even go down 

in history as having shown some direction. 

 

Unfortunately there is a negative side to this.  And if you . . . 

and obviously you have.  You've read your history and you've 

studied history.  You've alluded to it.  You've alluded to the 

history of England and child labour laws and those kinds of 

things and the Industrial Revolution and the hardships that 

occurred during those periods of time with labour strife. 

 

And no question, we are going through that same cycle again.  

History is repeating itself, and we in Canada are caught up in 

that this time because we're no longer a frontier.  We're now a 

part of that industrial revolution where jobs are harder to come 

by and harder to create.  And meaningful reasons to live are 

things that are being challenged by people. 

 

We are probably into an era, Minister, where we're looking at 

labour standards to take us in the direction of 32-hour work 

weeks, as being advocated in France.  Now obviously that's a 

little bit ahead of where we're at.  We probably could go down 

to a 36-hour week and spread our jobs around.  And those are 

the kinds of things that we're facing in our society. 

 

So we've got to be really careful, I guess is what I'm saying 

today; that we've got to be really careful when we change our 

labour standards so that we don't 

change them in such a way that we defeat the purpose for 

which we are all here, which is to try to make society better. 

 

And whether you're on that side and I'm on this side, or we 

belong to different political parties with different philosophies 

or not, I think that it's reasonable to assume that we entered 

politics for the same reason -- that being to try to bring about a 

better condition of life for the people that we represent. 

 

How to achieve that, that's the question.  And I'm wanting to go 

into some detail on how we should change the amendments and 

how we should in fact go about structuring this law and maybe 

tempering it through the regulations which you still have as an 

open option to you. 

 

And I'm going to ask you to give us, as we go through this 

process, some idea of where those regulations will lead us and 

where this legislation will lead the province.  And having 

started this in a rather general and all-encompassing type of 

debate-type question, I think it's only fair that I now give you a 

chance to respond to where you think you're going with this 

legislation in that very general and broad term of how you see 

society evolving out of this whole process of change, and how 

you believe we are going to better society with it and where the 

jobs are going to be created and how you intend on making this 

work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I shall do so briefly, in part, 

because I've already done so in previous days.  But let me just 

summarize the comments which I have made. 

 

Since The Labour Standards Act was last updated, there have 

been enormous changes in the workplace, in the workforce, and 

in attitudes in the market-place.  The workplace has been 

revolutionalized by the introduction of the microcomputer.  As 

I have pointed out before, the last time The Labour Standards 

Act was revisited was one year before IBM came out with the 

PC (personal computer). 

 

There've been enormous changes in the workplace.  It has 

changed the way workers work; it has changed the way 

managers manage.  The workforce has changed.  Perhaps 

partially as a result of the introduction of computers, but 

partially for other reasons, the number of part-time workers has 

increased. 

 

This legislation doesn't say that part-time workers are a bad 

thing.  It does say that we need to provide some minimal 

protection for part-time workers and that we cannot leave them 

at the whim of their supervisor. 

 

And most supervisors and most employers are good employers.  

They take a pride in the way they treat their employees.  But 

not all.  And the whole basis underlying this legislation is that 

there should be some minimum standards which even the bad 

employers have to meet.  And that is particularly true with 

respect to part-time workers. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

Attitudes have also changed.  There is a new competitiveness in 

the market-place, which I think most observers believe was not 

there a generation ago when this was last revisited.  Some 

would call it a ruthlessness.  This manifests itself in a number 

of ways, but particularly these amendments I think grew out of 

that. 

 

There isn't any evidence at all that there's going to be any rise 

in unemployment because of these amendments.  There's lots of 

scaremongering, but no evidence that that's actually going to be 

the case -- indeed very little of rational argument that that's 

going to be the case.  What people are making is simply a 

number of bald statements.  And I've heard very little rational 

argument and no evidence at all that that's going to be the case. 

 

So those are the basis upon which I refute the concerns 

expressed by the member from Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, that leads us into one of the 

subjects that I did want to discuss with you.  Now yesterday in 

this Assembly you said to me and the people of this province 

that you had no evidence whatsoever that these Bills are going 

to hurt business or employment in Saskatchewan.  Here is the 

reality, and I'll quote you your words.  You said, those are your 

exact words: show me the evidence.  That's your quotation.  

And I'm going to do that right now. 

 

But first let me say that in second reading debate you obviously 

were around here somewhere.  And I delivered to you during 

those second reading debates letters and correspondences that 

we had received from all across this province.  I led you 

through a geographic turn through the province.  I led you 

through complaints from workers, complaints from business, 

and complaints from everybody in between.  And I led you 

through that in a discussion that took in excess of four hours of 

time to do. 

 

But not once, as far as I'm aware, did I ever repeat a piece of 

evidence that I used and presented to you.  And it took me that 

long to present all of the evidence from all of the people that 

we had been in touch with.  And many of them that we had 

received were rather duplicated and so we didn't even present 

them.  We tried to present one of the better ones of those that 

were fairly similar.  And a lot of the cases that were made for 

the arguments of course ended up being quite similar.  They 

were all against what you were doing. 

 

But after that many hours of presenting correspondences and 

messages from all over the province, you say: show me the 

evidence.  What do you call evidence?  If the message from the 

people isn't the evidence that they're against what you're doing 

and that it's going to hurt, what would we have to do?  Call in 

Chicken Little to drop the sky on your head?  I mean we must 

have to do something pretty dramatic. 

 

So what we're going to do is we're going to present you with 

another piece of evidence because here 

now, just a few minutes back, you say there is no evidence that 

this legislation is going to hurt our province.  So I give you 

some more evidence: 

 

Urgent message (it says).  Dear MLAs:  Re:  Proposed 

changes to The Labour Standards Act and The Trade 

Union Act. 

 

And I will quote from this as another, further piece of evidence.  

I'll even put my glasses on so I get it straight. 

 

We have recently reviewed the proposed changes to The 

Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union Act.  These 

changes are ultimate pay-offs to the trade union hierarchy.  

Such changes will increase labour costs and inhibit our 

ability to manage and operate our businesses as 

entrepreneurs.  Consequently, these amendments will 

severely reduce our ability to compete in the global 

market-place. 

 

During these tough economic times we can ill afford to 

bring in such drastic changes.  If we want to create jobs for 

our young people and attract businesses to Saskatchewan, 

we must bring in policies that are similar to other 

jurisdictions. 

 

Perhaps it is time the government got its priorities straight 

and finally lived up to its election promises to create jobs.  

Such a commitment is necessary to stop the exodus of 

young graduates from Saskatchewan and keep existing 

businesses in Saskatchewan. 

 

What new business would move to Saskatchewan with 

such restrictive labour legislation?  As politicians, you 

were elected to represent the taxpayers of this province 

and not the special interest groups, namely the unions, 

who represent a minority of the voting public. 

 

We pay a significant sum of both personal and corporate 

taxes to provincial coffers.  Currently, 80 per cent of our 

revenues come from out of province.  We must state 

emphatically that if the proposed changes go through as 

tabled, we will relocate in another jurisdiction within a 

year. 

 

Alberta's favourable tax system, together with their 

reasonable labour legislation, looks very inviting.  We 

know of many other companies considering a similar 

move. 

 

End of quote, Mr. Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Bye, bye; let them go. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And the member from Regina, who has 

constantly supported a left-wing, communist viewpoint in this 

Assembly, chirps from his seat, let them go; get rid of them -- 

chirps from his seat, let them go; get rid of them.  Obviously all 

he'd like to have left in Saskatchewan is the 10 per cent of 

workers who are presently unionized and would be forced to 

stay.  Then we could cut this Assembly down to three 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

MLAs, and that would be the end of it. 

 

Mr. Minister, you wanted evidence.  I present for you today 

this letter as evidence of a culmination of hundreds of requests 

and applications that we have had to bring to you some 

common sense in your labour legislation. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now the man from the press will say this is right-wing rhetoric.  

Because he has to try to find some way of expressing 

extremism to get his readers.  What we are doing here in reality 

in today's society is trying to bring you to the middle of the 

spectrum.  Those philosophies of the 1970s that would have 

been considered to be right wing are today in society 

considered to be middle-of-the-road moderate.  That happens to 

be a reality of political life in North America and around the 

world. 

 

Therefore the man from Rosemont is out of tune with the times.  

And he'd probably better find a better jurisdiction to live in and 

to represent because he no longer represents the people of 

Saskatchewan.  None of them.  He's a dinosaur in disguise -- a 

political one -- for sure. 

 

Mr. Minister, you wanted evidence.  This is evidence.  How do 

you comment to this evidence that I present to you here today, 

signed from Victor Jensen, the controller of Mechanical 

Management Services Ltd.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't wish to be disparaging of the 

author of the letter.  I am sure the author of the letter expressed 

genuine concerns.  And as a matter of interest, if that's evidence 

of anything, it's simply evidence that the person is concerned.  

It is not evidence that this legislation is going to result in any 

loss of economic activity.  It's simply evidence of concern. 

 

But I say to the member from Maple Creek, and I say to the 

members of the Assembly who are participating in this debate, 

every time anyone suggests that there ought to be anything 

done to protect the rights of workers, somebody says, if you do 

it I'm leaving the province. 

 

I have seen this happen time and time again.  All I can say to 

members of the Assembly is that the threats are always made 

and that's almost always all it ever is, is threats. 

 

If people . . . and I don't want to personalize this and, as I say, I 

do not want to be disparaging of the author of that letter; I'm 

sure his concerns are genuine -- but I say to people who write 

such letters and to others, it's more helpful if you could tell us 

why it's going to destroy your business rather than just follow 

the example of the member from Maple Creek and make these 

bald statements that this is going to be a devastating piece of 

legislation. 

 

It would be more useful if you told us why you thought it was 

going to be devastating, rather than simply 

making these bald statements.  All the authors of those letters 

are doing is repeating the mistake that you've made, and that's 

simply make bald statements. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  You just opened 

up the door for me to start repeating parts of Hansard from 

that four-hour discussion we had.  Because in that four-hour 

discussion what we did was quote to you item after item of 

proof of exactly what people thought would be detrimental to 

their businesses, the specific items that they thought would 

cause them their problems. 

 

And this is the book of Hansard and this is what we're going to 

start going into if that's the way you want to play the game, like 

you never heard it before.  For four-and-some hours we told 

you of specific examples of exactly how each businessman and 

each worker thought he was going to be hurt by this legislation.  

Not because they didn't want some changes to make things 

better, but because you've gotten too extreme and you've gone 

too far. 

 

And you refuse to give people the final definition of your 

regulations.  And the reason they don't trust you is because you 

did exactly the same thing with The Workers' Compensation 

Act, which incidentally came in with regulations,  after the time 

in which you promised them faithfully in this Assembly that 

there would be a 10 per cent increase only in the fees.  And we 

have numbers of cases of people that wrote to us and showed 

us the mathematical examples of 100 and 200 per cent 

increases in their personal businesses where they were 

increased. 

 

And they don't trust you any more because when you say 10 

per cent, that might be for some people, but for many of them it 

could be anything to 100 or 200.  And in the regulations for 

The Labour Standards Act people are saying, here are the 

specific things that are wrong that we see right now, plus we 

don't trust you because of what you've done in the past.  Your 

track record is not good here. 

 

This is a chance for you to redeem yourself.  I open the door for 

you.  This is your big chance.  You can be a hero in 

Saskatchewan.  Show the people what your regulations are 

going to be out front and then they won't be worried.  Give it 

all to them before you make this law.  People have said: let's 

table this legislation until this fall; we'll come in for a couple of 

days or a week, after you've had the summer to go through it 

and set up the regulations, and we'll do her. 

 

But no, you're intent upon saying you never heard it.  Well all I 

can say to that, sir, is that maybe you ought to read the 

Hansard if you weren't around to listen to the debate.  Because 

it's all there, and there's certainly a lot of examples, and we can 

dig you up a lot more. 

 

But I think, Minister, that we ought to get into more specifics, 

because even though we did this for four-and-some hours 

before, we've even got some more evidence, as you like to call 

it.  And we'll present it to you as evidence and we'll ask you 

questions about this evidence as we go. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

Now an independent businessman of the small business has 

shown us in a very concise way in his letter a lot of the very 

generalities brought into a tight-knit circle in a small, short 

letter.  The Canadian Federation of Independent Business 

doesn't approach things quite that way.  They don't go into a 

round generality that's concise and neat, in a small package; 

they become more specific.  And I think it's only fair -- because 

I haven't included them very much in the last discussion we had 

-- that I present to you some of their more specific and detailed 

explanation of the problems that they have. 

 

And I'm going to have to quote from this piece of work of 

theirs so that you will understand where they're coming from 

and I hope that you will make comments that will be positive in 

the direction of bringing them some comfort today in the 

worries that they have about this legislation. 

 

We have here the analysis of House amendments, revised April 

14, 1994, to amendments to The Labour Standards Act, tabled 

March 11.  And we have first some general comments and then 

. . . which I think we should get on the record for you seeing as 

you seem to not know what happened in the second reading 

debate.  So to refresh your mind we will go into this because it 

does summarize to some extent. 

 

Under the general comments, the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business is still very concerned about Bill 32. 

 

We believe that rather than delay proclamation of certain 

sections or flesh out crucial details by regulation away 

from the scrutiny of the legislature, the entire Bill should 

be pulled until the whole regulation-making process is 

completed first. 

 

Very simple request, Minister -- put down what you're planning 

on doing, lay it out for them.  That's what they're asking for.  

They want to see what the results is going to be to their lives 

before you make a law.  They don't want you to put them in a 

position of having to sign a blank cheque.  I don't think that that 

is an unfair or unreasonable request in a democracy. 

 

A dictatorship is different.  You haul out your gun and you say, 

you guys all get over there and you go to work and you do what 

I tell you.  We happen to think we live in a democracy where 

we negotiate how we live and how society works its problems 

out. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon doesn't agree today.  The 

Minister of Social Services says this is not how it's done.  Now 

this is an amazing thing.  Of all the people I thought would be 

fair about labour standards, this person disagrees with the 

Canadian Federation of Independent . . . from his seat today.  

So I guess we'll have to give him an opportunity to get into this 

debate as well. 

 

But for the moment I want to bring you the message of the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business 

which goes on, and they say that they have also analysed the 

supplemental House amendments of April 14 very carefully 

and compared them to our discussions with senior government 

officials of late March. 

 

In particular, we have compared them to the document of 

intent in principle entitled, Labour Standards Act 

Technical House Amendments, which was hand delivered 

to the Saskatchewan business groups in a meeting at 9 

a.m. March 31, 1994. 

 

In our view, the latest technical amendments provide very 

cold comfort to the business community.  In many cases, 

the drafters of this latest set of amendments still fail to 

capture what we thought was agreed upon in recent 

discussions, and in some cases the government has created 

even more difficulty for employers through these latest 

April 14 amendments. 

 

What is that saying to you, Mr. Minister?  Isn't that saying that 

you told them one thing and now you've done something else?  

It smacks loudly and clearly of a betrayal to me, where you 

meet with people and you agree to things and then you write up 

the legislation opposite to what you've agreed to.  There's no 

other explanation for that and no words that can be used in the 

parliamentary process that fairly describe that kind of action. 

 

So I'll just carry on with their opinion here: 

 

In the remainder of this paper, the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business shall indicate why we continue to 

express our profound disappointment with Bill 32. 

 

In addition, it is important to remind the Saskatchewan 

government that since initially tabling Bill 32 on March 

11, 1994 a long list of other concerns have been totally 

neglected. 

 

A long list of other, residual concerns never was reflected 

in documents of March 31 or the supplementary 

amendments of April 14. 

 

And this list includes . . . Listen up, Minister, we're even going 

to give you the list of the things that are wrong here, the things 

you've missed.  What more can you ask for than to have people 

present you with all of the information that you were asking 

for.  You want evidence, we give you evidence.  You want to 

know what you missed, now they're going to give it to you and 

I'm going to be the spokesman and present it for you so you can 

hear. 

 

It says: 

 

no changes to the unworkable new definition of "day"; 

 

no change to the new and costly extension of mandatory 

pay in lieu of individual layoffs, including a 

portion thereof; 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

no change in new and costly extension of definition of 

allowable break in service; 

 

continued imposition of a new reverse-onus test for 

employers to prove they cannot reassign the workplace to 

accommodate disabled workers; 

 

Also: 

 

continued duplication with Human Rights Act; 

 

no Act clarification on employer obligations for night 

transport of workers; 

 

Interesting here, that someone told me that this part alone could 

cause some mining industry people, could cause them to have 

to provide individual taxi service or individual bus service or a 

chauffeured limousine for workers that work perhaps 20 and 30 

miles away from different mines out in the country within our 

province.  People that now drive their own vehicles from a 

farm, perhaps to work, could insist upon having a taxi service 

provided for them. 

 

These are the kind of things you haven't considered when you 

wrote your legislation in this very broad and general wording.  

You've allowed too many doors to be opened and nothing that 

is for sure. 

 

It goes on here to say that: 

 

no changes in new one-sided wage assessment appeal 

process; 

 

no change in a new, potentially politicized arbitrator 

selection process; 

 

no change in new whistle-blowers' protection clause, 

including continuing potential for frivolous reporting; and 

no ability to penalize frivolous or vexatious claimants; 

 

The next one is: 

 

new and very massive regulatory powers remain, i.e., a 

huge regulatory leap of faith with serious doubts as to 

whether there will be good-faith consultation process with 

this government's Department of Labour; 

 

These are very important, Mr. Minister. 

 

And here, the last one that they've got on this particular list is: 

 

continued rejection of the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business's call for legislated guarantee in the 

new Act to at least pre-publish any regulations for 60 or 90 

days prior to a final order in council approval away from 

the legislature. 

In other words, Mr. Minister, what they want for you to do is to 

lay out for them what the rules are so that they can at least 

respond before you make it law.  And in this process that you 

are adopting, you've passed legislation that allows an order in 

council or a decision by cabinet to finally decide what the law 

will be and how it will be interpreted. 

 

In a democracy, my friend, that is not fair because that's not 

democracy; this is dictatorship of the highest order and of the 

most revolting form to all people in this country and in North 

America.  If you tried to pull this in the United States of 

America, you'd have a revolution on your hands.  Absolutely, 

without question in my mind, this would be a revolution.  

People would not tolerate this kind of dictatorial approach to 

creating laws. 

 

You're putting a gun to the heads of the people of 

Saskatchewan and you're forcing them to accept laws that are 

made behind closed doors and ratified by a cabinet of 

extremists in the highest order. 

 

Minister, I've told you what I think and I think it's only fair that 

I let you respond to the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business's list of concerns that they feel you left out.  Tell me 

how you're going to handle this list of concerns and what you're 

doing with them. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me say with respect to the . . . Let 

me say generally, I am not sure what the opposition would do 

to fill in the hours were they not able to quote Mr. Botting's 

lengthy letters. 

 

Let me say also, with respect to the regulations, I hear what Mr. 

Botting says and what you've repeated on his behalf.  I do not 

believe that represents the mainstream view of the business 

community.  Most people in the business community want the 

process which we have set out, and that is the regulations will 

be drafted in a consultative process and by sectorial 

committees. 

 

So I hear what Mr. Botting says. I dispute your comment -- or 

the implication in your comments -- that that represents 

mainstream thinking of the business community.  I don't think 

that's accurate. 

 

Let me make a comment about one or two other things you 

said.  You pointed out that we had promised that they would 

see the regulations in the WCB (Workers' Compensation 

Board) before it was proclaimed.  There were no regulations 

under WCB.  There may be some changes in the regulations 

but none were contemplated in accompaniment with the Act. 

 

You indicated we had broken our promise with respect to ten 

and a quarter . . . ten and a half per cent.  Everyone but the 

member from Maple Creek understood that when we said it 

would cause an increase of ten and a half per cent, that was an 

average, and that individual assessments might make that ten 

and a half more or less. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

And of course there are some who are higher and of course 

there are some who are lower.   The average was ten and a half 

per cent.  And virtually everyone at this point in time admits 

that the Workers' Compensation Board and the Department of 

Labour delivered on its commitment to hold costs to ten and a 

half per cent.  Virtually everyone admits we did that. 

 

And virtually everyone admits that all the doomsday scenarios 

of 200 and 300 per cent increases were exactly that. 

 

Member, as well, you mentioned the matter of night 

transportation.  I want to take a moment to discuss this because 

this did cause some confusion.  Heretofore in certain industries 

night transportation -- particularly the service industries -- night 

transportation had to be provided to everybody in every nook 

and corner of Saskatchewan. 

 

It was true for the cocktail waitresses who worked in my riding 

in an industrial area of town where frankly they do need 

transportation, both because it's expensive and because it isn't 

safe to go out on foot at the time they're off duty.  But the rule 

also applied to nursing home workers who worked in small 

communities who drove home perhaps some tens of miles to a 

farm home. 

 

The old rule didn't make any sense because it was of general 

application.  The new section states that the Minimum Wage 

Board has the discretion to determine when night transportation 

should be granted.  And once it's understood, and for those au 

contraire to the member from Maple Creek, to those who have 

actually taken time to read it, it makes a lot more sense than the 

old section.  And I think most fair-minded people admit that at 

this point in time. 

 

I hear what you say with respect to the Labour Relations Board.  

You make two comments.  One is that we have politicized it.  

Bunk, that's just bunk.  We have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Good word. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, it is.  I take it from a 

distinguished source.  That's just nonsense.  The appointment 

process for Labour Relations Board hasn't changed in a long 

time, except that there will be appointed for fixed terms. 

 

Now surely the member opposite has got to admit that 

provision, whereby they get fixed terms, depoliticizes the 

Labour Relations Board because it removes them from any 

influence from the government of the day until such time as 

they're up for appointment or reappointment.  So this process 

depoliticizes the Labour Relations Board. 

 

It is true that there are additional powers given to the Labour 

Relations Board.  This is a subject of which honest people will 

disagree, and I think you and I will probably disagree on this.  

My impression has been most people agreed that decisions with 

respect to collective agreements should be determined before 

the Labour Relations Board and not in a court of record, not in 

a court of law.  I think most people agreed with that. 

 

We have taken the additional step of ensuring that the process 

by which the arbitrators, in the atmosphere of which the 

arbitrators . . . the atmosphere in which the members of the 

board work is depoliticized. 

 

With respect to the regulations, I can only repeat my comment 

which I made at the beginning, and that is that the process we 

have chosen has the general endorsement of most people in the 

trade union movement and most people in the business 

community. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, for at least starting to 

explain some of the rationale that you feel you've got behind 

your Act. 

 

In the area of night transportation, of course, you explain to us 

now why it is necessary to have that in certain sectors.  I don't 

think anybody ever disputed the fact that nurses who have to 

leave a workplace at 2 o'clock in the morning shouldn't have 

some kind of protection to make sure that they get home alive 

or unharmed or even threatened in any way. 

 

However, what we're saying here is that when you draw up a 

very general piece of legislation that doesn't have some kind of 

descriptive language with it, you can end up having people 

interpret that legislation to meaning transportation must be 

provided in areas that it would be totally and absolutely 

ridiculous because it would be too costly in terms of the fact 

that there is no risk. 

 

And I'm suggesting to you that men who leave an oil rig in 

south-east Saskatchewan and drive 50 miles to a motel are not 

likely to encounter any kind of trouble, other than that which 

they create themselves, and therefore to have them put in a 

position where they can demand their employer to provide 

transportation is unfair and unreasonable and downright 

foolish. 

 

And to be quite honest with you, Minister, things that are done 

wrong and aren't properly organized and properly done, we can 

refer to that as . . . or if we suggest something that isn't exactly 

true, that can be called a little bunk.  But when it's a whole 

bunch of wrongs, it's bunkum -- that's a pile of it.  And there's 

been an awful pile of bunkum in this labour legislation. 

 

So I want you to explain that travel thing a little more carefully 

because I think we're on the threshold here of having you admit 

to us that you're going to write these regulations so that the 

silliness will be taken out of it.  But you just haven't had the 

courage to put that in words yet. 

 

And I want you to do that, and I want you to also then go on to 

explain the problems that the business community has in the 

one-sided wage assessment appeal process. 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the opposite is true with respect 

to the wage assessment.  Additional protection is given, not 

less.  The labour standards officers have heretofore had the 

discretion to assess wages which are not paid in order that they 

be paid -- that's not new.  What is new in this Act, one of the 

things that is new in this Act, is an appeal process to a list of 

arbitrators and that in fact gives people who are the subject of 

an assessment additional protection, not less. 

 

The system of assessing for wages is not new.  What is new is 

that they have a right of appeal from that to a simple, quick, 

inexpensive process -- the list of arbitrators.  So that indeed is 

not new. 

 

The only other thing that I guess that's new, which the member 

didn't raise but which I would draw to your attention before the 

vote is taken on this section, and that is that we have in this Act 

a renewed provision, I guess I should say, whereby third-party 

demands can be made to ensure the collection of wages.  That's 

new. 

 

But from the point of view of the business person who wants 

protection, what is really new is that they have an appeal 

process. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That poses a question that strictly comes from 

my background. In this appeal process for wages  . . . and 

certainly I see some need for that actually out in the 

community; I've actually been approached by people who 

haven't been fairly paid.  And in my past life before I got into 

this business, I sat on the board -- agricultural employment 

board -- where of course some agricultural workers are treated 

somewhat unfairly.  So does this appeal process also extend to 

farm workers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, really it does not.  The Labour 

Standards Act does not extend to farm workers.  That was the 

subject of considerable debate about which argument was made 

both ways. 

 

At the end of the day, we had decided that we would not 

include the farm workers.  The thinking was that while there a 

need for some at least minimal protection of farm workers, 

there is also a need for a much broader consultation with the 

farming community before that's done and that really did not 

take place here. 

 

The consultation process was such that we had very little 

contact with farmers or farm families and before we include 

them in the Act, we would want a much broader consultation 

than we had this time.  So they weren't included and partly 

because their employers, the farmers, were not consulted.  

Having said that, I would concur with your comment that there 

is on occasion a need for additional protection in some areas for 

farm workers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Would it be fair to say 

then that farm workers who have a problem getting paid have 

to go through the small debts claim process?  Is there any 

assistance for those people in 

that process if this isn't included in this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I regret to say there isn't.  That gave 

us considerable cause for concern when we were drafting this.  

I regret to say there isn't any assistance for them.  There is, I 

think, a broad school of thought which suggests that needs to 

be changed.  But before we do it we need to consult broadly 

with the farming community.  That just was not done, and so 

we did not proceed with those amendments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you anticipating conducting such a 

consultative process in the near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Actually, I think we are.  I'm not 

hereby announcing government policy.  I'm just trying to 

glimpse into the future and it's always cloudy and hazy.  But 

I'm just trying to take a glimpse into the future here without 

announcing future government policy.  But I do foresee us 

doing that. 

 

We have had supplications from some organizations in the farm 

community which suggest that there needs to be some minimal 

protection given.  Generally, the argument goes that farming is 

much less of a way of life and becoming more of a business.  

Farms are being run on a far more professional basis than was 

the case when I was a child, perhaps.  Perhaps that is of 

necessity in a more difficult world. 

 

But as farming and farmers become more professional, there is 

a growing view that at least some minimal protection should be 

gathered.  And I think we do intend to enter into consultations 

with the farming community to see what they think is 

appropriate. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, for that observation.  

Certainly, there will be several people interested in knowing 

what you're going to do in that sector and not just on that 

particular issue.  But that, I think, is probably a debate for 

another day and one which we certainly will touch onto when 

we get time. 

 

I want to pursue all of the problems on this list and give you an 

opportunity to explain yourself.  Perhaps people will find some 

comfort in maybe knowing that they have misread or 

misinterpreted your earlier statements. 

 

So I want to go right back to this definition of a day.  There 

seems to be some problems with the definition of a day in the 

business community, and also the workers that I've talked to 

are extremely concerned about this particular definition of day 

and the way that you're setting that up in the new legislation. 

 

Would you explain to the people of Saskatchewan what exactly 

you mean by this and try to alleviate their concerns and their 

fears with regards to your new definition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This, I will admit, has been the 

subject of an enormous amount of concern by people who have 

discussed the Bill with us.  And we have earnestly considered 

their concerns. 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

Our position is that for virtually every employer in the province 

-- I defy the member from Maple Creek to name an employer 

for which this is not true -- for virtually every employer in the 

province the definition of day has not changed.  I defy you to 

name one where it has. 

 

The definition of a day hasn't changed, and they'll still be able 

to set schedules on a calendar day, which is what they're 

concerned.  Once this is discussed with them and pointed out to 

them, the concern generally disappears. 

 

But I must admit, it may be shallow but it's very broad because 

I've had a lot of people mention it to me. 

 

But it is shallow.  Once you say this to them, the definition 

hasn't changed, they generally agree. 

 

So I think while this is a concern, it is not a real concern, if I 

can put it that way.  It does not withstand hard analysis. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, I think your answer is just a little bit 

too vague and too general for the people to be comforted by.  

So explain to me how this affects nurses who have voluntarily 

chosen to work 12-hour days rather than 8-hour days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  I want to read the old section 

and the new section to the member, and I wish you'd tell me 

what you think the difference is. 

 

Old section, statute L-1, old section 5(a) reads -- and the first 

section is the retail trade, then it goes on to say: 

 

. . . for all other purposes (but the retail trade), any period 

of 24 consecutive hours. 

 

Now the new section reads: "In this part (only), 'day' means a 

period of 24 consecutive hours." 

 

Now I wish the member from Maple Creek would tell me what 

you think the difference is between any period of 24 

consecutive hours and any period of 24 consecutive hours.  It 

sounds awfully similar to me. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, quite frankly you're starting to 

sound like some of the preachers I watch on television who 

pick out parts of the good book to prove their point but don't 

read the verse ahead or the verse behind, and they totally take 

the whole message out of context to try and prove a point.  And 

without reading the entire scripture here from both good books, 

I think you're putting a twist on things that is not acceptable to 

the general public.  And as a preacher you've already been 

flushed out as a fraud, so you might as well stick to politics 

because they expect it of you here. 

 

So why don't we, why don't we face the reality that your very 

limited reading is not telling the problem that the business and 

working community see in your 

legislation? 

 

And I'm not going to explain to you what the differences are 

today because the business community has told you this and 

they want your response.  And they're the ones that are going to 

read Hansard after today and they're going to judge you, not 

me, because I have posed the question for them fairly; and you 

have treated with jest here the answer, not me. 

 

So if you want one more shot at explaining the problems and 

how you're going to overcome them, and if you'd like to 

explain to the nurses of Saskatchewan why you are affecting 

their decision to choose the kind of hours they are, you can do 

that.  If you choose not to, you'll be judged, not me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I can with difficulty overlook 

your calling my friend -- the member from Maple Creek -- a 

latter-day communist; but to compare me to a TV evangelist, 

that is a low blow, I have to say. 

 

However I'm going to overlook that in the spirit of cooperation.  

And perhaps I was a bit flippant in my answer to you because, I 

want to admit, this has been raised by a lot of businesses.  My 

response is, there's no change in the definition, none at all.  No 

change at all. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you then, Minister, prepared to also say 

that there will be no change in the way that businesses and 

labour will be affected after the regulations have been drawn up 

in this area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They will not be affected by the 

definition of "day" in the statute. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm sure you will be quoted back on that 

someday, but let's carry on for a few minutes here. 

 

Now the next concern was that we have "no changes to the new 

and costly extensions of mandatory pay in lieu of individual 

lay-offs including a portion thereof." 

 

There is some concern in the business community about the 

pay in lieu of individual lay-offs.  And I'd like to have you the 

opportunity to explain to the business community why they 

have no concern here, if you can do that. Alleviate their 

concerns in this area.  I give you that opportunity now, 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is an extension of the notice . . 

. of the pay in lieu of notice.  We think the extension is modest; 

it is not out of line with what some other jurisdictions do.  And 

in any event, we think it's not unreasonable. 

 

Let me make the following argument to the member for Maple 

Creek: if a member of the management is laid off, the standard 

rule which the courts use is one month per year of service.  

That's the standard rule which judges use.  It will vary in one 

case or another but that's the standard they use. 

 

What we're saying in The Labour Standards Act is one 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

week per year of service, plus two or three or four.  But the rule 

here is one week per year of service; the rule for management 

is one month.  That doesn't strike me as being overly generous 

to the workers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm going to remind you that 

in many cases the problems that I'm bringing up here, even 

though I'm at this time presenting from a document by the 

business sector, many of these same problems that have been 

brought up in this commentary of notes have also been brought 

to me and brought to my attention from workers. 

 

Some of them point out very emphatically to me that as 

individuals they absolutely have no one speaking for them.  

And they dare not speak for themselves because they will 

suffer the repercussions of loss of job, of being blacklisted by 

the union leaders, of never again having any freedom in their 

life. 

 

I'm absolutely amazed, in a province like Saskatchewan, that 

people even have to consider that kind of fear -- the fear of 

expressing their opinions, definitely not in writing, and very 

reluctantly even in conversation, because if their name were 

ever to be told, they know very well that they would probably 

have to sell their homes and leave this province. 

 

That's the kind of power your unions have and the kind of 

power they're exerting on individual people.  And I can 

absolutely guarantee you that I've had people come to me and 

tell me about how union people have come to their homes and 

threatened and coerced them if they don't toe the line.  These 

are facts of life. 

 

Now, Minister, knowing that therefore they cannot themselves 

stand up, I'll stand in their place.  And while I'll use the 

business commentary for now, I will tell you that many of these 

concerns come from working people themselves who are 

having the very same reservations. 

 

But I do want to go on into this list and give you a chance to 

explain your position.  We need to do that, and time grows 

shorter. 

 

The next one that I have on the list here is "no changes in the 

new and costly extension of definition of allowable break in 

service."  Now the allowable break in service is believed to be 

a very costly thing to business, and I'd like you to alleviate the 

concerns of the people of Saskatchewan with regards to this 

part of the legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This was one of the things we did 

which we think is of assistance to employers, and I think once 

it was explained to them, most of them agreed.  Again, while I 

certainly have no disrespect for Mr. Botting, this is one of the 

many subjects about which we simply have to agree to 

disagree.  But most of the employers agreed, when this is 

explained to them, that it really is for their benefit. 

 

What we have done is to move . . . If I understand the concern, 

we have moved the definition of year of 

employment from the regulations to the Act and it provides a 

maximum break in service of 13 weeks.  It will on one hand 

allow employees to retain earned benefits if they're not gone for 

13 weeks.  It's not out of line with the rest of Canada.  Nine 

jurisdictions in Canada allow a 13-week, three-month break in 

service; while two jurisdictions are much more generous than 

that -- they allow a six-month break in service. 

 

We've also pointed out to the business community, this is why 

most of them agree, having thought about it, that it is to their 

benefit . . . Thank you very much . . . that it is to their benefit.  

Most of them . . . We've also pointed out that this allows us to, 

in regulations, define this, and we may be able to alleviate 

some of the awkward situations which from time to time arise 

with any rule. 

 

So having thought about it, most of them agree that this 

provision is reasonable.  It's certainly in line with what is done 

in the rest of Canada.  And it does give us a bit of flexibility to 

work with it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I see that you got another, 

bigger book delivered to you, so maybe you can get a better 

answer now. 

 

Explain to me what the break in service really means then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It means if they are gone for that 

length of time, they don't accumulate the years for the purpose 

of getting notice, because how much notice you get depends 

upon the number of years you have.  The break in service 

means if you're not gone for more than that length of time, you 

continue to accumulate the years for the purposes of the notice. 

 

As I said, nine provinces have ours; two  -- and they are, if I'm 

not mistaken, two of the largest provinces -- have six months. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well if you're referring to Ontario and British 

Columbia with NDP governments, I don't think anybody is 

going to take much comfort in that. 

 

But anyway, that's your explanation and I'm going to let it rest 

there because I didn't hear anything comforting in that, to be 

quite honest with you.  It's exactly the same old thing that I 

heard before, so maybe you've convinced someone else with 

that and I'll let them judge you. 

 

Let's go on then, Minister, to the next concern that they have 

which is the continued imposition of a new reverse-onus test 

for employers to prove they cannot reassign the workplace to 

accommodate disabled workers, also continued duplication of 

Human Rights Act. 

 

Now how would you like to comfort the business community 

and the people and the workers of Saskatchewan by explaining 

to them what your motivations are here for real and how this is 

going to affect the workplace and how it's going to help 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The general rule is that where 

something is exclusively within the knowledge of one person, 

that person should have the onus of proving it; there's no way 

someone else can prove it.  That's just a general rule which is 

used in criminal law; it's used in civil law.  It is a centuries-old 

rule which judges have used to interpret common law. 

 

All this section really does is incorporate that principle into this 

Act, because generally whether or not there are any alternatives 

is really within the exclusive knowledge of the management.  

It's not something the department could ever be expected to 

prove.  Therefore it's not unreasonable that the onus be on the 

employer of proving that there's no alternative.  There is no 

way that the Crown could ever prove there is an alternative. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, for that explanation.  I 

think perhaps, in this one case, the member for Rosemont 

might have been better off presenting this Bill than you are 

because at least from the background he offered an explanation 

that was understandable.  So I'll let you take a shot at 

explaining how this affects the accommodation of disabled 

workers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry.  I have to be honest and 

confess I didn't grasp the member's question. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The member from Rosemont did. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- The member from Rosemont did, yes. 

 

How does this particular piece of inclusion in the legislation 

affect the disabled workers?  It's specifically designed towards 

alleviating a problem with disabled workers, I believe, and I 

think it's necessary to put on the record how this affects 

disabled workers and what benefit there is to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I wasn't sure I caught the 

member's question.  It seemed . . . the answer seemed relatively 

obvious.  It is to the employee's advantage to go back to work 

rather than be on Workers' Compensation. 

 

It is to the employee's advantage for two reasons.  One, they're 

usually financially better off.  But in any event we all value our 

self-worth by what we do, and those who are unable to work, 

marginalized, have a very difficult time with self-esteem.  It's 

to everybody's advantage to go back to work. 

 

(1615) 

 

It is also to the employer's advantage to take them back to work 

because ultimately, under the Workers' Compensation Board's 

scheme, the employers pay the cost of the accidents.  And if a 

worker must remain on disability pension for the balance of 

their lives, the employer has got to pay for that, and it's very 

expensive. 

 

This section ensures that where there is alternate employment, 

the worker will go back to work.  That is to the employer's 

advantage because they have to pay the cost of having them sit 

at home.  It's to the worker's advantage because they're usually 

better off financially, and in any event it's a question of one's 

self-worth.  They can go back to work; they feel important and 

indeed they are productive members of society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well at least there's something here that I 

think we can agree with you on, Minister, because you finally 

explained something that makes some sense, and that is that 

people that get hurt and heal up should be allowed to continue 

to work.  And I have to admit that I get a lot of calls about folks 

who are having problems with Workers' Compensation and not 

being able to get back to work.  There is a huge area of problem 

here. 

 

However, the question struck my mind as you were giving this 

explanation.  Is there such a thing, in your opinion, as people 

who are accident prone, and is that a viable reason used to deny 

employment in certain cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it's not.  The member will shortly 

-- well shortly, in a matter of a few days, I expect -- have an 

opportunity to express himself on the principle of no-fault 

insurance. 

 

Just let me say with respect to . . . well the second reading's 

already been given.  I assume the member's going to enter into 

the debate.  Let me just say that no-fault principle as always has 

been in effect here for a very lengthy period of time, going 

back to a date prior to the First World War.  And the principle 

here is that if you're injured on the workplace, no matter who is 

at fault, you should be fairly compensated. 

 

The system has been the subject of some difficulties, 

particularly -- and I don't want to get into a partisan debate here 

-- particularly when before this government took office there 

were some very real problems with Workers' Compensation, 

most of which I think we're in the process of resolving.  But 

with or without its problems, everyone agrees that the workers' 

compensation scheme is preferable to its repeal.  Everybody 

agrees with that. 

 

I invite the member to turn that around in your mind when you 

come to the question of no-fault insurance, and think about that 

proposition that everyone agrees that WCB is preferable to its 

repeal.  I invite you to think about that when no-fault insurance 

comes forward, because the same principle really here applies 

to no-fault insurance.  But perhaps we should leave that for 

another day. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm sure we'll get into that debate of 

it's-not-my-fault insurance, all right.  And we look forward to 

that debate, Minister.  But right now we do 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

want to get on with this Labour Standards Act and the very 

many implications here. 

 

Now as I said, there certainly is some problems with this 

particular section in our society where people who have been 

hurt need to have some way of getting back to employment.  

And I guess that goes to prove that all of these Acts are 

somewhat interlinked.  They can't be separate entities all the 

time.  And so while discussing one, we naturally may end up 

including the other. 

 

And I guess what the business community is concerned about is 

the accumulated costs that go with all of these good benefits.  

In a perfect society, certainly we would all like for everybody 

to get 100 per cent of everything they can get.  But we don't 

live in a perfect society.  Because when one person gets full 

compensation, another person may have to pay it, and we have 

to somehow work out a balance.  What is an extreme injury to 

me might appear to a doctor to be somewhat superficial, and 

we do have that debate going on all the time. 

 

So in the area of accommodating disabled workers, the plan of 

assisting employers through Workers' Compensation partly for 

employing a disabled worker, can that be an extension of this 

part of the legislation, or is there any room for the two to 

overlap?  In other words, is there some possibility for The 

Labour Standards Act to bring the government into some kind 

of a program to rehabilitate and relocate and reassign work to 

disabled people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Certainly the Workers' Compensation 

Board is actively encouraging employers to do that, pointing 

out to them that it is in their economic interest to do so.  I think 

if I were to characterize the Workers' Compensation Board, 

their view of their own success, I think they felt they've had 

reasonable cooperation from the business community in so 

doing. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, we've talked about the one-sided 

wage assessment appeal process just a little bit.  But I wonder if 

you'd explain that a little further and tell me if this means that 

there is no appeal once the decision is made, or is there still 

access to some appeal process where arguments can be 

presented later? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, in fact there's a new appeal 

process.  There's a simple, quick, cheap appeal process to 

arbitrators.  The only appeal process prior to this was to a court 

of record and it's quite expensive.  This provides a quick, 

inexpensive appeal system.  That is what is new about this, is 

the appeal system so that those who feel themselves aggrieved 

by a decision of the labour standards officers have some 

recourse. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I guess the question must be then, that 

from the business community's point of view here, that if the 

board has the right to set an arbitrary figure, that that is not then 

an appeal; that is more or less a judicial decision which is 

binding.  And 

if the access to the courts then, as you say, is cut off totally, 

how do you resolve those once in every, say thousand times, 

when the system happens to go wrong and something falls 

through the cracks?  And there will always be that exceptional 

case some time, somewhere, where things just won't be right.  

What recourse is there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's no prohibitive clause in this 

legislation.  The access to the courts is not cut off.  The appeal 

process is simply an additional step available to people who 

feel themselves aggrieved. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Let's go on to the politicizing of the arbitrator 

selection process which you alluded to earlier, Minister, but not 

in great detail.  Now it is felt by yourself, as you explained, that 

by setting up a designated time that members of this panel 

would set, that they therefore will feel comfortable to make any 

decision for or against business, for or against labour, for or 

against government interest; and that they will be relieved of 

any feeling that they might be fired for a decision that isn't 

necessarily good for the politics of the particular 

administration. 

 

Unfortunately though, if that is for a very short period of time 

-- and I'm not sure if it was three or five years that somebody 

mentioned, so you can fill me in on that -- it seems to the 

people in the business community that those people are going 

to feel indebted to the people who gave them that job.  And 

because it's not a lifetime appointment, like a judge, they 

therefore are in a position where they feel obligated to the 

people who hired them. 

 

I don't know if that makes any sense or not, but that's what 

people are telling me -- that folks who are only hired for a short 

period of time feel they don't have job security unless their 

decisions are leaned heavily towards their new employer.  And 

when that job happens to be in a semi-judicial area, such as 

this, we anticipate that the wage level is such that it would be 

so much higher than you could earn in the rest of society in a 

lot of cases; that it might be conducive to the proposition that 

one would rule in favour of the government to keep that job 

because of the extra high pay.  In other words, they would feel 

that financially they are being rewarded to find in favour of the 

government's philosophical direction. 

 

How do you square that with the business community and 

alleviate their concerns in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would concur with the member that 

heretofore I think that has been a problem.  I think governments 

of different political stripes . . . heretofore the process has been 

that the arbitrators have been . . . they're appointed by the 

minister and they're appointed on an ad hoc basis, and I think it 

has been a problem that the arbitrators have tended to try to not 

irritate the government . . . would reappoint them. 

 

I have said time and time again, I want to depoliticize this 

process.  And the way we propose to do it is possible.  You will 

see and hear that now arbitrators 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

are appointed by order in council, not by ministerial order.  

What will happen in practice is that we're going to appoint a list 

of arbitrators --, perhaps half a dozen for the south, half a dozen 

for the northern part of the province.  We will use them on a 

rotational basis so that you never know which one you're going 

to get. 

 

And the minister, apart from the fact that I suppose I take the 

recommendation for the list to Executive Council, the minister 

will be out of the circle.  I will no longer appoint individual 

arbitrators for individual cases; it'll be done by . . . nor will the 

department.  In this case actually, these are done at the 

departmental level.  Nor will the department. 

 

Hereafter we're going to have a list of arbitrators.  They'll be 

used on a rotational basis.  There'll be no discretion in who you 

get.  And we're also going to do so after fully consulting 

business and labour.  And since everyone will understand the 

system that arbitrators are going to be chosen on a rotational 

basis, everyone will attempt to get arbitrators who are fair and 

impartial.  So with these scheme, it is our hope to take politics 

out of the system of arbitration. 

 

But I would end as I begin, by concurring with the member.  

Heretofore I think it has been a problem.  I think arbitrators . . . 

the choosing of arbitrators has been a political process at times. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Recognizing a problem 

sometimes is a first step in correcting it.  So let's carry on with 

this just a step further to clear the air. 

 

These arbitrators, will they be paid by the year or by the job?  

Or how will they be reimbursed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, they're paid by the department. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- They'll be paid by the department by the job 

or by the year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, on a per piece basis by the job. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, so you say you're going to have 

perhaps six in the north and six in the south and that no one 

will know exactly who's going to be on which case.  How many 

arbitrators will hear each individual case?  Is there a minimum 

or a maximum? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In all cases it's just one.  I want to 

point out to the member just so there's no confusion, I use the 

six as a convenient number.  We have not yet determined how 

many are needed.  I think we'd want to consult with all 

involved labour and management to determine exactly how 

many should be used.  But there is going to be a list and we're 

going to use it on a rotational basis. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Will each one on the list, after you have 

established your list, work equal numbers of cases?  Or will 

perhaps one work ten cases and another work two cases and 

another one work five 

cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, they'll all work the same number 

because . . . Let us say there are six.  When the one at the top of 

the list -- and they'll be given numbers, one, two, three, four, 

five, six -- when one gets a case, they go to the bottom.  Two 

then rises to the top.  The next arbitration is done by two -- he 

goes to the bottom.  The next arbitration is done by three -- he 

goes to the bottom -- and so on. 

 

When I say it's rotational, that's what I mean.  We're going to 

take the politics right out of the arbitration system. 

 

One of the problems to date has been it has been politicized and 

people don't entirely trust it.  I really want to set up an 

arbitration system that everybody trusts.  I think if we could set 

up an arbitration system which everybody trusts, I think it 

would first of all, go a long way in advancing the whole job of 

improving labour-management relations, but I also think it 

would make the function of this department more effective.  So 

I am determined to get politics out of the arbitration system 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well on the surface this seems to be shaping 

up to a better system.  Unfortunately, there are some hidden 

problems here that you are probably aware of. 

 

In any situation, just for the sake of argument, could someone 

choose a particular arbitrator for a particular type of case that 

he might have a better background in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it's on a rotational basis.  When 

you're used in arbitration you go to the bottom of the list and 

start up again. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So this will basically be based on the old 

union hall hiring numbered process? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, the member from Morse is 

correct in a side bar comment made here.  It is really the 

scheme which is used; with some variations, it's really the 

scheme used by judges to determine who gets which case.  The 

judges are now on kind of a rotational basis. 

 

The Chief Justice always has the discretion to assign particular 

people to particular cases where they have strengths, but by and 

large, the Queen's Bench judges are assigned to cases on a 

rotational basis.  It's copied from the QB (Queen's Bench) 

judge system, as I understand it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So anyone, though, that knew the listing of 

the arbitrators by name could theoretically calculate so that 

cases would be fed into the system so that certain arbitrators 

would handle certain cases by the way that they're fed into the 

system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As a way of fixing that too, 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

once the list becomes known by any group of people, just 

juggle the numbers and start again, and they've got to spend all 

their time trying to figure out . . . in practice, I tell the member 

it's almost impossible to do. 

 

It used to be possible to know which judge was going to handle 

which case.  When I first started practising you could tell pretty 

well, and you were very careful about it -- about getting a judge 

which you thought had a certain point of view. 

 

It's now almost impossible to do.  First of all, there's a lot more 

judges; but secondly, at any given time they just rejuggle the 

numbers.  It's impossible to figure it out. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Who is the they that you refer to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it's the Chief Justice in the case 

of the Queen's Bench judges. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Who will it be in terms of the labour relations 

branch? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The labour relations branch will do 

this. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Who in the branch will have that 

responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know if I could be quite that 

definitive.  Ultimately the responsibility lies with the director.  

I don't know quite who will do it on a day-to-day basis, but 

ultimately the responsibility lies with the director. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Who hires the director? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well under normal circumstances it 

would simply be a clerical function.  And that is how I 

understand -- again exceptional cases aside -- that's how I 

understand the court system now works.  It is pretty well a 

clerical function. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well it has just been pointed out to me by my 

colleague that if the director is in charge of juggling the 

numbers and he sees a particular case coming up that might be 

of some particular interest, or have some particular interest to 

his employer, he might in fact decide that that's the day to 

juggle the list so that a particular member of that board would 

hear a certain case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, these are two separate branches.  

And if such a thing were to occur and that were to be brought 

to the attention of the deputy or the minister . . . I won't go any 

further.  But that would be contrary to departmental policy.  

But in any case, these are two different departments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I fail to see how different departments makes 

any difference in terms of juggling the list to get a preferred 

case heard by a preferred member.  Obviously the same 

government minister will be the ultimate boss and hiring 

official of people 

in both departments.  And if he wants the system to be set up in 

a particular way, it seems obvious to me that he's going to have 

hired employees who are dependent upon their jobs . . . their 

jobs rather depend on their ability to please their boss.  

Obviously it won't matter how many different departments are 

involved, they are going to perhaps be in a position to construe 

those numbers to suit the rotation that facilitates the needs of 

the government. 

 

So we haven't exactly depoliticized this, unless in fact we take 

this number process completely out of the hands of the labour 

standards board or the labour -- whatever -- involvement with 

government. 

 

Seems to me, sir, that you will have to put this numbering 

process into the hands of another judicial authority, one that is 

separate and independent from politics itself.  And that of 

course could be a judge; but better yet, perhaps the Justice 

department of another province juggling those numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I guess the only comment I can 

offer to the member is if that were the system which we 

wanted, we wouldn't have changed anything.  The Act sets out 

the changes.  The changes are arbitrators are no longer 

appointed by the department; it's done by order in council.  And 

we have regulatory power, as I read this, to set out the rules. 

 

Of course there's nothing to prevent us from breaking the rules.  

But if we were minded to turn this into a political process, we'd 

just have left it as it is. 

 

And I think the member may take some comfort from the fact 

that we've set out a new set of rules and we're not going to 

break our own rules.  If we we were going to break them, we 

wouldn't have set them out. 

 

It is our intention to depoliticize this process and we're going to 

set in place a set of rules which will ensure that that will 

happen.  If employees break the rules, we will deal with that.  

But I think that's the highest degree unlikely. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I hate to be unfair about this, 

but you just broke your own legislation with the judges.  You 

know, you set up a law saying you're going to have a 

three-member committee set up the wages for judges, and when 

they came back with a recommendation you didn't like, you 

broke your own law and fired the three people that came up 

with the recommendation and slapped them squarely across the 

head, metaphorically speaking, and sent them on their way. 

 

And so, quite frankly, even though I don't agree that the judges 

should have got what the panel said that they should get, we 

have to observe that it is not beyond the realm of possibility for 

this administration to break its own rules whenever it just sort 

of pleases, and most often without a whole bunch of 

consideration for the people around . . . in the province.  Or 

more particularly and more devastating to our system, breaking 

the legal system and the faith 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

that people have in our justice system.  And of course our 

justice system is now described as being one in complete 

shambles in our province, because nobody believes that we do 

have in fact any laws that can't be broken or that can be just 

thrown out at any time. 

 

Anyway, that's your explanation of it and I quite frankly, sir, 

see that an order in council is more political than ever and I 

don't really think that you have depoliticized the process in the 

way that you are trying to sell it to the people.  You've put in a 

better system but you haven't, in the end result, depoliticized it. 

 

The numbering system and that process, that's got some merit 

in terms of keeping it from being tampered with.  However, 

you have to go that one step further and take it out of the hands 

of cabinet because the order in council is an order of cabinet 

and that's the same thing, and everybody in this province 

knows that. 

 

So you haven't depoliticized it because you haven't taken the 

control of the appointment and the redrawing of regulations out 

of the political arena.  You can't depoliticize something if you 

don't take it out of the political arena.  And cabinet is politics 

and politics is the cabinet.  I mean you guys are the cabinet and 

that's the way it is. 

 

I want to go on to the next item of concern which is the 

whistle-blower's section, as it's described, protection clause, 

including continuing potential for frivolous reporting and no 

ability to penalize frivolous or vexatious -- I guess it's 

pronounced -- claimants.  I hope I've pronounced that word 

right but anyway I'm sure you'll get it straight. 

 

Anyway, I guess the word frivolous is something that 

everybody understands.  Vexatious I guess is . . . I think the 

word means someone that's trying to get even with somebody 

else or trying to take vengeance out . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . yes, on somebody for no reason. 

 

Okay, so you have this vengeance factor, you have frivolous 

factor, you also may have individuals that might simply be 

trying to ensure their own employment forever by claiming that 

they are being fired because they blew the whistle.  And 

therefore anyone who has ever done that could never be fired 

again. 

 

And so, you know, in terms of those three areas of concern, 

how do you comfort the community with the potential 

problems that could arise out of this section? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would point out subsection (2) of 

section 74 to the member.  It says that they're not given any 

protection where the actions of the employees are vexatious, 

which means accusations made which the accuser knew or 

should have known were false.  So I would point out that I 

think that they're unlikely to do that because they'll lose their 

protection if that's the case. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's some small comfort.  Now who would 

determine what vexatious is or who's being vexatious?  Who 

would make that judgement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, labour standard's officers, 

arbitrators, CUPE judge; in sort of that order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So if an employer thought that one of his 

employees was being vexatious, would he then make an 

application to the board, or who do you apply to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the actual process is that when a 

labour standard's officers gets a complaint, the labour 

standard's officer then contacts the place of business and said, 

I've had this complaint from Ms. X, that you've harassed her, 

let's say, what is your response.  He then gets a chance to make 

his response and to say, well no, it's not true; in fact the 

employee always was a wing nut or whatever it is.  And if the 

labour standard's officer finds that to be the case then he does 

not pursue it. 

 

If he or she finds that not only were they a wing nut but they 

knew that the allegation wasn't true, then they lose their 

protection and they can be dismissed.  So the process is that the 

labour standard's officers almost always contact the . . . well 

they always contact the business -- the first step after they 

receive the complaint. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- What would you consider some examples of 

the term frivolous to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh a complaint which is made in bad 

faith.  A complaint which the person knew was trivial, so trivial 

that it should not be proceeded with or the person knew it 

wasn't true.  I think either one of those would meet the 

definition of being frivolous. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you think of an example to sort of put 

it into layman's terms so that people can understand what you 

think bad faith and trivial are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Sure.  Let us suppose that an 

employee complains that their wages were shorted.  Turns out 

that it's true but it's only a matter of 10 cents -- honest 

accounting mistake.  And I would regard that as a frivolous 

complaint. 

 

Now it would be vexatious if the employee knew it was only 10 

cents.  That then I think would be a vexatious complaint.  The 

difference, as I understand the language, is the difference 

between frivolous and vexatious is that the employee knew the 

fact that it was false or that it was too trivial to have been 

properly pursued. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So then we could run into a situation where if 

folks were into a work-to-rule mode, they might start to use 

frivolous and trivial types of complaints in order to irritate the 

employers, to facilitate some kind of better bargaining lever, 

that sort of thing.  And this could all be straightened out then.  

Is that your observation? 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's a constant . . . that is not a 

constant problem but it is a problem which arises.  And we are 

very careful in investigating complaints made in the context of 

a work dispute or work stoppage.  We treat those with extreme 

care because the chances of them being put forth in a balanced 

and unbiased fashion is rather low. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm not sure if there's a huge 

amount of comfort going out to the public, but at least you're 

having your opportunity to put your words onto the record. 

 

Now I'll go on to the next one, which is the new and very 

massive regulatory powers that remain, i.e., a huge regulatory 

leap of faith with serious doubts as to whether there will be a 

good-faith consultation process with this government's 

Department of Labour. 

 

I guess once again I'll just leave it up to you to explain how you 

can comfort the business community to know that you're 

dealing with this, or that it isn't the kind of concern that they 

view it to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well we'll be repeating the very 

successful process we had with the occupational health and 

safety regulations.  And that is that we will have the joint 

labour-management commission which will deal with the 

general . . . will deal with general issues.  But the regulations 

themselves are going to be fine-tuned by sectorial committees 

in which labour and management will both participate. 

 

So while there is a lot of regulatory power in here -- I would 

admit that -- it has the advantage of allowing both labour and 

management to participate in the solution.  And after thoughtful 

people have given that some consideration, they generally 

agree that that's an improvement over us simply doing it and 

mailing out a letter telling about it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- What do you think then about the idea that 

has been expressed  by the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business that you should perhaps pre-publish the regulations 60 

or 90 days prior to the order in council from the cabinet that 

would make them law?  Would that be a reasonable request? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, it is reasonable enough, and in 

fact we did that last year in the occupational . . . I think it was 

occupational health and safety. 

 

We didn't do it this year because I think most of the business 

community felt that that was unnecessary last year.  There is in 

place, developed by the gentleman who usually sits here, the 

member for Elphinstone, a Code of Regulatory Conduct and 

they developed that in the Department of Economic 

Development. 

 

The Code of Regulatory Conduct requires us to 

pre-publish regulations and to make them available and make 

them widely known.  As I remember the time, it's 90 days in 

advance of gazetting them; that gives people ample opportunity 

to respond.  So we did it in occupational health and safety.  I 

think the view of most members of the business community is, 

it isn't necessary to do that so long as the Code of Regulatory 

Conduct is followed and I think they believe us when we say 

that we're going to be following that in all cases. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well my comment to that, sir, is this: that I 

have in my hand a document from one of the biggest umbrella 

groups in the province for business who are saying to you that 

they want a 60- to 90-day period to study the regulation before 

it's made law. 

 

Your observation that a lot of people don't want it I say is not 

substantiated from the mere fact that you haven't shown us any 

business people that have supported your point of view here.  

And while you have stood in your place today and said that this 

is a reasonable kind of an approach, that you've done it in the 

past, seeing how as several hundreds of businesses represented 

by this umbrella group are asking you for it, would you 

consider committing to that today on their behalf? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think to be honest with the 

member from Maple Creek, I would not commit myself to that.  

The Code of Regulatory Conduct already requires that it be 

pre-published in a sense -- not in the Gazette -- but 

pre-published in the sense that it is made widely available.  

That covers off this need. 

 

I do not agree with Mr. Botting that we need in addition to that 

to pre-publish it in the Gazette and I don't think most business 

people agree with him either. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, you referred to this Code of 

Regulatory Conduct.  Could you provide me with a copy of that 

and the contents of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I certainly can.  Well it may not 

be today, but I certainly have that available for you.  It's readily 

available. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I certainly would like to have that before we 

enter this discussion again, because an awful lot hinges on 

whether or not that in fact does what you say it would do to 

offset the need for the 60- to 90-day period.  Realistically, if 

one does the job that the other does, you don't need both. 

 

But I suspect that because the Saskatchewan federation of 

independent business people have asked for this, they must 

have made the observation that the Code of Regulatory 

Conduct either doesn't overlap into your department and you 

are not required to fall under its guidance, or else it doesn't 

apply. 

 

So with that I guess my question has to be -- because you've 

referred to the minister from Elphinstone who 



April 20, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

used this in his department -- are you bound to the Code of 

Regulatory Conduct in the Department of Labour? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, then what would your observation be 

as to why the business community -- at least part of it -- object 

to you using this regulatory conduct process, rather than the 60- 

to 90-day notice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have no explanation for that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, sir, I'll explain it to you.  They don't 

believe that the Code of Regulatory Conduct gives them the 

opportunity to express the needs for changes . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not true. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well the minister from Elphinstone assures 

me that this is not true, and I'm going to take him at his word 

and put him on the record today as saying that this is absolutely 

not true, that the business interests will be taken care of 

absolutely by the Code of Regulatory Conduct. 

 

However my observation is that the business community 

doesn't trust you and they don't believe that their interests are 

being protected. 

 

I may have to allow the other members to get involved in this 

debate because they certainly seem interested in assuring us 

that the Code of Regulatory Conduct covers what the business 

community needs.  However it is my observation that they 

don't believe that; it's my observation that they don't trust you. 

 

So in view of that, would you make the commitment that if we 

can make the case in our debate as we go that the Code of 

Regulatory Conduct does not in fact provide the business 

community with the same opportunities that they would have 

under the 60- to 90-day -- I guess it's called a notice -- if they 

don't get exactly the same coverage, would you then commit to 

changing your mind and providing them with what they have 

asked for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- When you've had a chance to look at 

it, I'll certainly listen to the member's arguments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, I'll do that.  We'll carry this on another 

day, I'm sure.  We have several pages of problems that we have 

to go through here, Minister.  However I think I'll just ask a 

couple more questions and then let a couple of my colleagues 

get into this debate here, as we go.  I think the member from 

Thunder Creek certainly has a few things he wants to say in a 

couple of minutes here. 

 

Now business has promised that the rigid requirements to post 

written notices was too limited and should also include verbal 

notice, especially in small workplaces.  Was this done? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is reading from the 

letter.  Let me assist the member; you're reading from the letter 

from the Canadian Federation of Independent Business.  You 

inverted the last sentence.  It says: 

 

Business was promised that the rigid requirement to post 

written notice was too limiting and should also include 

verbal notice, especially in small workplaces. 

 

Then it goes on to say: this was done.  If the member would 

read from this document accurately, there would have been no 

need for the question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wish to start a discussion regarding clause 

72.  And as you are aware, Mr. Minister, there are certain 

sectors in Saskatchewan, and I'll specifically mention the 

mining sector, which have got long-standing collective 

agreements in place that have been bargained because of the 

type of work that occurs in those situations.  These mines take 

many different forms.  A lot of farmers, for instance, work in 

the potash industry.  In the North you have the considerations 

of travel and days-in and days-out and that type of situation. 

 

I think it's been expressed to you, sir, and to other members of 

the government that there's a great deal of concern with this 

particular section, because what it effectively does is destroy 

these long-standing collective agreements that have been 

bargained -- the way shifting is done and that type of thing -- 

and what you're effectively doing here is moving the entire 

works up to a new standard. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, it's a very price-sensitive industry that they 

work in, but also the fact that the people that work in it have 

bargained some things that are different than perhaps the rest of 

the workforce in the province.  And they have some concern, 

Mr. Minister.  And I wonder if you could tell the Assembly if 

you have looked at this, and are you prepared to make some 

changes that would take those long-standing collective 

agreements into consideration rather than impose a whole new 

set of standards on them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- First of all, let me say that the way it 

now reads is the way it always read in this province until a very 

few years ago when it was, we believe, misinterpreted by a 

judge. 

 

As well, I can tell the member that every other jurisdiction in 

Canada, bar none, has this same provision.  We simply . . . 

nobody else does it any other way.  Labour standards is a 

minimum and it's a minimum whether or not there's a collective 

agreement.  Every other province does this.  We just are the 

subject here of, I think, an erroneous judicial decision, and we 

are correcting it. 

 

I admit there may be transitional problems.  I have told various 

business groups, including the mining community, that if they 

can demonstrate a good case and if they've discussed it with 

their workers -- they 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1994 

must do both -- we will consider an exemption in the . . . as a 

transitional measure.  Because I admit there may be cases 

where existing agreements contain provisions which are not 

compatible with this.  It that's the case, if they're transitional 

problems, we'll look at them.  And I've told one and all that. 

 

So we'll assist them through the transitional problems, but the 

principle itself is very much mainstream. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's very clear that you 

must understand some things here.  IMC (International 

Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) is a good 

example.  IMC had a water breakthrough a number of years 

ago.  When that happened, the whole business around that mine 

changed.  You had people performing certain functions.  When 

they started to have an inflow of nearly 10,000 gallons a minute 

-- and I believe it even went higher than that at times -- all of a 

sudden the whole section of the workforce there, both 

management and union, had to be shifted to other duties. 

 

There's a bank of 40 oil well pumps, Mr. Minister, down in that 

mine now that have to be serviced in order to maintain their 

business. That has necessitated all sorts of changes which were 

worked out between management and labour in order for that to 

happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, that can happen in any potash mine in the 

province.  It has necessitated long-term change in the 

workplace, people performing different functions which they 

never originally were bargained for, but by mutually working 

together they've been able to at least overcome some of the 

problems there. 

 

What you're proposing here, Mr. Minister, would make that 

transition far more difficult than what has occurred.  And that 

situation can occur in a uranium mine, for instance, where a 

bulkhead lets go and the place all of a sudden gets thrown into 

a different mode. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, what you're proposing here makes that far 

more difficult.  So it's more than just a transitionary phase 

where their existing collective agreements come up and go on 

to a new one.  There are other things that happen that I don't 

think your legislation will allow for.  And I think that you need 

to seriously rethink this situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me just say that nothing in The 

Labour Standards Act affects the situation you described.  

Nothing at all.  It has no application to the situation you 

described.  A collective agreement might, but that's a different 

Act, one we'll get to in due course, but nothing in this Act 

would affect that situation. 

 

I think unless the members have some strong views to the 

contrary, I will move we rise, report progress, and ask for leave 

to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 


