




















































Hansard: April 06, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1343 

 April 6, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Health Districts Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure and a privilege today to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly approximately 

12 members of the Camp Balmoral Sons of Scotland, which is 

the Regina branch of this national organization.  As we all 

know, Tartan Day was declared April 6, 1992 in appreciation 

of the Scottish clans in Canada and was put forward in a private 

members' motion by the member from Kindersley.  And today 

you've heard the bagpipes and hopefully have had a chance to 

see a bit of the Scottish dancing that was occurring in the 

rotunda earlier. 

 

Included in the group that has come with the singers . . . or 

dancers and the bagpipe player are several past chieftains of the 

Camp Balmoral, and especially today, I would like to welcome 

Mr. Gordon Gardiner, who is the worthy grand chieftain of the 

Sons of Scotland of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to welcome them here today and 

to, on behalf of the members, say how much we enjoyed their 

presentation to honour today the Tartan Day in appreciation of 

the Scottish clans of Canada. I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker. April 6 is 

Tartan Day across Canada, and I'm pleased to extend, on behalf 

of the opposition, best wishes to the people of Scottish descent 

from across this province. 

 

I had the privilege of introducing the legislation that allowed 

for a day of appreciation for the Scottish clans in Canada in the 

1992 legislative session.  Having Scottish blood, I was 

particularly pleased when this Bill passed without any incident, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Tartan Day gives those of Scottish descent an opportunity to 

acknowledge their heritage and to play a role in building our 

province in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that all 

members of the Assembly agree that Scottish people played an 

important role in Canada's history and wish all those of Scottish 

descent today, a very good day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'd ask all members again to welcome the folks in the gallery 

this afternoon. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my honour 

today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of this Assembly two visiting scholars at the 

University of Regina from Mongolia.  They are in your east 

gallery. 

 

Wang Jian Xia, lecturer in history at Hebei Normal University, 

and Professor Li from the department of engineering of Inner 

Mongolia building college.  Their host today is Chris 

MacLeod. 

 

The two scholars will be in Regina for one year, and we're very 

happy to have them here today.  And I'd like the members of 

the Assembly to join me in welcoming them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have the 

pleasure -- I think for the fourth time in this session -- to 

introduce a group of public servants who are spending the day 

in the legislature on one of their tours. They're seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  There are 19 individuals involved in 

today's tour from the Departments of Finance, Social Services, 

Labour, Economic Development, Energy and Mines, Justice, 

and SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like you and my colleagues in the legislature 

to welcome the public servants today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Notable Saskatchewan Scots 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a member 

opposite mentioned, it is an honour to be able to welcome the 

guests who are representatives of the Sons of Scotland, and if 

you only have a little bit of the Scotsman in your soul, the next 

best thing is to be married to one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, we're proud to have these guests today 

to help us recognize Tartan Day, April 6.  This day is set aside 

in Canada to honour the contributions of Scottish people to 

Canadian life.  The day was declared in Saskatchewan in 1992.  

Ninety seconds, of course, is far too brief a time to do more 

than mention some notable Saskatchewan Scots. 

 

Hardly a day goes by in this House without at least one 

mention of Tommy Douglas who was born in Scotland and 

came to Canada as a child.  Tartan Day would deserve 

recognition for this reason alone, but there have been many 

other notable Scots who have left their mark on our public life.  

Former premier and former federal Minister of Agriculture 

Jimmy Gardiner was a second-generation Scot.  A long-time 

secretary of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, George Robertson, 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

and former president of the University of Saskatchewan, James 

Thompson, are just two more of the many that could be 

mentioned. 

 

We can all name from our own personal knowledge Scots who 

have excelled in their chosen profession and have done so with 

grace, wit and determination.  Another statement could be 

taken up with Scottish place names in Saskatchewan, and I'll 

give you just one example. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation Conference 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, the writer H.G. Wells said that 

the teacher is the real maker of history.  That assertion might 

come as a shock to those of us here who might think that we 

have something to do with what goes on in the history books.  

We can also remind ourselves that often teachers are also the 

writers as well as the makers of history. 

 

At any rate, as a member of the government caucus committee 

in education, I'm happy to announce that the annual meeting of 

the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation is taking place this 

week in Regina. 

 

Two hundred and fifty councillors representing their teacher 

colleagues from all over the province are here to conduct their 

own business, take part in various seminars and group sessions, 

listen to the Minister of Education give her annual address, and 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, have the Minister of Education listen to 

them.  Consultation I believe is what it's called. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a teacher yourself you know that the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation is a key partner in our 

effort to enhance the quality of education for Saskatchewan 

students.  We all know that the individual teacher is one, along 

with the minister, the doctor, and the parent, at the bedrock of 

society.  It has ever been thus. 

 

And on behalf of the government, I welcome the 

representatives of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation to 

Regina and wish them well in their deliberations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Davidson Project to Feed the Hungry 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It pleases me to tell the 

Assembly about the honourable efforts of certain farmers from 

Davidson who are creating a pilot project to help feed hungry 

people in this province.  Food will be produced by these 

farmers and given directly to people who are in need.  Again, 

Mr. Speaker, we see the compassion and determination of the 

people of this fair province and especially of our farmers. 

Elmer Laird, a farmer from Davidson, has donated 35 acres of 

land to grow over 200 tonnes of high-quality vegetables for the 

hungry in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Laird has decided to engage in 

this because he was concerned, as we all are, about the fact that 

here in Saskatchewan we have 43 per cent of the cultivated 

land and about 4 per cent of all the people in Canada, yet 

people in our province still go hungry. 

 

Mr. Laird is showing his community and the rest of 

Saskatchewan that people can make a difference.  These 200 

tonnes of vegetables will be available to people who otherwise 

would be hungry.  By volunteering his time and energy, Mr. 

Laird is giving hope to many individuals, not only because they 

are able to eat healthy food, but also that the people of this 

province will always help each other. 

 

I am sure that the many people that Elmer Laird will help feed 

will be very grateful for his generous work.  The rest of the 

province should also recognize his efforts. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grow Regina Garden Project 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Following along 

the line of the comments from the member from Redberry, a 

group of community organizations in Regina with 

representation from all levels of government, have combined 

resources to establish a major community garden project.  

Grow Regina was initiated by the Regina World Food 

Committee. 

 

The project has acquired two large parcels of land for the use of 

families and individuals of all ages who do not have access to a 

garden.  Growing fresh food locally as a community is a 

sustainable activity with benefits to health, education, 

recreation, agriculture, and the environment.  The two land 

parcels represent about 280 garden plots, and the individuals 

and the families who live in the immediate area will be given 

preference for the plots.  The first parcel is being leased from 

the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, north of 

the Red Cross on Broadway Avenue; and the second garden is 

south of the new Regina & District Food Bank at 2201 1st 

Avenue. 

 

And it should be known that some of the produce which is 

grown here will be going directly to the food bank.  There'll be 

educational workshops to teach basic and advanced gardening 

techniques. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that these types of community efforts 

bring people together for a common goal.  We wish them good 

success and a good growing season.  Thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Three Sioux Indian Bands form Partnership 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

the Assembly to join with me in recognizing and congratulating 

the three Sioux Indian bands in my constituency, the Key, the 

Cote, and the Keeseekoose, that pledged a tripartite partnership 

agreement for economic and social development earlier this 

month. 

 

This historic agreement has come about as a result of the three 

sharing so much in common.  Since they share the same 

language, culture, heritage, and history, it is believed that a lot 

more can be achieved through cooperation and working 

together. 

 

Through this agreement of understanding, the bands will jointly 

develop a comprehensive economic and social strategy to 

address many of the concerns that are facing the Canadian first 

nations.  Their language and their culture will be preserved and 

the members of the band will be given an opportunity to enter 

into a better quality of life.  The three bands will also invest 

their human and other resources to cooperate and to 

communicate in the common good of all parties. 

 

This agreement is calling for cooperation in the 

community-based economic development, health, welfare, 

sports, recreation, culture, justice, child and family services, as 

well as education and job skill training. 

 

This agreement was signed by Chief Pat Cote, Chief Albert 

Musqua, and Chief Dennis O'Soup.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to congratulate these three bands on their historic initiative 

and wish them all success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Study on Breast Cancer 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In recognition of 

Cancer Month I would like to announce a new study on cancer.  

The Canadian Cancer Society is recruiting 80,000 women in 

this province to participate in a ground 

_breaking new 10-year study on breast cancer.  The study is 

being directed by Dr. Carol Haines who says this will mark the 

first time ever that the everyday activities of women will be 

examined to determine if they are associated with breast 

cancer.  A $90,000 grant from the Max Bell Foundation will 

help fund the project. 

 

In an attempt to recruit women for the study, elementary school 

children in eight communities will take home information on 

the study this month while Regina and Saskatoon will get 

involved this fall.  Women can also become involved by 

contacting either the cancer society or their local health centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel it is of utmost importance to do all 

research necessary to defeat this devastating disease.  Through 

studies such as this we can come closer to the point of finding a 

cure.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Welfare Numbers 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

few questions I'd like to ask the Minister of Social Services.  

Mr. Minister, the other day you suggested that the welfare 

numbers were levelling off.  I suggest to you, sir, that that's not 

true. 

 

We have learned that the number of people on welfare in 

Saskatchewan in February grew to 81,652. That's an increase, 

Mr. Minister, of over a thousand people in January; an increase, 

Mr. Minister, of over 5,000 in the past three months. 

 

Mr. Minister, this growth has all occurred after the transfer of 

off-reserve natives.  So it's your government that is actually . . . 

it occurred after, so it's your government that deserves all the 

credit for these increased numbers. 

 

Mr. Minister, what do you attribute this tremendous increase in 

the welfare rolls?  Why is it happening under an NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government that promised to eliminate 

poverty? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear 

that we are still committed to eliminating poverty, and we're 

working very hard to try to create jobs in a situation where that 

opposition left this province in such a mess, so we had a major 

rebuilding job to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every month, every single month new families 

come on assistance as they leave the reserve, new treaty 

families, and we're responsible right away.  Now it's his federal 

counterparts that are responsible for that. 

 

If you take January and February together in terms of the 

increase, that is a better situation, those two months together, 

than it's been in the last five years.  So take those two months 

together.  The bottom line is that due to UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) changes of your former colleagues in 

1993 in the federal offloading and in the new federal budget, is 

going to create major problems for off-farm income, for people 

who are going to have their benefits cut in UIC.  They're going 

to create another increase in the case-load because people have 

to work longer and qualify for fewer benefits. 

 

And I can go over -- as I said the other day -- I'll be happy to go 

over the projects that are coming on stream across the province 

in terms of new jobs.  I'd be very happy to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

before the election your party had the answers to end all of the 

poverty problems.  You had all the answers.  Now all you offer 

is excuses, Mr. Minister.  The number of people on welfare in 

this province continues to rise -- 81,000 people on 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

welfare. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is equivalent to the entire population of 8 of 

Saskatchewan's 12 cities -- the equivalent of the population of 

Estevan, Lloydminster, Melfort, Melville, North Battleford, 

Swift Current, Weyburn, and Yorkton -- all on welfare, Mr. 

Minister, under an NDP government that promised to end 

poverty in your first term. 

 

What is happening? What's happening?  Well is it because your 

government's economic policies, are they failing?  Or is there 

an increase in the amount of abuse in this province?  Which 

one is it, Mr. Minister?  Please tell us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me make it very clear, Mr. 

Speaker, when we were in opposition we never anticipated the 

degree of federal offloading that there would be on UIC and 

treaty families off reserves.  How could you anticipate that?  

That's dumped 10,000 new families onto assistance.  Those are 

the facts and you know that. 

 

What the member should know as well is that across Canada, 

across Canada, Mr. Speaker, the average assistance case-load 

has gone up 51 per cent in every other province across Canada.  

They've gone up 33 per cent in Saskatchewan in the last three 

years -- we know that -- but they've gone up 51 per cent in 

every other province. 

 

So we're doing a better job than other provinces, and it's no 

thanks to you or the Liberals or your federal counterparts from 

before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, we know, we know that the majority of the people in 

this province don't want a cheque from your department.  They 

don't want a cheque from the provincial government; they don't 

want a cheque from anyone but an employer.  They simply 

don't.  And you can't get a job in NDP Saskatchewan; that's the 

problem right now.  Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that there's 

always a few people who will try and take advantage of the 

system.  And judging from these numbers, Mr. Minister, it 

appears that there's a number of people who are abusing the 

system, or they can't get a job because of your economic 

programs. 

 

Just the other day the NDP government in Ontario, they hired 

270 investigators to look into the potential abuses of the 

welfare system -- a move that they feel will save $100 million.  

Meanwhile your government, Mr. Minister, has moved exactly 

in the opposite direction.  You're doing away with 

investigators, cheque pick-up, and direct payment to landlords.  

You're going the opposite direction. 

 

Mr. Minister, given the sky-rocketing welfare numbers in this 

province, the high potential for abuse, and the rising costs to 

taxpayers, what changes are you considering to eliminate 

welfare abuse? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, he's playing politics 

with a very serious issue.  I tabled the other day in estimates, a 

listing of all of the control mechanisms that we've put in place 

and that we're working very closely with the Provincial 

Auditor; and read his report as I invited you to the other day.  

What the people of this province don't want either, is your $850 

million interest payment.  That is hand strapping this province; 

and you know very well, $15 billion debt. 

 

Let me read you a few examples of jobs that are being created 

in the last little while -- Balcarres, 23 direct jobs; Biostar, 

Saskatoon, 30 jobs; Goldenhill Cattle, Viscount, 24 jobs; 

Alcatel Wire, Weyburn, 10 jobs.  I'll give you the list; there are 

dozens and dozens and dozens of jobs here.  We're doing . . . 

we're working very hard. The chambers of commerce, the 

business community is optimistic about 1994; the Conference 

Board of Canada is optimistic about 1994; and the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking for hope and optimism and 

leadership.  They're not getting it from you or the Liberals.  

And the federal Liberal budget is going to do more to hurt low 

income people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, I 

agree it's becoming a very serious financial problem, not only 

for the people on welfare but also for the people, the taxpayers, 

who have to support the system. 

 

On the day you took office there were eight people working for 

every one person on welfare.  Today that ratio is about five 

people for every one working.  Every working person there is 

one person on welfare.  And the welfare numbers just keep 

going up. 

 

I want to read you . . . In November, 76,000; December, 

78,000; January, 80,000; February, 81,000.  Now is this what 

you meant when you said it was levelling off?  It's levelling off 

at 1,000 a month, is that what you're telling us?  It's like 

watching the Telemiracle, it just keeps going higher and higher 

and higher. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other provinces are moving to eliminate 

welfare abuse.  Other provinces are creating work programs for 

welfare recipients.  When are you going to see some positive 

welfare reforms in this province, Mr. Minister?  When are these 

numbers going to start going down?  That's what we need to 

know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, if he's serious about 

his concern about low income people and unemployed people I 

hope you support the last budget, the budget we're debating 

now, because we've put additional money into the Crown 

Corporations capital project -- 700 million; 24 million for 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

to work with the regional economic development authorities; 

330 million to support reforestation; 400 million . . . 4 million 

for northern economic development.  I hope you support these 

measures.  You should have thought, you should have thought 

when you were building big megaprojects, when you were 

building up a $15 billion debt, how you would hamstring future 

generations in our ability to support small-business people, but 

we've done that in spite of you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Elections 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, 

today SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) once again called on your government to hold 

health district board elections this year, at the same time as 

municipal elections.  SARM president, Sinclair Harrison, said, 

and I quote: The provincial government promised local 

authority and accountability in health care services.  It's time 

for the provincial government to live up to these commitments 

and keep its promises. 

 

Madam Minister, will you keep that promise?  Will you hold 

health board elections this October in conjunction with 

municipal elections? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government is committed to having elections for health district 

boards.  And I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that this has never 

occurred in the province of Saskatchewan before.  The 

members opposite never had elections for hospital boards.  Our 

government, however, is committed to that and we've written it 

in legislation.  We have committed to it publicly; however, we 

have always indicated the timing of these board elections is 

under review.  There is a process in place, as I have mentioned 

repeatedly throughout this province to the press and to other 

people who have asked, that is reviewing how we proceed to 

these elections and when we proceed to these elections, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think 

what we heard in code was there is not going to be elections 

this fall. 

 

Madam Minister, in addition to the issues of local authority and 

accountability, SUMA and SARM say that holding elections 

this fall would make the most economic sense for the taxpayer 

of Saskatchewan.  SUMA president, Ted Cholod said, and I 

quote: If the elections are integrated, the additional costs for 

district health boards would be minimal. 

 

It's difficult to estimate what the cost would be for health 

district boards to hold their own elections, but we suspect it 

could be several hundreds of thousands 

of dollars.  Madam Minister, we all recognize that resources in 

Saskatchewan are scarce so every possible health care dollar 

should be spent on service delivery not on administrative costs.  

You could save, Madam Minister, hundreds of thousands of 

dollars by holding the elections this fall. 

 

Madam Minister, will you take that opportunity for the people 

of Saskatchewan -- will you save health district boards 

hundreds of thousands of dollars by holding election this fall as 

SUMA and SARM have called for? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- One of the things the process will review, 

Mr. Speaker, is the cost of holding elections in the fall or 

outside of that time period at some other time.  The reason why 

we want to review that is because there are many people who 

are suggesting to us that these elections should not be held 

simultaneously because of the fact we have school board 

elections, municipal elections, and this is another election on 

top of that. 

 

The suggestion is is that they should stand alone on their own 

and we should concentrate on these elections.  Therefore we 

want to review what the costs are and how we could have an 

election that may be more cost efficient. 

 

It is also important to note when we're talking about costs, as 

for example one individual wrote with respect to boards, that 

the learning . . . the challenge is immense and the learning 

curve steep.  The point has also been made to the government, 

Mr. Speaker, that these boards have just barely got up and 

running; are just learning the processes and the administrative 

aspect of health care.  And to throw them into an election in 

October would not only be disruptive to health reform but it 

would also undermine much of what they have learned in the 

past if, for example, new members should be coming on 

stream.  We should use their knowledge that they're gaining 

over the last few months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

SUMA and SARM don't agree with you.  SUMA and SARM 

say it will cost hundreds of thousands of dollars to hold them 

outside of the municipal elections this fall.  And they represent 

people all over Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, Sinclair Harrison points out that the idea of 

holding health board elections in conjunction with municipal 

elections was first proposed by your department, the 

Saskatchewan Health officials, Madam Minister.  This was one 

of the few good ideas that your officials had in implementing 

your health care model.  And now you're backing away from it, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Sinclair Harrison says, and I quote:  As an interim measure 

appointed boards made sense, but appointed boards answer to 

the minister, not to the people in the districts, Madam Minister.  

The point is that we have 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

been trying . . . that's the point we've been trying to make for 

months, Madam Minister.  You have the opportunity to give 

Saskatchewan people a real say in health care reform and save 

hundreds of thousands of dollars doing it at the same time, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Will you take that opportunity as the people from SUMA and 

SARM and people all over Saskatchewan are suggesting, and 

call for those elections this fall? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all the boards 

answer to the people in their district.  It's written in the 

legislation that they must represent the interests of all the 

people in their district.  They are held accountable at two public 

meetings per year and have to provide information and budgets.  

They are accountable to the people within their district.  And 

there is a massive consultation, there is a massive consultation 

process going on right now with people in the district. 

 

I want to point out to the member opposite that SAHO, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, has called 

on the government to delay elections, and their voice has to 

also be heard.  I also have in my hand just a spattering of 

editorials throughout this province that urge for more time for 

health boards.  Election of hospital boards may be premature.  

Here's Swift Current: Delaying health district elections makes 

good sense -- boards need more time. 

 

So for the members opposite to suggest that there's this 

overwhelming unanimity in the province that we have to 

proceed to elections in October, is wrong.  Because the issue is 

open for consultation and debate.  We will consult with SARM 

and SUMA, with SAHO, and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I accept the next question, I have 

detected that there's too much interruption, particularly when 

the answers are given by ministers.  And I ask particularly one 

member on this side to not constantly interrupt.  I think he 

knows who I mean.  So please, not so much interruption.  Next 

question. 

 

Funding for Agriculture Emergencies 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question is 

for the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Your government has a contingency plan in place for natural 

disasters such as forest fires but you have nothing to deal with 

emergency situations suffered by farm families from flooding 

and excessive rain and snow that damages crops.  Every time 

you are asked about providing agriculture assistance, you 

ignore your responsibilities and pass the buck on to the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, you cannot expect help from Ottawa 

when your government has no agriculture plan in place.  What 

are you going to do to address natural emergencies in 

agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the 

member opposite: as he well knows, Saskatchewan has 40 per 

cent of the arable land in the country of Canada and 3 per cent 

of the population, and he expects 3 per cent of the population to 

protect 40 per cent of the agricultural land in the country. 

 

Meanwhile, the federal Minister of Agriculture says in 

November that he is going to institute an interest-free cash 

advance.  But now he says no.  He also says that he likes the 

idea of a third line of defence, but where is it? 

 

The federal government has a responsibility to agriculture in 

this country and we expect them to keep their word on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps the 

member from Kelsey-Tisdale didn't hear the question was to do 

with emergency disasters and what his government had plans to 

do about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are more than 900,000 acres of unharvested 

grain, tame and wild hay that were flooded and damaged by 

excessive rain and snow last fall in north-eastern Saskatchewan 

-- the area of the province where the member is from, in fact. 

 

When farm families hurt, the rural communities and businesses 

in those communities suffer as well, Mr. Speaker.  A study was 

done in the Preeceville-Sturgis area to see how the 1993 crop 

year has affected the community services.  Among other things, 

tax arrears have gone up 12 per cent over the previous year. 

 

Ag. Credit Corporation has varying degrees of accounts in 

arrears, with six out of ten farmers in serious trouble in the 

north-east -- six out of ten farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit there is a problem and provide 

these farm families with emergency assistance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly we 

have concerns.  There are certain areas in the province that 

have some problems and we are pressing the federal Minister 

of Agriculture to act on those concerns.  I wish the member 

opposite would join with us. 

 

I wonder what his agricultural policy is, Mr. Speaker.  I know 

that the Leader of the Third Party borrowed the Mulroney ag 

policy in 1991 when she was campaigning for election.  I 

wonder if they still have the federal Mulroney ag policy as their 

answer to the solution because I think it's the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The government 

appears to not have the agriculture in their heart as much as 

they claimed they did have before the 1991 election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The farmers who called us say they do not have enough money 

this spring to pay their bills, put seed in the ground. 

 

Mr. Minister, one farmer went to his local lending institution 

for a loan.  He has been dealing with this institution since 1973 

and has never been late with a payment.  His loan was refused.  

The lender told him, because of the situation in the last two 

years, they were not prepared to lend him any more money.  

The banker told the farmer he was not alone in that; there were 

35 to 45 farmers in the same position. 

 

If 45 farmers are forced off the land in the Preeceville area, a 

chain reaction will start which will destroy rural Saskatchewan.  

Mr. Minister, it's not my job and it's not Ottawa's job, it's your 

job, and what are you going to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again I want 

to stress to the member opposite that in Saskatchewan we have 

over 40 per cent of the arable land and 3 per cent of the 

population.  I don't know what he expects from the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It's a federal issue and we are talking with Mr. 

Goodale and I wish you would, Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- The Saskatchewan government has 

instituted a six-year leaseback program, an ag equity fund.  

Where is Farm Credit on the six-year leaseback issue?  Where 

is the federal government on this?  All I hear from Mr. Goodale 

is yes, I like the idea of an interest-free cash advance today, but 

not now.  And on the other hand I hear him say I like the idea 

of a third line of defence.  But where is it today?  Join with us.  

Talk to Mr. Goodale and see if we can't get help for the farmers 

that are in need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The issue before 

us is a very serious one.  And I would wish the member from 

Kelsey-Tisdale would be more serious in his answers as the 

people that we're discussing are from his area of the province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Small business in rural Saskatchewan is dependent on the 

agriculture community.  Mr. Minister, if the farmers do not 

have disposable income, these small businesses will suffer. 

 

A local farmer tells us that in the Preeceville-Sturgis area 

several businesses are feeling the effects of the problem.  He 

gives examples of the co-op association, farm equipment 

dealers, the Wheat Pool, the UGG (United Grain Growers 

Limited), credit unions, and grocery stores.  Grocery stores 

alone have recognized a 10 per cent or a 12 per cent decrease 

over last year.  Mr. Minister . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have a difficult time hearing 

the member's question from all the interruptions from the 

members.  I wish they would allow the member to ask his 

question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, will you recognize the 

seriousness of the situation, develop a plan that will allow for 

emergency assistance in the case of natural disasters for the 

farmers -- the farmers in your area, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the 

member opposite, I was in Nipawin the other day and I was 

talking to a group of farmers; they're much more optimistic this 

year.  Certainly there are problem areas. 

 

Prices are better for their commodities.  They like the idea of 

the ag equity fund, Farm Support Review Committee's 

recommendations to Mr. Goodale, and are hoping that we can 

have a new program shortly.  They like crop insurance changes.  

They like the idea of the six-year leaseback and many are using 

it. 

 

Mr. Goodale, I believe, will be in town today.  I'm wondering if 

you could talk to him and ask him if he is concerned with the 

farmers in this province.  Talk to him about the 5 per cent cut to 

the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act).  I haven't 

heard you mention that at all.  And how about the interest-free 

cash advances which I mentioned a little while ago? 

 

Where is Mr. Goodale?  Can he come to the aid of 

Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grain Car Shortage 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, you may not be 

aware of this, but farmers in this province are facing three 

major challenges as they head into spring seeding. 

 

The first concern relates to a severe shortage of railcars for 

grain transportation.  Mr. Minister, the rail companies and the 

GTA (Grain Transportation Agency) have failed to maintain 

sufficient number of railcars.  As a result, elevators in this 

province are being congested.  Farmers are finding they have 

more difficulty moving their grain to market.  Mr. Minister, this 

creates a cash flow problem when producers can least afford it. 

 

What actions has your government taken to address this 

situation?  Have you contacted the respective federal 

authorities to determine the extent of the problem and what 

they intend to do about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the 

member opposite, yes I have contacted the federal minister in 

that regards because we do believe that there is a concern.  And 

you are exactly right, Mr. 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

Member -- what is the federal government doing about it?  I 

don't think anything. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

With respect to questions 46 to 50, I hereby table the answer to 

all those questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Answers to written questions are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 32 -- An Act 

to amend The Labour Standards Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's indeed 

a pleasure to stand in this Assembly and to raise some concerns 

that are being brought to our attention on a daily basis by 

people across this province regarding Bill No. 32, the 

amendments to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, as the debate has unfolded and as 

people have become more aware of the legislation and the 

intent of the legislation, as they've been listening and waiting 

for the Minister of Labour to come forward with his 

regulations, Mr. Speaker, the people are becoming more 

concerned on a daily basis.  And we have had calls from all 

across this province, from people in the business community, 

people involved in education and health, Mr. Speaker.  Even 

labour groups have been calling with regard to some of the 

concerns they have. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the major concern that we have is the rate 

at which this piece of legislation is being forced on the people 

of Saskatchewan.  And it would be appropriate to ask . . . one 

might ask, why such a rush?  Why is there such a rush to push 

this labour legislation forward, or to change The Labour 

Standards Act? 

 

Is it because the government wants to get some of these types 

of legislation out of the way before they get into a year just 

following or proceeding a provincial election?  I would think, 

Mr. Speaker, that is what the government is trying to do.  They 

want to get some of the pieces of legislation that they know 

would be quite controversial out of the way well in time or well 

ahead of the next provincial election so that the electorate 

will have some time to sit back and totally forget about what's 

taken place and how the government has just run roughshod 

over each and every one of them in their lives on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to ask whose support does the 

government have in pushing these amendments forward?  And 

certainly we're quite well aware of the fact that the business 

people certainly aren't in support of this legislation.  Many 

business people right across this province have spoken out.  

Businessmen and women in my area have being raising the 

matter with me and they've been sending suggestions forward. 

 

(1415) 

 

And we've contacted business people, we've contacted 

organizations and we have asked them, Mr. Speaker, to not just 

write us with their concerns, to raise their concerns but to also 

offer some suggestions.  So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, as 

we enter this debate and if we get to the point where this 

government just seems to be bull-headed and moving forward 

with the legislation and not as the Minister of Health has 

indicated, pull the legislation as she suggested that we do with 

the election for health boards, then we will be offering some 

alternatives. 

 

Now I've heard the Minister of Labour indicate that he may 

have some amendments to the legislation.  Well I think it 

would be very appropriate if the Minister of Labour would pass 

forward or send those amendments over and let us see them, in 

light of the Bill, so that we can discuss it with the Bill. 

 

And the Premier has said, well if we let it go, he'd do it later 

this day.  Well we've heard the Premier make those comments 

before, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately every time we turn 

around and offer the opportunity we have been left in a position 

where we've been double-crossed and I don't think that's 

appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, SARM, wants a delay in the passage of this 

Bill, as do the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

SUMA, and the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, the group that the Minister of Health was 

talking about today, SAHO.  SUMA, SARM, and SAHO 

represent the single largest employee group in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by their own admission, they represent over 

40,000 employees across the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 

Speaker, they have permanent employees, they have part-time 

employees, casual employees and seasonal employees.  

They've inside workers and outside workers, emergency 

workers.  They hire students and have employees near 

retirement.  And they, Mr. Speaker, want the government to 

slow down. 

 

And it doesn't seem to matter who you talk to out there, and 

I've talked to some local businesses who 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

hire individuals on a part-time basis.  And the reason that it's a 

part-time basis is because they have fluctuations in the traffic 

flow in their businesses, especially businesses of food outlets, 

Mr. Speaker, where there's a heavy traffic flow during, say, the 

noon hour and during the supper hour. 

 

And as it is right now, Mr. Speaker, if they bring an employee 

in, they must pay them three hours, not just for the hour that 

they may happen to work; they pay them for three hours.  And 

if they're forced to give that employee all the benefits that this 

piece of legislation is bringing forward, it's going to put them in 

a position where it becomes a greater financial burden for them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they might be able to continue hiring that 

employee, provided they can pass the cost on to the consumer 

and provided that consumer doesn't get turned off and not come 

and continue to give them their business.  So they have to 

weigh the options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when you look at the concerns that are 

raised out there by SARM and SUMA . . . And I'd like to give a 

few quotes.  I'd like to quote from the SUMA news conference 

that was held just recently.  And Mr. Ted Cholod, he said, and I 

quote: 

 

We believe that fast passage of the Bill may instead prove 

disruptive to workplaces, displacing part-time workers, 

and intruding on the collective bargaining process.  By 

speeding up the process, we are concerned that the 

government may do more harm than good. 

 

End quote. 

 

Mr. Cholod, president of SUMA, also asks the government to 

withdraw Bill 32 and to reintroduce it in the 1995 legislative 

session, complete with the regulations.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that would be appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the question period today we asked the 

government or the Minister of Health if indeed the government, 

as they've been asked by these same groups, would indeed 

implement health board elections this fall in conjunction with 

municipal elections.  And the Minister of Health said no, we 

must take the time to review the process.  They must review the 

process -- that's what she said -- before we bring forward the 

legislation that allows for election of health boards. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Health feels it's time that 

we must take the time to review the process, and it would 

appear to me that the fact that the health legislation and the 

health boards have been in place for somewhat over a year at 

this time, that it would also be appropriate for the Minister of 

Labour to take the same recommendation and to listen to the 

concerns that are being raised by business people, men and 

women across this province, student groups and organizations, 

withdraw the legislation, sit down with all these organizations, 

as he's indicated, go over the piece of legislation, make the 

changes that would 

be appropriate, but also lay out the regulations or the changes 

that will be coming about through regulation. 

 

Now yesterday in this Assembly the Minister of Labour stood 

and told us that he would bring forward the regulations if we 

would allow him to move to committee.  And here again I say, 

what guarantee have we that we are going to see the regulations 

if we would just move from one process, the democratic 

process in this House, if we would just move through orders of 

the day and adjourned debates and move right into committee? 

 

Would the minister guarantee the regulations?  I doubt it very 

much.  I'm not even sure if the minister has the regulations 

ready.  Even if he did, would he show them to us?  Would he 

let us know?  And the problem we have -- we've raised it 

before -- is the fact that regulations are given approval by 

Executive Council.  And who is Executive Council? -- that's 

cabinet.  Cabinet makes recommendations and can give 

approval to regulations, and regulations are made and affect our 

lives on a daily basis. 

 

And we saw that just recently, last week, the increase in our 

power bills by 3.8 per cent.  Did we have the opportunity to 

debate it on the floor of this Assembly?  Did we have the 

ability to stand here and speak up on behalf of the taxpayers 

across this province?  No, we didn't.  It was just a move by 

Executive Council.  And that's what's going to happen with the 

regulations regarding The Labour Standards Act. 

 

And that's why we feel it very appropriate that we take the time 

to bring out some of the concerns, or many of the concerns that 

are being raised with us on a daily basis.  And that we continue 

to ask the minister and ask the government to come clear with 

what they are planning on doing through The Labour Standards 

Act, and not only through the Bill itself and the legislation, but 

the regulations that they will be implementing at a later date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I  believe this would allow the government an 

opportunity to further analyse and get feedback, the real 

feedback that the minister continually tells us he is getting, or 

even the fact that he tells us that he's been meeting with groups. 

It would allow him to sit down in a real way, unencumbered, 

and with concerned groups across this province, and hear their 

concerns, hear the issues that they're raising, get some real 

feedback, and then come before this Legislative Assembly.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we would be more than willing to deal with 

the legislation in that appropriate fashion.  And so we would 

ask the minister if he would take the time and follow the lead of 

the Minister of Health, withdraw the Bill, and seek that 

consultation that he keeps telling us he's doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again refer to Mr. Cholod's remarks, and his 

concerns and requests were echoed as well by the president of 

SARM, the new president of SARM, Mr. Sinclair Harrison, 

and Harvey McLane, executive director of SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations).  They as 

well are worried, Mr. 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

Speaker, about the collective bargaining process.  They do not 

want to see 20 years of collective bargaining go down the 

drain. 

 

Another group, Mr. Speaker, that we have to take note of is the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association.  They are also 

opposed to Bill 32.  And, Mr. Speaker, when you realize that 

they employ between 17 and 18,000 people across this 

province, you begin to understand why a group such as the 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association) would 

have concerns and would be raising these concerns with us 

today. 

 

So we see business groups like SARM and SUMA, SAHO, and 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association have told us 

that although they do not oppose changing the Act, they are 

opposed to the specific piece of legislation that has been 

brought before us. 

 

And the reason they're opposed, Mr. Speaker, is because prior 

to introduction of the legislation, they were led to believe that 

there would be a sincere consultative process, that they would 

have input into the legislation, that the legislation would be 

very clear, would lay out major guidelines, and that as well the 

minister . . . they were led to believe that the regulations would 

also be brought forward so they could see how the regulations 

correlated with the legislation. 

 

However, to date they are still waiting for that, as we are.  And 

so even though they realize that some changes are needed to 

The Labour Standards Act to bring it up to date and bring it 

into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker, they're also concerned with 

how it has been done and the process that has been 

accomplished. 

 

They do not want these amendments pushed through the 

Assembly without any regard to employers' costs and job loss.  

At the very least, the government should table the regulations 

and allow for consultation, and then as I've indicated, 

reintroduce the Bill at a later date after they have indeed taken 

the time for real, meaningful negotiations and consultation. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that government members know what 

kind of restraints organizations represented by SAHO and the 

SSTA are under; even SARM and SUMA, for that matter. 

 

These organizations, Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of, have 

had their funding cut and are facing additional costs this year 

such as -- and I just talked about it a moment ago -- the 

SaskPower rate hike announced last week. And people are 

saying, how can we continue to absorb these kinds of 

increases?  How can we absorb the effects of this piece of 

legislation? 

 

The end result, Mr. Speaker, as we've talked to groups and 

organizations, is there will be job losses -- job loss, which is 

inevitable. 

 

And unfortunately when we have students right across 

this province who are in the process of getting ready to write 

final exams and are thinking a month down the road of looking 

for job opportunities, are going to find that the jobs may not be 

there unless the government was willing to take a very clear 

and concerned look and listen very attentively to the concerns 

of the small-business community across this province that do 

take the time to hire students, giving them that opportunity to 

work and that ability to raise some finances so that they can go 

back and continue their education in the fall. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, the only people supporting Bill 32 are 

government MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 

the so-called -- I believe the minister called them -- the silent 

majority that the Labour minister continues to refer to. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, it would be appropriate if the Minister 

of Labour, I would suggest, would hold this legislation until the 

silent majority speak up and state their case.  But maybe, Mr. 

Speaker, they'll never get an opportunity or won't take the time 

because maybe that silent majority is silent because they really 

aren't there -- that silent majority that the minister continually 

refers to as being out there supporting them.  Maybe they have 

no case because we really don't have that silent majority there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the government members have been 

receiving as many letters on this matter as we have in our 

office.  And since we don't have the ability to have a free 

discussion in this Assembly and allow members to speak very 

openly on the concerns raised by their members, it would be 

interesting to hear what kind of a debate is taking place behind 

closed doors in the government caucus office, or the 

government caucus at this time, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that 

they're going through some of the major concerns that even 

were raised when I was part of government and the major 

debate we had on a daily basis as caucus members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me the only letters in support that the 

government must be getting are no doubt coming from trade 

unions.  It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that even part-time 

employees are opposed to some of the changes. 

 

And I've talked to individuals.  I've talked to women who have 

part-time jobs, and the reason they've got a part-time job is 

because they've got family at home and they want to spend 

time with family and they really don't want to take the time to 

be involved in a full-time job.  And they like the flexibility of 

part-time work.  And they're concerned, Mr. Speaker, because 

they're not necessarily looking for all the benefits, but they 

appreciate the additional income that it brings into their 

household. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been receiving letters from those who 

will suffer from the changes to The Labour Standards Act and I 

would like to give you a few examples.  From Humboldt, 

Saskatchewan, a graphic artist writes, and I quote: 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

You people don't seem to get it, that it is difficult as 

business owners to make a decent living much less to 

expand.  My employee now makes as much as I do with 

absolutely nothing left.  Now you want to make it even 

tougher with staff benefits for the few times we use extra 

help.  In our case, you're not helping us stay in business at 

all. 

 

From a businessman in Saskatoon, and I quote: 

 

I have glanced at the proposed Labour Standards Act 

changes.  Please do not proceed.  They do not make sense, 

are not needed, and are unworkable. 

 

From the general manager of a meat plant in Melfort, quote: 

 

Your government keeps telling us to compete globally, 

export value added products, be efficient, start small 

businesses, hire people, and on and on.  Do you forget, or 

did you ever know that we, Saskatchewan small business, 

already operate on an unlevel playing-field and now it will 

be much worse?  Small business is expected to pull us out 

of this deep depression.  Why are you trying to kill it? 

 

(1430) 

 

From The Battlefords Chamber of Commerce, quote: 

 

Additional non-statutory benefits, such as medical 

benefits, will be difficult to secure and impossible to 

administrate.  Scheduling of part-time workers with an 

extended notice requirement and seniority-assured work 

will significantly reduce existing part-time labour force. 

 

A Saskatoon restaurateur says, and I quote: 

 

The changes you intend to make to the labour laws will 

destroy most small-business restaurants, therefore less 

jobs, higher unemployment, and more welfare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this employer makes another strong point, and I 

quote: 

 

One week notice for work scheduling changes -- what 

happens when my employees phone in sick 15 minutes 

before shift start?  What do I do?  I didn't have a week 

notice to replace them.  My business suffers; my clientele 

suffers. 

 

From an engineering firm in Prince Albert, and I quote: 

 

As a fairly large employer in Prince Albert, we have 

always enjoyed a good relationship with our employees by 

paying them good wages and treating them fairly, not by 

wielding a big stick.  It appears as if the provincial 

government could learn from this on dealing with 

employers in the 

province as this legislation is guaranteed not to improve 

relationships or cooperation with business.  Without 

businesses and the profits they make, there will be no need 

for any legislation as there will be no employees to protect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on quoting from the letters that 

we have received in our office, reading excerpts, speaking out 

against the changes that are being proposed through Bill 32, the 

changes to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Each and every letter clearly defines problems with this 

legislation.  Almost every letter indicates the legislation will 

force businesses to lay off part-time workers. 

 

Are the members opposite concerned about jobs in 

Saskatchewan?  Are they truly concerned?  Are they concerned 

about the increase, the major increases we are seeing in the 

welfare rolls in this province?  I think, Mr. Speaker, they 

should be because their track record is certainly showing it as a 

dismal failure. 

 

Members opposite should be paying attention to the concerns 

that are being raised.  Do the members opposite really realize 

that there were fewer people working in Saskatchewan in 

January than any month since March of 1984 according to 

Statistics Canada?  It's a real fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Are the government members and is the minister aware of the 

fact that there are 12,000 fewer jobs in Saskatchewan than in 

January of 1991, or are they not concerned?  Does it really not 

bother them?  Are the members opposite aware that 

Saskatchewan's population has fallen to a new 10-year low?  

And do the members opposite want to further increase our 

already bloated welfare system? 

 

As my colleague, the member from Wilkie, indicated today, do 

the members opposite realize that out of the 81,000 individuals 

on welfare today in Saskatchewan, a great many of them were 

laid off and can't find jobs?  People with jobs are desperately 

hanging on to them; people without are looking.  Many people 

have come to the point and have quit looking because there's 

just nothing available and have turned to welfare as an 

alternative. 

 

If the government does not pull this Bill, the first to suffer, Mr. 

Speaker, will be our students.  Students who are trying to earn 

enough money to go to university will be out of jobs straight 

across the province. 

 

The Minister of Education is aware of the amount that 

university students must raise to go to the facility of their 

choice next year.  She knows, Mr. Speaker, because her 

funding cuts have forced an increase in tuition.  And I find that 

interesting when the Minister of Education and many of the 

members opposite were sitting on this side of the House prior 

to 1991, and they were condemning the former government for 

holding the line at zero on educational funding.  Now they've 

cut that funding.  They were condemning the former 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

government for the increase in tuition. We don't hear them 

complaining about tuition fee increases right now. 

 

What they're saying is we may have reached the end of the line 

-- no more decrease in funding.  We may have just found a 

place where we have balanced off. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, time will tell.  In fact as we got into the 

debate today and the Minister of Social Services was 

responding, he was blaming the federal government.  Well I 

think he needs to be concerned because following the Quebec 

provincial election, the federal government may be taking a 

serious look at social programs and third-party funding that 

they are sending across this country.  And they indeed might 

pull some of that funding out of Saskatchewan.  And yes, this 

government must be concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has serious ramifications.  It must be 

pulled from the order paper and be reintroduced after proper 

and thorough consultation has occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the members opposite to truly 

consider the detrimental effect this Bill may have on business 

and other employment rates in Saskatchewan.  I would ask all 

members to take the time to listen to people in their 

constituencies.  Listen to their constituents; listen to the groups 

and organizations and individuals who are speaking out about 

this Bill.  To listen to their concerns; to raise them with the 

minister, Mr. Speaker; to ask the minister to slow down. 

 

Let's indeed do that consultation that we've always talked 

about.  Take a very serious look at it and come in with the 

proper amendments, with the changes in the regulations before 

us, so that at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, when the Bill is 

introduced and finally makes it through this House, that there 

won't be a person across the province that will not say that we 

haven't had an opportunity; but that we will have a working 

relationship with business and employers and employees across 

this province so we can all work together to develop and build 

this province so we can go into the 21st century. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 32 second 

reading debates.  I'm particularly happy today, Mr. Speaker, to 

address the issue from two points of view. 

 

First of all, as the critic for Labour, I feel that Labour should be 

defended to some extent in this Bill and the way it is going to 

treat people in our province.  And with that view, I'm going to 

try to balance my remarks in my debate, in my contribution, 

with the view that perhaps both sides have issues that need to 

be addressed, and that there needs to be a compromise of those 

ideas if we are to have peace and harmony in our province. 

 

The Minister of Labour has in past suggested that 

members of this opposition want to divide the employers and 

the employees on major issues and cause confrontation.  

Unfortunately the reality of life is that we are doing no such 

thing.  We are playing our role as an official opposition by 

trying to point out the shortcomings of the legislation and how 

it might in fact hurt people, both business and employees.  And 

we do that with all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, knowing that it will 

be a difficult job, but also knowing that that balance is there 

and needs to be found. 

 

I want to say that in all of the letters and correspondence we 

have gotten, I've brought just a handful with me.  I've got them 

with me because I sorted through them earlier today and I 

brought a few of the more important ones with me.  Out of all 

that were received, I've only had two pieces of material that 

support the legislation in some way.  And the one is a letter, 

and I think I need to comment on that first in order to bring 

about some of that balance. 

 

As you are probably aware (and I'm quoting from this 

letter), some of the business community is opposed to 

changes to The Labour Standards Act.  I believe it is only 

the unscrupulous employers who are fighting the changes 

and not the many good employers in this province. 

 

Now this letter came from a Dan Bechtel, I think that's 

pronounced, and he's the president of the Saskatoon & District 

Labour Council.  And I'm not surprised that some of the labour 

leaders would view it a positive thing for this legislation to be 

changed because, after all, they have asked for this for some 

time.  He goes on to describe how many workers he represents 

and that he feels that the legislation of course is necessary and 

should be done very quickly. That was the one actually signed 

letter that I got that favours this legislation outright. 

 

The other piece of paper, Mr. Speaker, that I have that refers to 

in some degree of support, is from the Leader-Star and it's a 

story written after interviews with various people.  And the 

name Barb Byers of course is no secret to the people of 

Saskatchewan in support of the labour movement. 

 

 And while she basically says that she supports Bill 32, what 

she doesn't like -- and this is quite important, I think, to the 

whole debate -- what she does here is complain very bitterly 

that the government has now suggested that it might actually 

take a compromise position that would allow business to 

continue to operate, as well as labour to be able to get along 

with business people who employ them. 

 

Now she says here, and I'm presuming that they have direct 

quotes from her, that, she says, the changes provide an 

opportunity for employers to weasel out of actually having the 

Act work. 

 

Now I don't always agree with Barb Byers' point of view, 

especially her philosophical point of view, but she is not really 

the kind of person that would make that kind of comment 

without having studied it and 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

thought about it.  And I'm quite concerned that when even the 

labour leaders, the most prominent ones in the province, say 

that this legislation is not going to work, I am quite concerned 

that maybe, when the business community on their side of the 

issue have also said that it won't work, maybe the draft itself is 

faulty. 

 

Maybe the language that was used and the way that this Act has 

been drawn up cannot work.  And maybe then, just maybe, Mr. 

Minister, you have to go back to the drawing board and tear 

this thing up and start over and redo it.  Because here we have 

one of the most prominent labour leaders in the province saying 

that there is an opportunity for people to weasel out of the 

legislation, in which case why have we gone to all this hassle 

and trouble? 

 

On the other hand, I have a mountain of letters, and I'll just go 

through the names of a few people that have sent me letters so 

that the minister will know that we are not playing silly games 

with him, that in fact his silent majority, on both sides of the 

issue, are not silent and they are not a majority. 

 

Letters that I have collected today for this debate include letters 

from the Saskatchewan business coalition; the regional tourism 

association; the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association; the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce; Price Club; 

Saskatchewan Construction Association; Beau Manor Motel 

and Hotel; the Bird Machine Company of Canada; SUMA; 

SARM; Precision Servicing and Engineering Ltd.; The 

Battlefords C of C; Thompson's Wheat Limited; McDonalds -- 

we have from more than one operator-owner of McDonalds 

franchises. 

 

We have from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan -- that 

was from Rocanville. We have Perry Foster from Saskatoon, an 

individual very concerned; Anderson's Restaurants -- I don't 

know how many they've got; Graphic Arts and Printing; and 

Hunseth Line Construction Corporation.  And I ran out of page 

so I quit there and I figured by the time I talk about all those 

folks, my time will probably be expired anyway. 

 

So the point that has to be made, Mr. Speaker, is that all of 

these people have written in opposition to the legislation.  And 

while labour has only been represented by a couple of 

individuals that have added their thoughts to my pile of 

information, they both make the same point on one issue, and 

that is that the legislation is unworkable. 

 

And that's the key to the importance of why we should be here 

in second reading debate.  The minister has suggested we 

should move on to committee of the whole, but what he is 

saying then is that all of those people that have taken the 

position that we have a faulty piece of legislation are wrong 

and that he is right and they should not be listened to. 

 

(1445) 

 

He tries to tell us in question period and other times 

that the regulations that he proposes to set up at a later date and 

the amendments that he talks about to be brought in during 

committee of the whole are in fact the same things when in fact 

we all know they're not.  And everybody in this province, 

including business and labour, knows very well that the 

regulations and amendments are not the same thing. 

 

And when the minister suggested yesterday that we should go 

to committee of the whole and talk about this, I was quite ready 

to call his bluff because I knew very well that he wouldn't have 

any regulations because they haven't even been discussed with 

the business community yet.  He could have brought in some 

amendments because the business community has given him a 

list of what to do, but he could not have brought in the 

regulations as he promised. It can't happen if you don't have 

them.  And the business community knows very well that they 

haven't even been decided for individual areas. 

 

So with all of this taken into consideration, it becomes 

imperative that we hold the minister to the regular normal 

process of bringing Bills into being.  And that of course means 

that he has to listen to our second reading debate wherein we're 

going to point out to him the fallacy of his position. 

 

Having said that there are things that need to be considered on 

both sides of the issue, we now need, Mr. Speaker, to go into 

more detail on exactly what the problems are. 

 

Now after talking to many, many people, it is clear that these 

amendments that are proposed in this legislation are faulty.  It 

has not been properly thought through and there was not 

enough consultation.  And I say that in all sincerity, Mr. 

Speaker, based on the fact that out of all of these piles of letters 

and communications we have, most people felt that they had 

not been listened to. 

 

And in the end what will happen is that Saskatchewan people 

will be hurt rather than to be helped by these changes.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is too bad because after having had two and 

a half years to actually come up with some good ideas, it seems 

that this government is void of good ideas in the labour area. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you can bet that once part-time jobs start 

disappearing and your job creation record keeps spiralling 

downward, there will be casualties in the Labour department.  

Because you're going to say, what we have to do is find a 

scapegoat for all the mess we've gotten, and so you're going to 

have to fire some of your officials in order to save your own 

skin. 

 

And I don't think that's fair.  Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think 

the minister could save all of that hassle by simply tabling, as 

the president of SUMA has suggested, simply tabling this 

legislation and taking it into a fall session after a summer of 

genuine negotiation where they sit down and listen to people. 

 

And I'm suggesting that they should listen to Barb Byers as 

well as to the head of the Saskatoon District 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

Labour Council, it was called.  They should be listened to as 

well.  The government needs to do their homework.  They need 

to do a lot more studying and they need to do an awful lot more 

listening. 

 

So rather than have a few people from the Department of 

Labour fired when this thing is over with, I think it's only fair 

that the minister reconsider his position and withdraw the 

legislation. 

 

Now, Minister, while you were travelling all over the province 

and sending news releases to the whole country touting your 

new standards for part-time workers . . . which of course I have 

to admit sounds okay because I would like to see some things 

done in the legislation to protect part-time workers.  In theory 

to make things better for part-time workers is a good idea, but 

we have to be careful not to let theory interrupt reality. 

 

Now your legislation won't solve the problem, Mr. Minister, as 

it stands now, because it doesn't really help the part-time 

workers.  Your legislation didn't even mention job sharing or 

permanent part-time workers. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, many people choose to job share or to be 

permanent part-time rather than full-time.  This legislation does 

not cover that area for those individuals.  Instead we could see 

situations where an employee with seniority can horn in on the 

time shared with another employee, or a third person can horn 

in on an individual who works only three days a week, etc. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, did you purposely leave out those who job 

share and those who choose permanent part time, or did you 

just forget to address their concerns?  And I hope, Minister, that 

you will consider that possibility, that maybe you've let some 

people fall through the cracks here. 

 

Now our office, Mr. Speaker, has received calls from 

individuals in this situation.  And, Mr. Minister, I guess I have 

to ask the question, what do you want us to tell those people 

when they call in?  Are you going to take care of their concerns 

in regulations or are you not?  And we have to know and the 

people want to know what these regulations will or will not 

entail.  And the workers in this province, as well as business, 

have a right to know what those regulations are going to be and 

how they will affect their lives. 

 

Now changes to The Workers' Compensation Act and to The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, The Labour Standards 

Act, and soon The Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, have all 

meant more government control.  And, Mr. Minister, it is the 

small business that creates the majority of new jobs in this 

province.  Yet at every turn you are penalizing small business.  

Each of these changes have meant more intrusive government 

and less flexibility for business. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you honestly believe that bigger government 

and less flexibility is the best way to create jobs in this 

province?  Given the fact that your 

government's record of job creation has meant 12,000 less jobs 

since you were elected, maybe you should take a different 

approach. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, we also heard the figure of 81,000 

people on the welfare rolls, which very much dwarfs the 12,000 

figure, but it did not include an addition of the 70,000-plus who 

are presently on unemployment insurance in our province.  

Now it doesn't matter whose mathematics you use, that's 

getting to be a pretty high figure for a province the size of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I suggest to you, Minister, that you ought to listen more closely 

to the business people, the business owners, who are making 

our province more attractive for investors.  I believe that you 

could do that by listening to the point of view of how 

businesses operate.  And if you're to do that through the 

different regulations, then most certainly you ought to show us 

what those regulations are and how they're going to work.  It is 

the fear and the uncertainty that worries people the most in our 

society, especially when you have 150,000 people on some 

kind of government assistance with no jobs, no future, and no 

hope of getting a job in the immediate future. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, there are specifics in this Bill such as the 

provisions speaking of work scheduling being in a place a week 

in advance.  Mr. Minister, why have you taken a small amount 

of flexibility away from business, and how are businesses to 

comply with employees who get sick or injured or happen to 

have other mishaps that might happen to them? 

 

The legislation, Mr. Speaker, also states that a business is 

responsible for providing work to employees who become sick 

or disabled.  Now there aren't provisions as to how this may 

come about.  For instance, let's say that a company employees 

20 people.  One employee over the weekend has too much to 

drink, drives on the road and rolls his vehicle, and ends up 

disabled.  Are you saying, Minister, that it is the responsibility 

of his employer to take care of this employee for ever? 

 

Mr. Minister, there is some need for some responsibility to be 

designated, and your legislation leaves this door wide open.  

This would place quite a financial burden upon a 

small-business owner, which in turn could place the remaining 

19 employees' jobs in jeopardy if in fact the employer were 

found to be responsible. 

 

I think, Minister, you can see how quickly you could have 

something not covered in your legislation that could spiral and 

mushroom into a very serious situation where an entire small 

business could become bankrupt and all of the jobs could be 

lost as a result of not having properly thought about this 

legislation and not having properly written it up. 

 

I think we need to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about the exact 

reasons that many of the business people have found that they 

feel that we need to change this legislation.  I just want to quote 

a little bit here from some of our research: 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

Background briefing notes on Bill 32 (it says here) -- Take 

a closer look! 

 

The minimum new labour standards could mean maximum 

hardship for Saskatchewan's economy and less jobs. 

 

On Friday, March 11, 1994 the NDP government tabled 

Bill 32 -- an unprecedented set of sweeping amendments to 

the Saskatchewan Labour Standards Act. 

 

Now we have checked into that, Mr. Speaker, and apparently 

that is a fact.  These measures would be unprecedented in most 

of North America.  That means that we are setting ourselves 

out not only as leaders, but as being individuals in labour 

standards. 

 

Now as I've said before in this House, there's nothing wrong 

with being leaders, and there's certainly some benefit to leading 

in certain directions.  However, leading in the direction that 

will cost you jobs or seriously impact the economy of the 

province in a negative way certainly wouldn't be the best way 

to be a leader.  And we cannot allow ourselves to get out of 

sync with our neighbours in labour legislation or we will all 

pay the price of a poorer tax base and a poorer business base 

and a poorer opportunity for workers. 

 

Now it goes on here: 

 

Despite an expensive government ad campaign that says, 

"we're listening", the business and employer community 

had NO prior opportunity to review the detailed proposals 

contained in this legislation. While Labour Minister (and it 

says his name) and his Deputy Minister . . . held dozens of 

meetings over the last few months, the Department 

continues to be vague and elusive regarding the specific 

contents they had in mind.  The mere act of meeting does 

not count as meaningful "consultation" if the Department 

does not reveal its detailed intentions and does not really 

hear our legitimate concerns. 

 

The business community was also never asked for prior 

input on the design of a so-called cost impact study using 

highly questionable methods.  This Cost Impact study is 

nothing more than a clever smoke screen which continues 

to miss several key factors. 

 

And of course that's the Deloitte & Touche impact study that 

they are referring to; an impact study that in itself, when you 

read it closely, says that it doesn't cover all of the factors that 

need to be considered.  And the business community is very 

much worried about that, and I think they have good reason to 

be. 

 

Now it goes on to say that: 

 

With only a few weeks left before the NDP government 

attempts to bull-doze passage of Bill 32, the Saskatchewan 

business community is still trying hard to get the Labour 

Department 

to listen. 

 

Now we had the minister telling us here in this Assembly that 

he had consulted with everybody; he'd been on a great road 

show; he had talked to everyone in the province.  And yet when 

he got back here and told us how he'd consulted with 

everybody, we received this document from the business 

community, and they're saying that nobody listened to them; 

that in fact the meetings were one 

_sided and that they didn't hear the concerns. 

 

And it goes on to say that: 

 

Now we know why the Saskatchewan business was left in 

the dark until the very last minute. 

 

Bill 32 goes way beyond its stated intent to ensure that 

labour laws are fair, balanced and up to date.  There are 

many measures in this legislation that business does 

support -- e.g., additional leave for bereavement of 

grandparents, several maternity and parental leave 

provisions, shorter and precise time limits on claims, (and 

that sort of thing). 

 

Now I think that's important, Mr. Speaker, that the business 

community has pointed out that they're not totally against the 

legislation.  They've pointed out that there are some things that 

they themselves recognize needed to be corrected.  So they're 

not saying that labour legislation is totally out of order. What 

they're saying is that this particular legislation is not well 

drafted and has not addressed the issues that need to be 

addressed. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

However in many other areas of the legislation, as 

currently drafted, is: 

 

- technically unworkable; 

- will sideswipe and harm more workers than it helps; 

- will represent a huge and costly "payroll grab" from 

employers, beyond fair payment of wages actually 

worked; 

- represents an automatic enrichment for powerful union 

interests in Saskatchewan, without even having to bargain 

for it; 

- makes Saskatchewan less economically competitive; 

(and) 

- will cost jobs. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now that is a brief summary of some of the things that they 

saw wrong, and some of the things that they saw that should be 

done.  And there again I say that we are working on an 

approach to a balance -- a balance that will make this province 

work both for labour and for management.  The business 

community provides the jobs and the employees do the work 

that has to be done. Without the two working together, you can 

have nothing. 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

This particular document went on to do some outlining of how 

the Bill is actually going to work.  And I think it's important 

that we take a look at what these folks feel is important that the 

government hasn't listened to.  Because I know the minister is 

going to start to listen.  We have discussed this matter now for 

some time and I'm pretty sure that he would like to have this 

session end some time before the middle of July. So having 

gotten his ear, I think it's time that we put the words into his 

ear. 

 

We have here a summary of how Bill 32 will cost jobs and 

create other serious hardships, and these are as follows.  And it 

goes on here: 

 

How will Bill 32 hurt workers? 

 

New provisions to extend mandatory benefits to part-time 

workers -- including short-term casual, seasonal and 

student workers (Section 45.1). This goes well beyond the 

Government's original intent.  It is likely to result in less 

part-time jobs for our youth, sudden removal of existing 

worker benefits, or less new benefits to be established for 

other workers. (The insurance industry is also totally 

confused about how to modify plans to accommodate this 

pro-rating and how employers will be able to track 

variability and number of worker hours and number of 

employees according to regulatory thresholds.) 

 

See, Mr. Speaker, even the small businesses have recognized 

that workers are going to be hurt in a very direct manner, 

because the insurance companies that they've talked to are 

unable to come up with an idea of how to cover the workers.  

That's a very fundamental problem when you're talking about 

having part-timers covered by the system in the same time that 

full-time workers are covered. 

 

And so there needs to be time for the insurance industry to 

work out a way to make this program work.  I'm confident that 

they can do that, but they can't do it overnight most likely.  So 

we need to have that time to work on this. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

It appears that benefits will be mandatory for all 

employees if even one full-time employee or senior 

manager receives benefits.  Preliminary indications are 

that Government will apply this provision only to firms 

with more than 20 workers -- but the definition of "20 

workers" does not mean full-time equivalents, but the total 

number of T4'd workers as they may accumulate in the 

course of a year.  Once again this will cause real confusion 

in defining eligibility, and may result in down-sizing to get 

below an arbitrary threshold, artificial company splits, or 

greater shifting from employee to contractor status. 

 

So here's where some of the confusion begins to set in, Mr. 

Speaker, with regards to the numbers of workers 

that are specified in the legislation.  The legislation says 20 

workers.  If you take it on the surface, that would mean that an 

awful lot of small businesses wouldn't be counted in.  The 

reality is of course though that it's the number of T4s, which 

means that if you're in a small business or an industry where 

you have a turnover of employees on a monthly or bimonthly 

basis even in some cases, you could soon chalk up 20 T4 slips 

that have to be issued.  You might only have five or 10 

full-time employees, but you may have part-timers coming and 

going, and before very long you're also one of those businesses 

covered by this legislation. 

 

New definition of "working day" as any period of 24 

consecutive hours will take away worker flexibility to alter 

work patterns (Section 5). For example a worker who 

begins a 1:00 p.m. shift one day could not start the next 

shift on the next day before 1:00 p.m. without overtime.  

This is likely to result in less hours of work. 

 

And I think it's just natural that their point is well taken that 

most employers then would say, well if you can't work that 

shift until 1 o'clock, I'll hire your friend over there and he'll 

come in at 10 in the morning, or 8, and he'll take the whole 

shift and you lose your chance for a shift that next day. 

 

And I think most workers would like to have that opportunity 

to be able to keep their jobs and to rotate on the shifts.  I know 

that there are some exceptions to every rule, but I know of a lot 

of people that work in shift work who have accepted this as a 

natural part of their life, that they have to work shifts and that 

they are sometimes inconvenient. 

 

New section requiring that meal breaks must be taken after 

every five consecutive hours (Section 13.3). This 

legislative rigidity is unique in Canada and could affect 12 

hour and other shifts.  Overly rigid regulation of this 

section will likely lead to extensive short shifting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in our community we had a situation that 

pretty near works into this example.  We had nurses in our 

hospital who wanted to work a 12-hour shift because the 8-hour 

shifts that they had meant that they had to come to work more 

often in order to get the same number of hours.  Many of these 

nurses lived a long ways away from the hospital and had to 

commute long distances.  They themselves made the proposal 

to the health board of the day asking if they could have 12-hour 

shifts so that they could get their hours in with a lot less trips to 

and from work. 

 

The board agreed, the unions actually agreed to that, and it was 

set up that way.  And those nurses that worked under that 

program were very happy with it because it served their need in 

a particular circumstance that would be unusual perhaps for a 

city of Regina or Saskatoon.  But certainly in rural 

Saskatchewan this is not unusual. 

 

And so I think we need to have that flexibility built 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

back into the legislation, Mr. Speaker.  And without having 

seen the regulations, we don't know if that's going to be done; 

without seeing what the amended process is going to be, we 

also don't know. 

 

The business community is asking that they be shown.  I guess 

they're saying to the minister that they don't quite trust him to 

do what he says he might do or might not do. 

 

And I'm glad to have him paying such close attention today 

because this will be good for the business community to know 

that.  They have felt very strongly that the minister hasn't paid 

close enough attention to them.  So knowing that he is 

observing what's happening today will be of some comfort, I'm 

sure. 

 

Now the: 

 

New section requiring employers to provide part-timers 

with automatic seniority rights to get any additional 

available hours of work (likely for firms over 50 

employees) (Section 13.4). This may complicate full-time 

workers' opportunities for promotion or extra overtime.  

This is likely to create worker conflict and extensive 

confusion (not to mention real employer paperwork 

burden in tracking varying seniority rights for all of the 

part-time workers). 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, having to keep the records of 

which employee has the most hours in a firm of 50 people or 

more?  I can just see the mountain of paperwork that's going to 

have to be punched into some computer.  You'd likely have to 

have one full-time person just punching in the hours on a 

computer alongside each one of the workers on every shift that 

they do and add it up each day to find out who has the actual 

seniority. 

 

And then supposing you've got two people, who are good 

friends, who suddenly decide that they want both to have the 

same opportunities but one gets ruled out because he's an hour 

ahead in work time, and first thing you know you're going to 

have two good friends being good enemies because of a very 

small variance.  Whereas the employer had the opportunity 

before to straighten that out by an arbitrary decision that you 

work your shift as you always did before. 

 

I can see all kinds of headaches and problems coming out of 

this thing.  The new section appears to limit employees' ability 

to bank their vacation pay upon their request, section 33.1.  

And I think that most people would feel that the government 

should allow that kind of flexibility in legislation so that people 

can actually work out their own problems.  I'm not that sure, 

Mr. Speaker, that our world needs to have everything rigidly 

legislated into an absolute solid black-and-white law where you 

can or you can't, and it's so hard and fast that no exceptions are 

allowed to the rule. 

 

Now we have a: 

New section insisting that everything in this Act is a 

minimum standard.  This interferes with the free collective 

bargaining process (Section 72).  It precludes the 

possibility of mutually negotiated and acceptable 

conditions to help save worker jobs or shift from benefits 

to higher worker wages.  It also automatically ratchets up 

every existing union agreement in the province and/or 

makes every current agreement immediately null and void 

upon Act proclamation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is probably one of the most important aspects 

of this legislation -- is the fact that for people like SUMA who 

represent all of the cities in our province where thousands of 

workers are employed, all of those collective bargaining 

agreements that were made perhaps last fall or last winter or 

maybe a half or three-quarters of a year ago, automatically, 

with one fell swoop of the pen, those contracts might all be null 

and void. 

 

We could end up with half the population of this province 

without any contracts, and we could end up having the province 

shut down with a major, massive strike of employees that 

would legally be entitled to renegotiate and legally entitled to 

do so because their contract's no longer in existence.  And you 

could have the entire province shut down in a matter of a few 

days time after the proclamation of this particular legislation.  

How foolhardy can a government be to take a chance on such 

an event as this? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is just a few of the things that they have 

pointed out with regards to how this new legislation is going to 

hurt the workers.  And I felt that it was important that we 

outline what's going to happen to the workers because, for the 

most part, people have been attacking this legislation from the 

business point of view of how it's going to hurt business.  No 

one has taken the time really to point out where the fault in this 

legislation is as far as building a job base in our province and as 

far as creating work for our people.  So we need to take a look 

at that because there is a long list of those things that people out 

there have been telling us and the government doesn't seem to 

be listening to. 

 

Of course we have heard some of the things mentioned about 

how the Act will dramatically increase the business costs and 

harm Saskatchewan's competitiveness to attract new industries 

and jobs.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I had a call from a gentleman in 

Winnipeg who said that he was coming to Saskatchewan to 

study this new labour law because he represented certain 

business groups and financial investment groups who in fact 

were very concerned that they would not be able to come into 

Saskatchewan to do business if this particular piece of 

legislation were put into place.  Having said that, that alone 

should be enough to make the minister sit back and think twice 

about this legislation. 

 

Now I've dealt very briefly with the first three pieces of 

material that I have available to me here today, Mr. Speaker.  

And I have 15 more very precise and . . . but 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

long-winded kind of approaches to what should be done 

different in knowing that there is that much concern and that 

much evidence that should be placed into the record.  I have 

talked through our party officials to the minister in charge and 

we have discussed the very real need to spend a considerable 

amount of time on this issue to be able to get all of this material 

onto the record. 

 

Having said that, we had agreed that we would only do this for 

a certain length of time today so that we can move on to other 

areas.  I think we're going on to discuss health matters, and 

that's important too.  But I don't want anybody to get the idea 

that because we are leaving this issue today that we are 

downplaying it or considering it to be over by any means.  The 

debate will go on long and hard, as long as the government 

does not consider the needs of our workers in this province, as 

well as the needs of our business people.  We've got to make 

that point; we've got to have the minister reconsider this whole 

piece of legislation. 

 

And I would encourage him, just before I wrap up, that once 

again, the best thing to do would be to table the legislation; that 

doesn't mean necessarily pulling it and throwing it away.  

There is a process, I understand, where you can table the 

legislation and leave it sit and not act on it at this time. 

 

You could leave it until next fall and then after consulting all 

summer long with the business community and our labourers, 

our workers, and give everybody a fair opportunity to actually 

express themselves, after that period of time you could have a 

short fall sitting and bring in legislation that could genuinely 

help this province to grow and to develop and to prosper.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, there are so many more things that we 

can be in this province, and it needs to be said. 

 

So with that, I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1515) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I'd ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- It's my privilege today to introduce to 

you I believe a former seat mate of the Hon. Mr. Speaker, a 

friend of mine, a former MLA for the Nipawin constituency 

from 1971 to 1975, Mr. John Comer, is behind the bar on the 

government side of the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- John happened to be my 

room-mate in Saskatoon about a million years ago, in the late 

1960s.  And I want the Assembly to join with me in welcoming 

John back to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I hope members will permit me to also 

welcome my former seat mate and maybe the Minister of 

Labour could have a chat with him because John was a model 

MLA in the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Health to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  Before I 

introduce the officials, I just want to point out that to my 

immediate right is the Associate Minister of Health, Mr. Chair. 

 

The officials are, to my immediate left, Mr. Duane Adams, the 

deputy minister; and to his left is Kathy Langlois, the associate 

executive director, management support services 

implementation team. And immediately behind Mr. Adams is 

Ms. Danni Boyd, the executive director of district support; and 

to her right is Ms. Glenda Yeates, the associate deputy minister. 

Behind the Associate Minister of Health is Ms. Lorraine Hill, 

the senior associate deputy minister. And that's it.  Thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

welcome to yourself and to the officials this afternoon.  I think 

we'll probably start by a fairly broad discussion about health 

care reform and then maybe become a little more specific over 

time. 

 

I think that probably the topic of this afternoon will be the 

district health board elections and the need for an immediate 

call for those elections. Madam Minister.  We touched a little 

bit on it in question period this afternoon and I want to deal 

with that this afternoon, if you wouldn't mind. 

 

It's becoming increasingly clear, Madam Minister, that your 

government and your department that you're responsible for 

seem to have some reluctance in holding those elections as you 

originally had promised in the fall of '94.  And I'm wondering 

why, Madam Minister, that you would be wanting to back 

away from that commitment that you gave for holding those 

elections this fall. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to point out to the member 

opposite that the fall of '94 was a date that was put forward as 

the first possible date.  He talks as though we made a 

commitment that was enshrined in 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

legislation or enshrined in documentation that said there will be 

elections in October '94.  We talked about how the elections 

would be conducted.  The thinking originally was that the best 

way would be with municipal elections.  That means that the 

first window would be October '94 and that is how the October 

'94 date was discussed and used as a possibility. 

 

The government, as I indicated today, is committed to 

elections.  We have never in this province had elections for 

hospital boards in the past.  This is something new.  We believe 

in this process.  The people of Saskatchewan indicated to us 

that they wanted board elections, at least partially elected 

boards, and we gave them that in the legislation.  And we will 

be moving to elections. 

 

Now as to when we will be moving to elections, I am waiting 

for recommendations from the Department of Health when we 

have had the sort of consultations that are necessary to 

determine a whole range of issues that pertain to these 

elections.  The issues pertaining to these elections are issues of 

eligibility, criteria -- for example, qualifications of people who 

run for the boards.  And another very important issue that I 

know the member opposite will be interested in, and that is 

how the wards are determined.  Are they based solely on 

population, or do we look at a combination of populations and 

geography? 

 

That issue has not been determined.  There are people who are 

suggesting it should be population based.  The argument 

against that is that if it's solely populated based, smaller 

communities won't have an adequate say.  The legislation does 

not deal with that specific issue and we want to consult further 

on that issue, for example, amongst a whole range of other 

issues. 

 

There is a consultation process that is being put in place and a 

process to look at a whole number of these issues.  The 

consultation process will include consultations with SARM and 

SUMA and SAHO and health care organizations and health 

care stakeholders, as well as the general public throughout the 

province. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I don't think that 

that's quite good enough, and I don't think the people of 

Saskatchewan will think it is good enough either. 

 

I think at the time when health care reform was announced by 

you and your government that you held it out as a carrot to try 

and get some measure of support for your move towards health 

care reform.  And at that time there was some support for it, 

admittedly -- no problem at all.  And you're correct when you 

suggest to the people of Saskatchewan that there's never been 

health board elections before.  No one's denying that, Madam 

Minister.  Indeed that is the case. 

 

But it was you and your government who suggested that health 

care reform would move ahead as quickly as possible and 

health care reform would be dealt 

with in a fashion that would have elections in the fall of 1994.  

And so it seems to me, Madam Minister, that your reluctance to 

hold these elections now must be based on something other 

than a genuine belief that there's a need to hold them off. 

 

Madam Minister, in the press release from SUMA, a joint 

release from SUMA and SARM today, dated April 6, 1994, 

they are suggesting that they be held as soon as possible; that 

they were promised to the people of this province when health 

care reform started nearly two years ago.  And, Madam 

Minister, surely over the course of that time you realize, must 

have realized, and your department must have realized and 

started preparing for the eventuality of those elections. 

 

Right from the day you announced it, I would suggest to you, 

Madam Minister, that health care reform should have . . . and 

elections of the board should have been initiated, and initiated 

immediately so that the people of Saskatchewan knew exactly 

what they were dealing with.  In fact, Madam Minister, I would 

suggest to you that SAHO is even beginning to be a little bit 

concerned about this.  They're not necessarily saying an 

election should be backed off; they're saying to us as official 

opposition, in representations to us and in discussions with 

them, that the election should be announced as soon as 

possible.  At the very least, at the very least they should be 

announced as soon as possible so the people of Saskatchewan 

and the people that are on these boards have an opportunity to 

deal with that, Madam Minister. 

 

So I think SUMA and SARM are calling for these elections and 

I think it's important to recognize that the people of 

Saskatchewan want an opportunity for these elections. 

 

Madam Minister, when you initially started health care reform, 

you weren't willing to back up on anything.  You looked at it 

and you said that you're going to have these health boards put 

in place by a certain date and that wasn't going to be discussed 

any further, that the people darn well better get these health 

boards in place or your department would set them out 

themselves, Madam Minister. 

 

And so it seems incredible now, in light of what's happened in 

the past, that you would be backing away from this promise 

and this commitment.  And I don't think it's good enough for 

the people of Saskatchewan to do that at this time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, here is what SAHO says: 

 

Districts urge delay in board elections.  There was 

agreement among the district health boards, however, that 

1994 is too soon for elections as most boards are only now 

beginning the complex task of reorganizing and integrating 

their services and administrative structures.  Even for those 

districts where health boards have been in place for a year 

or more, elections next fall are seen as having the potential 

to be far more 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

disruptive than constructive. 

 

So that is SAHO's position with respect to elections.  SAHO 

knows, as well as the people of Saskatchewan, that there is 

going to be district board elections.  Absolutely.  That 

commitment is there and this government will follow through 

on that commitment. 

 

The issue is, is how do we have these elections and when do we 

have these elections?  And I think it's important to get 

consultation and input from the general public on those 

questions, as well as a number of ancillary questions. 

 

And as we go through this process, there are a lot of concerns 

being raised, as I mentioned in question period and to the press 

earlier today.  However the two main issues are how do we 

have them and when do we have them?  And there will be a 

consultation process with the public, and hopefully we will be 

able to come to a conclusion on those issues in the near future. 

 

I do not believe for one moment that SAHO thinks there isn't 

going to be elections.  I don't believe that for one moment.  I 

believe that SAHO believes that the fall of 1994 is premature, 

as do a number of other people throughout the province.  

Editorials from The Four-Town Journal, for example, which 

says that it would be premature to have them in 1994; editorials 

from Swift Current, saying it makes good sense to delay 

elections; editorials from the Star-Phoenix, from the 

Potashville Miner-Journal in Esterhazy.  I mean, this is . . . 

people know that this is an issue that needs further consultation 

and further debate. And some people are actually saying more 

time is needed, and amongst that is SAHO. 

 

(1530) 

 

I think it's important that we have the debate about whether or 

not we have these elections with municipal elections or whether 

we have them separately, and if so, what is the cost, or does 

having them separately warrant whatever increase in cost there 

may be. 

 

And what is the increase?  I have asked the Department of 

Health to provide us with that information and to put in place a 

process, which they've been doing, to have these questions 

answered and to consult fully with the public.  The member 

opposite . . . and I want to remind him, the issue of the 

boundaries is important, and how we determine these wards -- 

population only? -- which would be one of the arguments being 

put forward. Or do we base it on population and geography? 

 

That's an important issue, and the public will want some input 

into that.  It's not predetermined, but it makes a huge difference 

as to what sort of say various areas have on these boards.  And 

I want to hear from the member opposite what his opinion is in 

that regard, as well as hearing from other people in the 

province.  That's why we need this process, to look through 

these things. 

I want to point out that the government is absolutely committed 

to elections.  We have put it in legislation, we are committed, 

we will be proceeding. However, there's some issues that have 

to be ironed out. 

 

The boards, I might say -- you said the boards -- we insisted 

that they get together.  The corporations came together in 

August.  However, they didn't necessarily take over until 

several months later because there was a 120-day period before 

corporations, other corporations, had to amalgamate.  Some of 

these boards did not really take over completely until late fall 

or late December or early January.  So they have not had a 

substantial amount of time to do the restructuring that's 

necessary and to get the pieces in place from their point of 

view.  That's why they are telling us, and members of their 

community are telling us, they need more time to do the 

restructuring. 

 

Now as they pointed out in one letter that was sent to the 

Leader-Post, that October '94 seemed a long way off last year.  

However, there was a delay in getting some of these boards up 

and running, and we had to put a deadline on it in order to get 

them in place as quickly as possible.  And then after that there 

was a delay because of corporations taking the 120 days to 

amalgamate. 

 

And so we are looking at a lot of these boards not really being 

up and running until the end of '93.  So October '94 then 

becomes a much closer date when, originally, we anticipated 

more boards would be up and running in the winter of '94.  So 

they make that point. 

 

But there are a whole range of points being made, pros and 

cons, and I think it's important for the Department of Health to 

have its consultation with SARM and SUMA and SAHO, 

which is being put in place, and with the public on these issues.  

And I'm waiting to hear what their recommendations are. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

you make an eloquent argument.  Unfortunately I don't think 

the people of Saskatchewan agree with you on this.  You hold 

up a few editorials and you suggest that this represents people 

all over Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I would remind you that holding up and 

then suggesting to us that half a dozen editorials -- if you even 

have that many, which I doubt; sounds like you've got three or 

four, maybe, editorials from across the province -- represent a 

huge number of people, and somehow or another the rest of the 

people that are calling for elections as soon as possible this fall 

. . . somehow or another don't represent very many people. 

 

Well I remind you, Madam Minister, that SUMA and SARM 

represent people all over Saskatchewan, elected people all over 

Saskatchewan, both in terms of rural Saskatchewan and urban 

Saskatchewan, and they don't agree with you, Madam Minister. 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

And it seems a little bit odd, Madam Minister, that the only 

people that seem to have any difficulty with this elections 

process is SAHO.  And who is SAHO made up of, Madam 

Minister?  I think it's important that we recognize who SAHO 

is made up of.  SAHO, as I understand it, is made up of people 

who are, generally speaking, administrators on these boards 

right now, CEOs (chief executive officers), chairmen of the 

boards, that sort of thing, and people who are appointed board 

members, Madam Minister. 

 

So I ask you a very simple question: is it not simply like me, as 

an MLA, suggesting to you, I'm a little uncomfortable with this 

job; I've only been at it a couple of years, Madam Minister; I'm 

a rookie MLA and maybe we should hold off a general election 

for a few more years or several more years so I can get a little 

more acquainted with my job. 

 

Madam Minister, I just don't think people will buy into that 

argument.  I don't think that they believe that democracy should 

work that way, Madam Minister.  I think it's their belief that 

democracy . . . You are the one that decided, you and your 

government, that there was going to be democratic reform 

within the health care field, and now we're seeing that.  And we 

are welcoming the elections of board members, Madam 

Minister.  We're welcoming it.  Yes, absolutely.  We've 

welcomed it right from the very beginning.  We called for it 

right from the very beginning, Madam Minister. 

 

And now you are backing away from the process, Madam 

Minister.  And one can only think the reason is quite simple, 

and it's politics.  You're concerned, quite frankly, Madam 

Minister, that there'll be board member after board member 

overturned in the elections, and I don't think that you and your 

government want to see that. 

 

I think you feel you're sort of on the down slide of this health 

care reform issue and that things are maybe . . . the heat's off a 

little bit and why do we want to open up the old sores again?  

Why do we want to bring back these people who have an 

opportunity to stand on a platform in an election campaign and 

raise the issues of health care reform and point out all of the 

problems that there is with health care reform in their 

respective areas, Madam Minister? 

 

Madam Minister, surely, surely your department has 

undertaken some initiation of studies or some discussion about 

health care reform in the elections of these boards right from 

the very beginning.  Or did you enter this without any thought 

being given to the elections?  Did you just think, well it's a few 

years down the road; we won't worry about it now; it'll go 

away.  Maybe these people will forget about it; maybe we 

won't have to go through this process. 

 

Surely when you initiated this, Madam Minister . . . Give us 

some comfort this afternoon in telling us that right from the 

very beginning you had a commitment to hold these elections 

and that you were committed to holding them as soon as 

possible and that you had plans prepared in that regard, Madam 

Minister. 

And I wonder if you could share with us this afternoon what 

those plans were.  Surely you had some kind of plans right 

from the very beginning.  And I wonder if you would care to 

share those plans with us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I want . . . Mr. Chair, rather. 

I will answer the member's questions.  However, before I do 

that, I'd like to table the document that is the 1994-95 expected 

Saskatchewan Health payments to health districts for the 

member's information. 

 

Now with respect to the member's comments.  First of all, he 

says that SARM and SUMA don't mean anything.  And I want 

to say this, Mr. Chair . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I didn't say that.  You said that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Those are his words: SARM and SUMA 

don't mean anything. 

 

I want to say this, Mr. Chair.  We believe that SARM and 

SUMA are important and we will be seeking their advice and 

consulting with them on this issue.  I have told the member 

opposite there will be a consultation process.  Included in that 

is SARM and SUMA because we are interested in and respect 

their opinion.  So we do want to talk to them about it and I 

want the record perfectly straight on that. 

 

As I mentioned earlier to the member opposite, we have a 

commitment to elections.  I say this every time I deal with this 

question in the House.  There is a commitment; it is in the 

legislation.  We will be proceeding to elections.  We want to 

know how and when. 

 

And we want to do this right.  We want to set up an election 

process and create the health districts . . . The boundaries have 

just been determined in August of last summer and, let us 

remember, that with provincial elections it takes something like 

a year just to establish constituency boundaries. 

 

Within the context of the health district, we have to establish 

boundaries.  If we rush into it, it will be to the detriment of 

rural Saskatchewan and the members opposite have to know 

that.  By forcing the process too quickly we may not get the 

appropriate balance between rural and urban areas of a district.  

And this is crucial. 

 

I want to repeat that:  we need an appropriate rural/urban 

balance.  It is one of the issues that will be discussed.  We need 

to consult with people on that, and we don't want to rush the 

process because I believe if we do that, it will be to the 

detriment of the member from Kindersley and the member 

from Maple Creek's constituents, the rural constituents. 

 

It's important for us to make sure that smaller communities are 

not disadvantaged in this process.  And that's why we want to 

go out and consult.  We want to inform people what the 

problems are, talk 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

about them and get some feedback.  And we're doing that; 

we're putting that consultation process in place. 

 

And it will be . . . I know that right now the member opposite 

wants to make some political mileage on this; but in retrospect, 

when it is all finished, he will appreciate the fact that we have 

taken the time to do it right. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I don't think you're looking for 

my appreciation one little bit.  I think what you're looking for is 

some kind of justification for what your actions . . . or inaction 

of your department is.  And I'm not going to give you that this 

afternoon, Madam Minister. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan and particularly groups like 

SUMA and SARM are right.  And I can't help but suggest, 

Madam Minister, they believe that it's going to be a very, very 

costly exercise if you move outside of the process that was 

initially agreed to, Madam Minister. 

 

They're suggesting that it could cost in the neighbourhood of 

hundreds of thousands of dollars if health care reform . . . 

health board elections are delayed, Madam Minister.  And 

they're saying that, Madam Minister; we're not saying that.  

These people have looked at it and they believe that the most 

cost-effective way of dealing with this is to hold them with 

municipal elections this fall.  And they are convinced that that's 

the case, Madam Minister.  Integrating the elections, they also 

believe, will lead to a higher voter turnout for these health 

board elections. 

 

Madam Minister, can you give us some kind of an indication of 

a figure that your government or your department has worked 

up with respect to the cost of holding these elections outside of 

the municipal process this fall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have asked the department to do that, 

and as soon as we have that information . . . because it involves 

exploring options as to how the elections would be conducted.  

It isn't just a question of coming up with a figure; we have to 

look at options as to how we would do it and how the lists 

would be compiled.  And once that has been explored, we will 

provide you and the public with the information. 

 

And in response to the member's comment about we're not 

looking for his appreciation, I simply want to say this.  Not in 

my wildest dreams would I expect any appreciation from the 

members opposite.  However, my comment is this: is that if we 

do take the time to get the appropriate rural and urban mix and 

do what has to be done to achieve that, I believe that the people 

in your area will appreciate what we've done. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, what they will appreciate and 

what I've spoken to them about and what I've spoken to most of 

the members on the health board in my area is, is they would 

appreciate an opportunity to go before the electorate to see 

whether or not they're doing a good job in the view of that 

electorate, Madam Minister. They believe that 

holding these elections, and people all over Saskatchewan 

believe that holding these elections is important.  It was held 

out, as I said earlier, as a carrot to try and get some support, 

some degree, some measure of support, for your elective 

process.  And now, Madam Minister, you seem to have all of 

these vast concerns about wards and eligibility and all of those 

kinds of things, Madam Minister. 

 

At the time, a couple of years ago, it didn't seem to be an issue 

-- didn't seem to be an issue.  You and your department were 

extremely confident that you were going to be able to put this 

thing together by '94.  I remember at the time the discussion 

was of that nature, Madam Minister, that you would be able to 

and your department would be able to put these things together 

and it would all be dealt with, and the people don't have to have 

any fears; that there would be elections and they'd be scheduled 

and everybody would know where they stand; and away we'd 

go and we'd have these elections, and everything would be fine 

and dandy.  But, Madam Minister, that doesn't seem to be the 

case any more, does it? 

 

(1545) 

 

You and your department have dithered over this for a couple 

of years now, haven't been able to come up with any kind of 

concrete solution as to what you're going to do.  And now, 

Madam Minister, you're saying to us, hold off a little bit, give 

us a little time, we're working through the process, we're going 

to figure this out, we're going to do it right. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you've had two years to do it right and 

you haven't done it yet, and you're still asking for additional 

time; while at the same time all of that discussion was going 

on, you were closing hospitals all over Saskatchewan.  And you 

weren't giving them one moment's grace, Madam Minister -- 

not one moment's grace were you providing to any of those 

folks out there.  And yet when it comes time to do the process 

that you promised, you somehow or another feel that the 

province should give you time, Madam Minister. 

 

I don't think that's acceptable, and I don't think SUMA . . . and 

I think SUMA and SARM and other groups around the 

province agree with us, Madam Minister.  I think they believe 

that these elections should be held and your department should 

be moving as quickly as possible. 

 

Can you tell us what kinds of preparations you've made, what 

kinds of preparations to date that you've made?  I'd be happy if 

you'd table any of the kind of information that you have with 

respect to wards and eligibility, and all of those kinds of things. 

 

You and your department have been sitting around, Madam 

Minister, for the last two years, the last two years, doing 

virtually nothing with respect to this, I would suggest, and now 

you all of a sudden realize that the fall of '94 has crept up on 

you a little faster than you've anticipated.  And now the people 

are starting to call for these things, and you're saying: oh, 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

wait, wait, everybody out there, we're not ready for them. 

 

Well what have you been doing for the last two years, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I want to point this out with 

respect to the member opposite.  This year, last time, he said 

this district board legislation would pass over his dead body, or 

words to that effect.  He fought it tooth and nail.  They did not 

want districts.  They were opposed to health reform.  And now 

he's saying, well you can't get this up and running fast enough 

for us.  Well they're opposition.  The members opposite are 

opposition.  It doesn't matter what the government does; it's not 

going to be correct and they're going to look for problems. 

 

Now we allowed the people in Saskatchewan, unlike Tory 

Alberta and New Brunswick, we let people define their own 

district boundaries.  They came together in groups and they 

determined the boundaries.  New Brunswick came in and 

simply imposed a blueprint on the province, wiped out boards 

overnight, and put in new boards and defined it for everyone. 

 

We launched ourself on a massive consultation process and we 

tabled the district board . . . the vision paper about a year and a 

half ago.  Then we travelled the province and worked with 

groups to try and get boards established, which didn't come 

along as quickly as we thought, so we imposed a deadline.  

Because people were saying, impose a deadline; otherwise it's 

not going to get done.  That deadline was August '93; August 

17, '93.  And since then the boards have been working at 

getting corporations amalgamated and put in place. 

 

Health reform in Saskatchewan, given the fact that we have had 

a community development and a consultative process in terms 

of establishing boards and now moving towards elections, has 

proceeded reasonably quickly, and so will elections.  As we can 

come to elections, we will have them, as the work is done. 

 

The consultation process has been with health care 

stakeholders, and district boards have been putting their minds 

to it and we've had a number of consultations with them.  There 

have been discussions as to how they think we should be 

proceeding and what some of the criteria should be.  We have 

yet to have this consultation with the public at large, and that's 

the process that's being put in place right now and will take 

place over the next few months. 

 

And I think that will be a very productive process.  Because I 

want to say this: I want to say that one of the important things 

about health reform in Saskatchewan, to our way of thinking, 

has been the massive consultation that has gone on with 

individuals throughout this province.  They told us they wanted 

elections.  They told us a whole number of different things that 

went into the district board legislation.  We consulted with the 

public, and I think 

that's important. 

 

In the legislation we built in at least two public meetings -- and 

district boards, some of them are having a lot more than two 

public meetings -- two public meetings with their district to set 

out their budget, to be accountable to the people, and to give a 

report on the health status of the people.  That's positive.  That's 

good for Saskatchewan; it's good for health care.  It's positive. 

 

We're doing that because we believe that by consulting with 

people and involving people in the process, that we will have a 

stronger health care system. And people will become more 

aware of not just better, healthy lifestyles but also how the 

health care system works, and they'll become a part of the 

process.  And I think that's positive. 

 

When it comes to establishing ward boundaries, we want to 

take the time . . . and it wasn't appropriate to do that last 

summer when we were asking the district boards to get 

established nor in the fall when we were moving to 

conversions.  It's now appropriate for us to have that 

consultation process.  And we're moving quickly to get out to 

the public and talk to them about this very issue. 

 

But absolutely, the public has to be consulted, along with 

groups such as SARM and SUMA.  And we'll be doing that in 

the next few weeks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You're indeed 

correct; you imposed a deadline on people for the formation of 

the board.  Yes, everyone understands that; everyone 

recognized it at the time.  People were calling on delays in the 

system at that time.  No, can't do it; we've got a deadline.  The 

train has left the station, the Premier said.  We're not backing 

up one little bit; the train's on its way.  It's down the rails.  The 

people of Saskatchewan are just going to have to live with this 

thing.  We have a commitment to health care reform, and we're 

going to head it down that track no matter what, Madam 

Minister.  And that was the comments of the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But somehow or another the imposed deadline that you gave 

the commitment to the people in Saskatchewan for health board 

elections, somehow or another that doesn't hold water any 

more, Madam Minister.  And you also say now, oh you've 

absolutely committed to holding these elections -- absolutely 

committed to holding these elections. 

 

Well why should the people of Saskatchewan believe you, 

Madam Minister?  You promised one thing -- holding the 

elections -- and now you're saying no, we're not going to hold 

them. But we're promising, we're promising.  Everybody out 

there in Saskatchewan, don't worry.  We're promising that we're 

going to hold an election some day.  We're not going to tell you 

when, but we'll hold it, we promise.   We broke this last one, 

but don't worry about that.  We're promising that we'll hold one 

coming up. 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

And it seems to remind me a lot of what your colleague, the 

Minister of Justice, does.  He gets into the House and he puts 

through legislation.  And we promise that we're going to abide 

by this legislation for judges' salaries; we're going to set this 

independent commission up, and we promise we'll uphold the 

legislation.  And we're going to bring in the legislation.  It will 

be binding on this government and, wow, everybody in 

Saskatchewan sits up and takes notice and says yes, that's a 

good piece of legislation.  Take it away from the hands of the 

politicians and put it in the hands of the bureaucracy and then 

it'll be dealt with impartially and no one will have to worry and 

everything will be right. 

 

But what happened, Madam Minister?  He broke his promise.  

The Minister of Justice, the highest official in the judicial 

department in the province of Saskatchewan, broke his 

promise.  And now he's saying well we have a reason to break 

our promise. 

 

But somehow or another, Madam Minister, the people of 

Saskatchewan are growing a little tired of you and your 

excuses.  On one hand, you promise it, and on the other hand, 

you take it away.  You take it away from farmers.  You take it 

away from civil servants.  You take it away from the judges.  

And now you're taking away the optioning for elections, even 

though you promised it. 

 

And now you're standing up and you're saying we have a 

commitment, an absolute, solemn commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we are going to go ahead with these health 

board elections.  And, Madam Minister, I think that promise 

rings hollow. 

 

And I think the people of Saskatchewan agree me that that 

message rings hollow, that promise rings hollow.  Because 

your past action and inaction shows the people of 

Saskatchewan exactly what your commitment is to this health 

care reform and to the election of the district boards, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, you never answered the question when I 

asked it before.  What preparations, what kinds of preparations 

has your department gone through over the last couple of years 

to decide on the eligibility for wards . . . or the people that 

would be eligible to be in these elections and the formation of 

these district health boards and the wards within them, Madam 

Minister?  What kinds of preparations have you done?  Have 

you done any at all?  Or are you just sitting back hoping that 

this thing's going to go away. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite just gets up and 

harangues and harangues and harangues on this issue and tries 

to paint health reform as being partisan.  I ask him just to look 

at the Health payments to health districts.  And he should take a 

look at that information, which shows that areas that he 

represents have received one of the largest increases in terms of 

health districts. 

 

And let's just take a look at some of the other increases in 

health districts.  Health reform has been conducted 

by the Department of Health in a fair and consistent fashion 

throughout this province, doing what we believe is the right 

thing to do, is to try and get the politics out of health care. 

 

The members opposite want to create . . . first of all, last year it 

was a Donnybrook on the district board legislation.  They didn't 

want it to occur; they didn't want any districts; they hated 

health reform; it was a total mess.  And they did what they 

could to get that message out.  Now that we've got the district 

board legislation in, after they said for a whole year, slow it 

down, you're going too fast; now they're saying, go faster, get it 

done, ram it down people's throats, don't consult.  That's what 

they're saying.  Total inconsistency.  Total inconsistency. 

 

And what we are trying to achieve with respect to health reform 

is to put the control of health care in local communities as 

opposed to all out of Regina, as it is under the old system; to 

move to more local and community control, and to do it in a 

fair and consistent fashion throughout the province. 

 

And will the member opposite give us credit for that?  

Absolutely not.  Because it is not in his political interest to do 

that.  Because he wants to politicize the issue, to grandstand, to 

misrepresent, and to distort the positions of government and the 

Department of Health.  That's what the member opposite wants 

to do.  He does not want to speak the true facts on what is 

actually happening in health reform. 

 

Saskatchewan, unlike Tory Alberta and unlike New Brunswick, 

have come forward with a process that is democratic, that 

involves the people.  And we will continue with a democratic 

process of consultation and district board elections at the 

appropriate time and in the appropriate manner to ensure for 

future generations that we have a democratic process in the 

delivery of health care. 

 

And I hope, I seriously hope that the members opposite, instead 

of playing petty politics, will participate in developing a 

high-quality, first-class health care system for their residents 

and the constituencies that they represent . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- . . . instead of playing politics to the nth 

degree.  They don't care about their own inconsistencies in this.  

We're asking them to work with their district boards, to work 

with their populations, to build a strong health care system for 

their people, instead of trying to destroy it by rushing into a 

process without having done adequate consultation and without 

having reviewed all the questions. 

 

Now the Department of Health has looked at alternate forms of 

having elections.  They have explored various possibilities.  

They have consulted with district boards.  They've looked at 

possible boundaries.  There have been a lot of thinking and 

discussions going on on this topic over the months.  The 

conclusion that they come 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

to is the most difficult thing to resolve will be   how these . . . 

who is represented by the wards?  For example, do you base it 

only on population or do you take a population and geography 

mix in order to give smaller communities more representation?  

And if so, what is the mix? 

 

(1600) 

 

The other issue that has to be determined is with respect to 

minority groups.  Minority groups want a say, such as 

aboriginal people, on the health boards.  How do we make sure 

they have representation on the health boards if they don't have 

the population to create a ward, or the geography to create a 

ward?  So they want representation.  How do we fit them in the 

mix? 

 

Do we determine this unilaterally in Regina, which is what the 

member from Kindersley wants us to do?  He wants us to make 

a decision and unilaterally say it's going to be this.  I say we 

need time to talk to the public.  We need to raise these issues 

with the stakeholders and the organizations concerned and then 

we will come to a decision and then we will proceed to 

elections. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, it 

all doesn't sound all that believable to me.  You seek our thanks 

on this.  Somehow or another we in the opposition are 

supposed to sit back and say, well thank you very much.  

You've given the district that I'm from a little bit of an increase 

in funding and I'm supposed to stand up and say thank you very 

much. 

 

Well thank you very much for closing the hospital in Eston, 

Madam Minister.  Thank you very much for closing the 

hospital in Eatonia.  Thank you very much for closing the 

hospital in Dodsland.  All in my constituency, Madam 

Minister.  Thanks a lot for that. 

 

And the people in my constituency, I'm sure, Madam Minister, 

are fully behind me on this when I say thank you for closing 

those hospitals out there.  Big thanks.  And then you want the 

member from Kindersley and the rest of us in the official 

opposition to stand up and say thanks for closing 52 hospitals 

around this province. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, we're not going to do it and the people 

of Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan particularly, agree with 

us.  They don't believe you any more, Madam Minister.  You 

make a commitment on one hand -- you stand up and say you're 

going to have these elections as soon as possible -- and then 

you break that commitment.  You broke your promise, Madam 

Minister. You did everything in your power to do what you 

could do to hurt rural Saskatchewan, and now you want our 

thanks. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, it isn't in the cards.  We're not going to 

give you that thanks.  You could hold up these itsy-bitsy little 

promises of health care increased 

funding to our area or any other area in the province, and no 

one believes you, Madam Minister.  You took it away with one 

hand, and now you dole it out a little bit with the other hand 

and you think the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the 

official opposition, should stand up and clap our hands and say 

thank you very much, Madam Minister.  Well it isn't going to 

happen. 

 

It isn't going to happen because the people of rural 

Saskatchewan in the constituencies that we represent say, don't 

give in one inch to this minister, because she's wrong.  She 

started down the direction of health care reform and she's 

created nothing but hurt -- nothing but hurt, Madam Minister, 

in rural Saskatchewan. And the people out there recognize that. 

 

And that's why they're calling for these elections and that's why 

SUMA and SARM are standing up.  And somehow or another 

you stand up in your place and in your sanctimonious way you 

suggest that it's only us, only a small little band of 10 

opposition members, that are opposed to your health care 

changes and to not holding the elections as soon as possible. 

 

It's only me.  It's only me out there that has this voice in the 

dark out there that is suggesting that not to hold off these 

elections.  Well SUMA and SARM represent people all over 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, both in terms of urban 

Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan.  And they are saying 

proceed, Madam Minister.  They are saying, you've had time; 

you've sat around and done nothing on this for two years, and 

now you realized that it's come a lot sooner that you expected. 

 

Madam Minister, what preparations -- again I ask you -- what 

preparations have you made?  You've made none, I would 

suggest, absolutely none with respect to the eligibility in the 

wards and all of those kinds of things.  And now you're 

suggesting that we should sit back and wait. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, tell us this afternoon, tell us this 

afternoon and provide us with some sort of documentation as to 

what you have actually done with respect to holding these 

elections. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well it's clear, Mr. Chair, that the 

members opposite aren't interested in health reform.  They are 

not interested in seeing things done right; they are interested in 

a political harangue.  It's obviously clear. 

 

The member opposite has no interest in creating a high-quality 

health care system for the people of his district.  What he's 

interested in doing is haranguing and grandstanding and 

politicizing the issue.  He cannot get on with the job.  He wants 

to dwell on the negative and he wants to harangue. 

 

He also . . . obviously we hit a nerve when we spoke to him and 

pointed out that we have, although there have been very 

difficult decisions in health reform, we have made our 

decisions in a fair and consistent 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

manner and the evidence is there for that.  Now he may not 

have liked the decisions and that's perfectly understandable. 

 

That's his prerogative to choose not to like our decisions, but he 

wants to dwell on that instead of getting on with the job of 

building a strong, high-quality health care system for the 

citizens of his constituency.  In other words, he is simply not 

interested in the process.  What he's interested in is in ranting 

and raving; in political harangues; grandstanding and 

politicizing it in the hope he's going to ensure his own 

re-election. 

 

He is not interested in health reform.  He knows full well that 

Alberta is proceeding with health reform and not in the same 

consultative process as Saskatchewan.  He knows that in 

Alberta the budgets have been reduced much more 

substantially than they have been in Saskatchewan and how 

does he explain that to the people across the border? -- that a 

Tory government moved in and slashed health care by some 27 

per cent in some Alberta hospitals.  Just slashed it. 

 

In Saskatchewan we saw a 2.5 reduction, a 2.5 reduction and 

approximately 2.5 or a little less than that this year.  Three 

years, something like 7 per cent, as opposed to 27 per cent in 

Alberta in one fell swoop in Tory Alberta, your cousins.  Your 

cousins going out and defining the boundaries and telling 

people: that's it -- no consultation -- hack in a hospital by 27 

per cent overnight.  Bang. 

 

And you say you have the better method of doing things?  I say 

no.  You are not interested in moving this province to a 

balanced budget situation, which is where we are heading.  You 

don't want that to happen.  You're not interested in reforming 

health in order to improve it for future generations to save 

medicare for our children and our grandchildren.  Because let 

me tell you, if we don't make changes, we will lose medicare.  

We must make changes in order to accommodate it and 

preserve it for future generations. 

 

You don't want to do that because what we see in Tory Alberta 

is a movement to private hospitals, a movement to private 

facilities -- that's what you want to do and that's what your 

argument is all about today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

when it comes to grandstanding, I could take a lot of lessons 

from someone like yourself.  And I think most people in 

Saskatchewan recognize that. 

 

When it comes to grandstanding, there's no one better, with the 

possible exception of the Premier, than you, Madam Minister, 

when it comes to that sort of stuff.  And you know very well 

that that's the case.  I could take a lot of lessons when it comes 

to that from you.  And, Madam Minister, I sit back and I watch 

you on a daily basis, and when it comes to handing out political 

rhetoric, there's hardly anyone better than you. 

And you're sitting there, calling us the ones that are 

grandstanding, Madam Minister.  The one that used to bring in 

case by case things over the years and hold them up and 

grandstand on every single occasion she could.  And it's duly 

noted by the editorial writers of this province, Madam Minister. 

 

You're not interested in having an election this fall, Madam 

Minister, because you know very well that health care reform is 

still a hot issue in most parts of Saskatchewan, Madam 

Minister.  That's the reason. 

 

Let's face it, Madam Minister, the reason you don't want to do 

this is quite simple.  The people out there are not comfortable 

with health care reform and you know it.  And you know that if 

all of a sudden you have this overwhelming change in the 

structure of the boards out there, overwhelming outcry of 

people and overturning board member after board member out 

there, that it's going to cast a shadow on all the health care 

reform. 

 

You're going to have people . . . I'll tell you what's going to 

happen, Madam Minister.  You're going to have people 

standing up on a platform all over Saskatchewan and saying, 

I'll fight this government tooth and nail, right from now to as 

long as they are around, Madam Minister.  Because they're 

trying to preserve a little bit of health care for the district that 

they are wanting to be elected onto the board of. 

 

And you know very well if you have board member after board 

member go down in elections, that it's going to cast a big, big 

shadow over you and your department, Madam Minister.  And 

that's the reason.  And somehow you think that if you delay it a 

year, maybe everybody will forget, maybe they won't worry 

about it, maybe the closed sign on the hospital will fall down 

and the people out there won't remember it any more, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Well I don't think it's going to happen.  I think the people out 

there are mad enough that they'll remember this for a long, long 

time.  The party who always held up the promise of health care 

in this province is now the party that broke that promise, 

Madam Minister.  And the people out there understand that and 

recognize that. 

 

And somehow or another, I'm supposed to apologize for what 

happens in Alberta.  I'm an elected member in Saskatchewan, 

represent the Kindersley constituency, and I'm supposed to 

stand up and apologize for anything that's happening in New 

Brunswick or one of the Maritime provinces or Alberta. And 

somehow or another it's all my fault. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, it isn't anything to do with Alberta; 

we're talking about Saskatchewan today.  And I wonder if you 

could confine your remarks to Saskatchewan.  The people are 

more interested in what you have to say about health care 

reform in Saskatchewan than trying to justify your actions 

because of something else that's happening in another 

jurisdiction, Madam Minister. 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

Again, again just try and get it on the record this afternoon, 

Madam Minister, what plans have you made?  What plans have 

you made with respect to wards and eligibility and all of those 

other important questions that you said were holding you back, 

Madam Minister?  Very simple.  I'm just asking you if you 

could explain to the people of Saskatchewan and provide some 

kind of documentation to us as the official opposition, as to 

what plans you've made, if any.  And I don't think there are 

any, and that's why you don't want to say anything about it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I don't understand how he 

would think we've made decisions about these things and then 

we're going out to consult.  There haven't been decisions made. 

We're going to consult.  The decision has been to go and 

consult.  There's been research done, work and discussions, 

preliminary discussions, but we're going out to consult.  So we 

don't have plans as to exactly what we're going to do. 

 

And I would like to know what the member opposite thinks we 

should do with respect to wards.  Does he think it should be 

population based, or does he think rural communities should 

have a larger say?  I'd like to know what his opinion is. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Chair, the member opposite is not prepared for 

estimates.  I gave him this answer an hour ago, and I'm still 

answering the same question.  He just wants to engage in a 

political harangue on this particular issue, and he's not 

interested in the estimates. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I can assure you, Madam Minister, we're both 

ready and willing and capable of asking questions on estimates.  

And after we're finished with this topic, we'll get into a line by 

line on your department. 

 

But, Madam Minister, the important issue at the time, and 

particularly today in light of the news conference that was held 

and the press release by SUMA and SARM, the issue that they 

want to discuss at the moment, Madam Minister, is what you're 

going to do about elections in Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, it's a relatively simple thing.  They're calling 

for you to keep your commitment.  Will you keep that promise, 

Madam Minister?  Very simple question.  You promised an 

election, you promised an election in the fall of '94. Will you 

keep that commitment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I've answered the member's question at 

least 10 times. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the answer is always the same: we're 

committed to holding an election; trust us; we promise we're 

going to hold them eventually.  That's the commitment. 

 

But it isn't a good enough commitment, Madam Minister.  

People like farmers out there with GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program), and the judges, 

and civil servants realize what kind of commitments you people 

make.  You make the commitment and then you don't stand up 

to it.  You don't stand by it, Madam Minister. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan recognize that.  They are 

saying . . . SUMA and SARM said in their press release, 

Madam Minister, that it will cost in excess of hundreds of 

thousands of dollars to hold it outside of the process, Madam 

Minister.  And I'm wondering whether your department has 

done any preliminary discussions with respect to that.  Do you 

have any idea of what it will cost if you hold these elections 

outside of the municipal elections this fall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have also answered that question, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I think we need something a 

little more definitive than saying you're looking at it, you're 

thinking about it, you're wondering about it, you got your 

department working on it.  We're in estimates now, Madam 

Minister, and you're asking us to provide you with a budget for 

the upcoming year.  And we're not going to give you the blank 

cheque unless you can answer the questions, answer the 

questions with respect to what you're going to do with the 

money and what it's going to cost to hold these elections. 

 

So, Madam Minister, can you shed a little light on that for the 

people of Saskatchewan?  What are these elections going to 

cost if it's outside of the process? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I've answered that question before, Mr. 

Chair.  I told the member that we are looking at options and 

we're exploring various options.  Whatever option is chosen 

will dictate the cost, and those costs are being analysed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, when will you be able to 

provide us with that kind of information.  Because until you are 

able to provide us with that kind of information, I don't see why 

you feel that the official opposition should provide you with a 

blank cheque with respect to this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will be testing the options and 

determining what the cost is.  I don't know at this point when 

that information will be available because we have to have the 

consultation process that I referred to. 

 

I am informed that it is highly likely that the department will be 

able to, if the elections are held in '94, '94-95 fiscal year, be 

absorbed by the Health budget. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Would you agree with SUMA then that holding 

the elections outside of the municipal election process this fall 

could cost in the neighbourhood of hundreds of thousands of 

dollars?  Madam Minister, would you confirm that?  Because 

that's an estimate that SUMA has worked up and 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

SARM has worked up.  I wonder if you would provide us with 

any indication, any kind of preliminary indication as if that 

might be what the cost . . . kind of consequences that we're 

looking at. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We can't confirm the SUMA number at 

this point.  We will be having discussions with them to 

determine how they calculate that.  It also will depend on how 

they think the elections are being conducted.  So it is a question 

of determining how we do it and then we'll come up with a 

figure.  We can't confirm the SUMA number at this point. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well that's a little bit difficult, Madam Minister.  

You can't confirm the number.  They've worked up . . . they 

suspect it could be several hundreds of thousands of dollars.  

And, Madam Minister, I think the people of Saskatchewan 

would believe that that money would be better spent -- better 

spent having it in the use of the delivery of health care rather 

than administrative costs like holding elections. 

 

So it seems that not only is there an argument for holding the 

elections based on getting accountability and the election 

process done as soon as possible, there's also an economic 

argument for this, Madam Minister, that they are suggesting it's 

going to cost in excess of hundreds of thousands of dollars, 

Madam Minister. 

 

So we believe, the official opposition believes that spending 

that money wisely would be a very good thing, rather than 

spending it outside of the process, outside of the municipal 

election process, and thereby winding up with taking dollars 

away from the delivery of health care rather than administrative 

costs.  Would you agree with that assessment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Chair, I do want to bring this 

point to the attention of the member.  It is better to have the 

elections when we're ready to have the elections and everyone, 

including the health boards, are ready to move to elections, 

rather than having elections when health reform and health 

boards and communities aren't ready.  And that's the 

determination that we have to make. 

 

It's better, if necessary, to spend additional money, if that's 

what it takes, and do it right rather than rushing off because the 

member from Kindersley thinks we should have them in 

October of '94.  So the point is, is to do it right and move to 

elections as quickly as we can. But let us take the time to do it 

right. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So you're saying to 

the people of Saskatchewan that it's okay to spend an extra 

several hundreds of thousands of dollars just because you think 

that the process is . . . you're concerned that the process isn't 

being able to be put together right, and it's just me, just the 

member from Kindersley who wants to rush off and hold these 

elections. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, that isn't the case.  That is not the case, 

Madam Minister.  SUMA and SARM are not 

just me.  SUMA and SARM represent people from all over 

Saskatchewan, and they're calling for it, Madam Minister.  So it 

just isn't me.  It isn't me.  And I wish you would recognize that, 

Madam Minister, that these people represent people all over 

Saskatchewan.  It isn't just the member from Kindersley or the 

official opposition; it's other folks that are calling for these 

elections, Madam Minister. 

 

And they are saying that spending the money outside to hold . . 

. or to hold elections outside of the municipal elections this fall 

is wrong, because of an economic argument.  That's been your 

justification, after all, Madam Minister, right from the very 

beginning for these health care reforms, is because you felt it 

was necessary to spend the tax dollars in health care more 

wisely. 

 

And that's a laudable goal, Madam Minister; nothing wrong 

with that whatsoever, Madam Minister.  But somehow or 

another, when the process catches up on you and you're kind of 

caught in a situation where you don't like it any more and the 

elections are upon you or almost upon you, the promise for the 

elections at least are on you or almost upon you -- that 

somehow or another it's acceptable to spend, just blow a bunch 

of money outside of the process. 

 

Madam Minister, do you not think that SUMA and SARM are 

correct in their assessment that it's going to cost, and cost a lot 

to hold these things, the elections, outside of the municipal 

process this fall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, no process has been 

established yet, so nobody knows what the cost is going to be 

because a process has not been established.  And I want to 

make that point. 

 

With respect to what the member opposite is saying, I want to 

also make this point. I think we are waiting for . . . The member 

opposite in his remarks puts all kinds of statements in my 

mouth -- so you say you're prepared to spend all this money 

instead of going . . . and that's what you're going to do. 

 

I've said from the beginning -- and this has been an hour and a 

half now on this one point -- I've said from the beginning that 

there's a consultation process as to when the elections will be 

held.  In '94 or in '95 or when, and I am waiting to receive 

recommendations from the Department of Health as a result of 

that consultation process.  So none of this is predetermined.  

The process of the election is not predetermined; the cost is not 

predetermined;  and when they are going to be held has not 

been predetermined.  There's a process in place and I'm waiting 

for recommendations. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, what we've been attempting to 

do this afternoon is get some kind of an assurance for the 

people of Saskatchewan that you are indeed committed to 

holding these elections, and as soon as possible.  And somehow 

or another you're not willing to keep the promise that . . . and a 

commitment that you gave to the people of Saskatchewan 

earlier on, Madam Minister.  It was held out simply as a carrot 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

to try and get people to support health care reform; that you 

were going to make this system all that more democratic and 

people would buy into it and la-di-da. 

 

I mean everybody who is . . . you were trying to get them on 

board because it was a difficult time and we recognize that, 

Madam Minister, and it was tough for you as the minister.  And 

in order to do this you just throw them out a little bit of a bone 

and say, well you know, we can make this democratic.  And 

we'll open up the process and you can be part of the process in 

this grand scheme of health care reform, Madam Minister.  But 

somewhere along the lines it went off the rails, didn't it, 

Madam Minister? 

 

It went off the rails because you've made commitments on one 

hand -- you and your government do -- and then you aren't 

prepared to live up to them on the other hand.  Promise 

anything to try and get it smoothed out.  Promise anything to 

the people of Saskatchewan to try and get them to support your 

view and then at a later date, when you find out that it may not 

be possible, you back away from that promise as quickly as 

possible.  Even though, even though, Madam Minister, it might 

cost more. 

 

And that was the single justification for the whole process in 

the beginning, was the delivery of health care dollars and trying 

to make them . . . the system more accountable and trying to 

make it a better system.  That was the whole reason for health 

care reform was trying to get a better bang for the tax dollars in 

health care reform.  And somehow now that has a whole lot 

less lustre to the equation than it did at that time, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And that's why the people of Saskatchewan, and that's why 

groups like SUMA and SARM, are asking you to live up to 

your commitment.  And that's why, Madam Minister, it's 

becoming increasing obvious that you're not prepared to live up 

to the commitment that you made.  And it's becoming 

increasingly obvious that the Minister of Justice seems to have 

the same problem with keeping commitments. And the Minister 

of Agriculture, or the former minister of Agriculture, and the 

Minister of Justice with respect to civil service contracts.  You 

people don't seem to have any conscience when it comes to 

keeping the commitments that you make, Madam Minister. 

 

And that's why the people of Saskatchewan are becoming 

increasingly difficult to deal with for you, Madam Minister.  

Because on one hand you say something to them and then you 

take it away on the other hand, Madam Minister.  And that's 

why people are beginning not to trust you, Madam Minister.  

You said that you weren't going to close hospitals and they 

closed.  You said that you weren't going to hold off on these 

elections and now you're going to hold off on the elections, 

Madam Minister.  So why should the people of Saskatchewan 

trust you on this, Madam Minister? 

 

Why should we believe that your commitment to holding these 

elections is any more stronger today than it was when you 

initiated health care reform a 

couple of years ago? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Now I know there's no point in telling the 

member opposite this, but I'm going to say it once more for the 

people who may be watching.  This government did not say 

there shall be elections in October 1994.  There was a promise 

to have elections but not a promise to have them in October 

1994.  There was a discussion about having them with 

municipal elections and the first window would be October '94.  

It was talked about, a possibility that we could have them in 

October '94 and maybe this is when we could have elections. 

 

The promise was to have elections and that promise is there and 

the government is committed to that promise and we are 

putting a process in place to move us to that.  Unlike the 

members opposite who were in power for 10 years, who had an 

opportunity not to destroy health care, which is what they did 

when they went around and threw out health care dollars 

indiscriminately and other dollars throughout the province and 

brought this province to a $15 billion debt which has 

financially crippled it.  That was their commitment to health 

care. 

 

They had a commission that they paid some $1.2 million for, I 

think -- or was it 1.8; I not sure -- that said divide the province 

up into regions.  And they sat on it and they shelved it because 

they had no commitment because they didn't have the courage 

to move forward and do the right thing. 

 

Our government is committed to having elections.  We're 

committed to moving to elections as soon as we are ready to do 

that -- as soon as district health boards are ready, health care 

stakeholders are ready, and communities are ready.  We want 

to move to elections. 

 

I don't know at this point when that will be.  I have put in place 

a consultation process which will provide us with 

recommendations and tell us when it should be. 

 

There are arguments out there that it shouldn't be October '94.  

Some of those I've shared today in the Legislative Assembly.  

There are other arguments that there should be.  This is what is 

going to take place in the next few weeks and months -- a 

debate on when and how. 

 

Now the member opposite of course is either . . . As I say, what 

he wants to do is say there was a commitment carved in stone, 

and now you're breaking your commitment.  So I know there's 

no point in telling him what the truth is, because he will want to 

distort it.  But I am telling the people of Saskatchewan that 

October '94 was perceived as a possibility, but the commitment 

was not to absolutely have them in October '94, but the 

commitment was to have elections. 

 

The question becomes, that we have to look at, is when and 

how.  October '94 is the first window.  We could have it outside 

of municipal elections and have it in the spring of '95, or 

somewhere late '94.  But 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

whenever we are ready, the province is ready, to move towards 

elections, the government is committed to it, and we will do it. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  We've gone at 

this for some time now, and it's becoming increasingly obvious 

that you don't have a commitment to holding elections this 

year.  You, no question about it, are going to hold 

consultations, and you're going to dither around with this and 

string it out as long as possible in hopes that somehow or 

another the concern and the issue will go away, Madam 

Minister. 

 

But I can give you the assurance that the people of 

Saskatchewan are not going to let this thing just die, and 

SUMA and SARM aren't going to let this thing just die either. 

 

I think they believe that you made a commitment at that time, 

Madam Minister, to holding the elections as soon as the fall of 

'94.  And now you're backed away from that commitment and 

you're seeking any kind of justification for it you possibly can.  

And you stand up in the legislature and say, I don't want to talk 

about it any more, and the official opposition is supposed to 

just sit back and accept that somehow or another as an 

explanation and an argument that we have to live with, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And I'm saying to you that I don't think people believe that any 

more.  I'm saying they believe that you made a commitment at 

that time.  You made those commitments trying to get people to 

support your health care initiatives, Madam Minister, knowing 

full well that you had no intention -- no intention, Madam 

Minister -- of keeping that commitment because it would be of 

a political sensitive nature when it comes time for those 

elections.  And I think the people out there recognize that. 

 

And unfortunately, Madam Minister, I think they also 

recognize that groups like SAHO, when they stand up and say 

that they don't want elections, represent something -- that they 

aren't very impartial on this, Madam Minister.  They find 

themselves in a situation where they are on these boards in 

large measure, Madam Minister.  And it's like me standing up, 

as I've said earlier, as an MLA and saying, I don't want to have 

elections any more. 

 

Well I don't think the people of Saskatchewan will go along 

with that, Madam Minister.  Democratic reform of the health 

care system is something that you initiated and you now must 

live with it, Madam Minister.  And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are asking you to live up to that commitment. 

 

It's very plain and obvious, Madam Minister, that you have no 

intention -- absolutely no intention -- of holding those elections 

at the promised date of 1994 in conjunction with municipal 

elections, Madam Minister.  And now the people of 

Saskatchewan realize that. 

And unfortunately, Madam Minister, they realize as well that 

you've broken another promise, you and your government.  

And it's a shameful day, I think, Madam Minister, when the 

Minister of Health and the Minister of Justice and the Minister 

of Agriculture and the Minister of Justice on another occasion 

breaks the very commitments that they make to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

 

And somehow or another the people out there are supposed to 

appreciate what you've done in health care.  And the opposition 

is supposed to appreciate the changes that you've made and not 

stand up in any kind, in any form, of opposition to those 

changes, Madam Minister. 

 

But I'm afraid, Madam Minister, that the people out there don't 

believe it any more.  They don't agree with you.  They don't 

believe what you say, Madam Minister, because you're not 

trustworthy, Madam Minister.  You break your commitments to 

people, you and your government.  And unfortunately that's the 

circumstance where we find ourselves today, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, we'll move on now from this argument.  We 

may return to it at a later date, but we'll move on to things of 

other importance with respect to your very, very important 

portfolio, Madam Minister.  We'll change the direction a little 

bit and deal with acute care bed levels in Saskatchewan, 

Madam Minister. 

 

I understand that as recently as October 29 of last year you 

confirmed that more cuts are planned for acute care bed ratios 

in Saskatchewan.  And, Madam Minister, I wonder if you 

would care to provide us with information on that; what your 

plans are with respect to acute care bed levels in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- For the members edification, when he's 

talking about SAHO being district board members, I wish to 

also let him know that there are many other people who sit on 

SAHO.  All of the denominational boards have representatives 

on SAHO.  Public health association has a representative on 

SAHO.  Health administrators as an association have 

representation on SAHO.  It's a much broader group than health 

boards. 

 

And I think the member opposite does them a disservice when 

he says that it's self-interest and they're only district boards.  So 

I just want to set that record straight, Mr. Chair. 

 

With respect to acute care, the reduction that was announced 

last year, not this budget -- it's in this budget but it was 

announced last year; you will recall that we gave a two-year 

announcement -- was 2.8 per cent, minus 2.8 per cent in the 

acute care sector.  There was an overall increase in the health 

budget, or a zero ratio, but acute care was reduced by minus 2.8 

per cent. 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

We are in the process of getting plans from district boards 

because it will vary from district to district as to how this minus 

2.8 per cent is absorbed.  It will depend on what their long-term 

care needs are, for example, and what their overall budget is.  

And how they are going to absorb this is unknown on a 

district-by-district basis until they've provided us with their 

plans. 

 

But they will be receiving their overall budget and they will be 

making decisions as to how they want to move.  And at that 

time we will have more information as to what it means in 

terms of acute care beds. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, you said that there would be 

further acute care bed reductions at that time, and the cuts to 52 

rural hospitals reduced the bed ratio target from 4.2 beds per 

thousand to about 3.3, I understand.  And you said the 

province's target is about 2.5 to 3 in two more years, upcoming 

years, Madam Minister. 

 

And so the obvious conclusion is, Madam Minister, that there 

will be additional facilities in Saskatchewan that will be closed. 

And I'm wondering if you would care to comment on that and 

confirm for us this afternoon that indeed the next round of 

acute care bed-level reductions will result, will result in 

additional closing of hospitals in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There is sufficient funding for district 

boards to be able to keep their facilities open, and in the 

institutional . . . in the acute care sector, there is sufficient 

funding to achieve that. 

 

I want to also, however, tell the member opposite that a part of 

health reform is shifting resources from institutions to 

community-based and home-based services, and there have 

been increases provided for community-based and home-based 

services.  And these increases are going to be distributed 

through a $10 million rural initiatives fund.  The government 

has established, as you know, a $10 million rural initiatives 

fund which will in part be able to provide for more 

community-based services. 

 

There also was a 7 per cent budget increase to home-based 

services and a continued full year of funding for health centres 

which were converted from hospitals in '93-94. 

 

So as we develop community-based services, we have less need 

for institutional services.  And what that mix is and how 

quickly districts move to providing more services at the 

community level and in the home is yet to be determined. 

 

Districts will have to provide us with their plans as to how they 

want to move in this direction and what they think the best 

procedures is.  The fact is, however, is that they have received 

adequate funding in this budget to continue to operate facilities 

.  However, they will be developing community-based services 

and as we do that there's less reliance on institutional and acute 

care. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, the question's very simple.  

How many more hospitals in Saskatchewan will close if you 

reduce the bed level targets to 2.5, which you've suggested 

you're going to do?  It seems simple enough to me, Madam 

Minister, if the 52 that you closed the door on for acute care 

bed levels now . . . I think we'll see an additional round of that 

same thing happening.  And I just want your confirmation of it, 

Madam Minister.  How many more hospitals will be changed 

from what you used to call a hospital to a wellness centre?  Or 

how many will have reduced acute care bed levels to zero in 

rural Saskatchewan particularly? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think the overall provincial average for 

acute care bed levels -- the target which, as I said, is flexible -- 

is somewhere between 2.5 to 3.0 beds per thousand.  That's the 

overall target which, I should suggest, is a target that's being 

adopted across Canada.  But it may not be achieved.  Some 

places have already achieved this target; in fact some places are 

lower than this target.  It may not be achieved everywhere.  

That is an overall sort of average. 

 

I want to remind the member opposite that what took place in 

the conversion of hospitals was that acute in-patient care was 

phased out and the facilities were converted to health centres.  

Some of them have long-term care; some don't.  All of them 

provide certain basic services.  So the hospitals . . . the doors 

were not closed, the hospitals were changed.  Their roles were 

changed, as we talked about the need to do since we formed 

government -- the need to change the roles of facilities. 

 

I want to point out to the member again, there is adequate 

funding to keep facilities open in this budget.  District boards 

will be receiving increased funding for home-based services 

and community-based services.  As we develop better alternate 

services, there's less need for institutional services. 

 

What does that mean in terms of acute care beds in a district?  I 

can't tell you at this time because it will depend on district to 

district.  I have not yet received plans from the district boards 

as to what they are going to do in the year to come.  Those 

plans should be forthcoming soon. 

 

The member opposite wants me to make premature statements 

with respect to what the acute care bed level is going to be in 

Saskatchewan.  I am waiting for district boards to consult with 

their communities and do this analysis and provide us with a 

plan.  Then we'll have more information for the public.  

However, in this budget, as I want to reiterate again, there is 

adequate funding to keep facilities open. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  According to a 

recent report from StatsCanada, Saskatchewan residents have 

longer distances than most Canadians to travel to the nearest 

hospital.  On average, Saskatchewan residents must travel 9 

kilometres to the nearest hospital of any kind.  Now that means, 

when they say hospitals of any kind, I'm under the 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

impression that they mean a wellness centre or some kind of 

rudimentary health care facilities, Madam Minister. 

 

Only Canadians in three of the four Atlantic provinces have 

further to go in an emergency.  Now if you need a hospital, 

Madam Minister, that has a wider range of services, 

particularly specialty services, Saskatchewan residents have an 

average of 103 kilometres to travel.  That's the longest distance 

for Canadians anywhere except in New Brunswick, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Statistics for this study were compiled before, Madam Minister, 

before your cuts of funding to 52 of Saskatchewan's 132 

hospitals.  With these facilities losing provincial funding for 

acute care, the average distances to hospitals in this province 

will inevitably increase, Madam Minister, leaving 

Saskatchewan people with the greatest distances of any 

Canadians to travel to receive adequate health care services, 

Madam Minister. 

 

And given all of that information and that evidence, Madam 

Minister, how is it possible to say that the people of 

Saskatchewan, facing these kind of cut-backs that you are 

imposing on Saskatchewan residents, have an improvement in 

their health care?  How can you say that the people of 

Saskatchewan have an improved health care system relative to 

the system they had prior to your health care initiatives? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I would ask the member to table that 

report, please, the one that he's referred to.  And I'm assuming 

he'll do that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Be very happy to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, okay, he will.  Because he's referred 

to it, he will table it. 

 

The other point I wish to make to the member opposite is in 

Saskatchewan we have more miles per capita than any other 

province because of the fact that we have a small population 

and a large geography.  So we have to bear that in mind. 

 

We also have to bear in mind that we have one of the best 

ambulance systems of any other province.  Now it doesn't mean 

that there can't be improvements or that we shouldn't improve.  

Obviously we should.  But the fact is today in Canada we have 

one of the best ambulance systems in Saskatchewan. 

 

The distances with respect to how far people have to travel are 

medically chosen distances.  There is advice from medical 

professionals as to how far they should travel and what's safe 

and what's appropriate.  These aren't just chosen out of the 

blue. 

 

We also have to be aware that much of what takes place in a 

hospital takes place in larger centres.  Something like half of 

the admissions in our base hospitals are from outside Regina 

and Saskatoon.  So 

rural people have always come to the larger centres to be 

looked after in hospital. 

 

So there's all these things playing.  It isn't as black and white as 

the member opposite wants to paint the picture.  What we have 

to do . . . And the Department of Health has a rural health 

advisory committee which is looking at ways to improve 

services for Saskatchewan people, particularly rural residents.  

They're looking at what are appropriate times of travel and so 

on and they're working with the Department of Health and the 

district boards to put in services that will be high-quality 

services. 

 

I think it's important to note that 95 per cent of Saskatchewan's 

population lives within a 30-kilometre radius of a road 

ambulance site, and that's very substantial.  I think 

Saskatchewan has very good emergency services when you 

compare Saskatchewan to other jurisdictions.  However we still 

want to work on improving those services, and our district 

boards are doing that right now. They have ongoing discussions 

with respect to how we can improve emergency services. 

 

The Department of Health is establishing first-responder 

systems throughout the province where communities want to 

participate.  We're looking at what sort of enhanced ambulance 

services have to be put in place -- the additional training of 

EMTs (emergency medical technicians).  We're looking at and 

graduating this spring, the first class of nurse practitioners in 

Saskatchewan -- a program that is a first in Canada -- in order 

to provide more highly experienced health professionals in our 

communities, particularly in remote rural communities and 

northern communities. 

 

So there is a lot of work being done in that regard.  And I know 

that as a result of the efforts of the district boards and the 

communities and the Department of Health, that Saskatchewan 

people will be looking at a very high-quality emergency service 

system throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

unfortunately I think the people of Saskatchewan again believe 

that your words ring hollow.  I think they don't agree with you, 

particularly in 52 communities that I can think of across 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister -- small town Saskatchewan -- 

and in some cases, relatively very vibrant communities, Madam 

Minister, that feel that your initiatives haven't been right and 

you left them without the kinds of services that they've grown 

to expect and enjoy over the course of the years, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And I think it's becoming increasingly obvious why there is 

increased speculation that you won't be the Minister of Health 

much longer, Madam Minister, because of the disaster that this 

health care initiative has been right from the very beginning, 

Madam Minister. 

 

They now believe, Madam Minister, that you did this 



April 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

. . . I don't know for what reasons.   Some are political I would 

suggest, Madam Minister, and some were just I think you just 

didn't know what you were doing, Madam Minister.  And that's 

unfortunate, that you didn't understand what you were doing to 

the people of Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, with respect to 

health care reform.  Unfortunately, Madam Minister, I think 

that's what they are saying. 

 

And the people in the communities that I represent, Madam 

Minister, said to me that they think that you should resign your 

portfolio because of what you've done to health care in 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister.  You went into this with a 

whole lot of preconceived notions about how wonderful it was 

going to be, Madam Minister, and it hasn't turned out that way, 

has it? 

 

You went into this thinking that people would wholeheartedly 

endorse your drive for health care reform, and unfortunately 

again it hasn't worked out quite that way, Madam Minister, has 

it?  And they now believe, Madam Minister, that the only way 

to solve this problem is for you to resign from it and let 

someone else take over. 

 

The same way that your seat mate, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, resigned . . . or I mean was asked to resign 

from the portfolio of Agriculture because it was a disaster, 

unmitigated disaster right from the beginning, Madam Minister.  

And that's what health care reform has developed into in 

Saskatchewan unfortunately, Madam Minister. 

 

And it has nothing to do with what anybody over here has to 

say, Madam Minister.  It has a whole lot to do with your 

attitude in the direction that you've taken with respect to this, 

Madam Minister.  You went into this . . . the Premier said that 

the train has left the station.  There's no way you're going to 

back up on any of this kind of stuff, Madam Minister.  You 

went into that, into it; you went in and said, health care boards 

better be set up, or else, and the or else was you'd set them up if 

they didn't do it willingly, Madam Minister. 

 

And you went into it with a whole bunch of promises to the 

people of Saskatchewan -- don't worry about your hospital 

closing; don't worry about anything, reductions in health care 

services, Madam Minister.  And unfortunately, again it hasn't 

worked out that way. 

 

And we are beginning to see, Madam Minister, every single 

day, calls coming in to our offices from concerned citizens in 

the province of Saskatchewan suggesting that the changes have 

been harmful to them, Madam Minister.  And one can only 

wonder what kind of response you and your department gives 

to these people when they call in with those kinds of concerns, 

Madam Minister, when they call in about situations that have 

happened around Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

 

I can think of a situation that happened at a sporting event out 

in the community that I live in -- in fact I happened to be in 

attendance at that very event that 

evening, Madam Minister.  It was a few weeks ago in Eston.  

There was a provincial final hockey game on and an old fellow 

who happened to be there from Carlyle watching his son 

playing that evening walked out after the game was over and 

suffered, I understand, a very severe heart attack right on the 

entrance to the facility in Eston, Madam Minister -- suffered a 

heart attack. 

 

Well fortunately, because there was a sporting event on, the 

ambulance service was available and they were there and they 

rushed this man out to the wellness centre in Eston.  And 

fortunately again, there was a doctor present, and he was 

administered health care services that evening, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And people are asking what the point is, and I'll tell you what 

the point is.  That doctor called me a couple of days afterwards 

and he said, it is very, very obvious, Madam Minister, that had 

services not have been available in that community, that it is 

absolutely impossible that that man would have lived and 

survived the trip to Kindersley that he would have had to have 

made had there not still been some kind of services available in 

that community, Madam Minister. 

 

And there was something like 750 people in attendance at that 

game that evening, Madam Minister.  And I think they all 

recognized and thanked the very . . . thanked God that there 

was some kind of services, some kind of basic services still 

available in that community.  And Madam Minister, that's the 

concern that's out there. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan believe that you're not committed 

to providing services on a fair and equitable basis to the people 

of Saskatchewan, Madam Minister.  They don't believe that 

you are prepared to do what you've promised to do because you 

haven't kept your commitments in other areas, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And you may think that this health board election stuff is minor 

little stuff, and it's an irritant, and it'll go away, and the 

opposition shouldn't be concerned about it, and neither should 

SUMA or SARM or anyone else who stands in their place and 

says that this is a important question. 

 

But it is an important question, Madam Minister.  Because on 

one hand you're asking the people of Saskatchewan to trust you 

with health care reform. Trust us, you're saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan; trust us. We're going to do what's in your best 

interests; we're going to provide adequate health care services. 

Don't worry, the people that are at these kinds of things in 

small town Saskatchewan, or in larger communities, or 

anywhere else for that matter; the health care services are going 

to be there if needed.  That's what you've said right from the 

very beginning -- don't worry, there'll be health care services 

there if needed. 

 

But, Madam Minister, when you give a commitment in one 

area to hold elections and don't keep it, why 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1994 

should the people believe you in that area, or in the area that 

you promise with respect to health care services and adequately 

funding those services, and adequately providing services on an 

equitable basis?  Why should they believe you, Madam 

Minister?  You break commitments all the time, you and your 

government, and that's why the people of Saskatchewan don't 

believe you any more, Madam Minister. 

 

And when you say, you stand up and say there's adequate 

health care dollars in this budget so there won't have to be any 

more further hospital closures, why should they believe you on 

that commitment either, Madam Minister? 

 

You provide us with some documentation and say oh yes, 

there's money available for all of these districts and not to 

worry.  But we heard the same story before, Madam Minister.  

We heard the same story from you, saying that these people in 

Saskatchewan were going to be adequately served with health 

care services, and not to worry, Madam Minister. 

 

But unfortunately that promise has been broken as well, 

Madam Minister.  And it's becoming increasingly obvious that 

you don't care about this.  You don't want to discuss it; you 

don't like the very thought of people criticizing the process.  

Madam Minister, you don't like us standing in our place on a 

daily basis and bringing up the concerns in Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, when we call your department, in large measure, 

Madam Minister, your ministry officials are shocked when we 

bring up these kinds of things, absolutely.  They don't want to 

discuss it.  They want it dealt with as quickly as possible; 

they're scared to death that we'll bring up these kind of issues in 

the legislature, Madam Minister. 

 

But I can promise you, Madam Minister, that we're going to 

continue bringing up situations that people bring to our 

attention on a daily basis in the legislature because it's 

important.  And it's important that health care is provided with 

adequate funding and the people of Saskatchewan are provided 

with adequate health care services, Madam Minister. 

 

And we don't think that the opposition should back off on this 

one little bit, because the people in our constituencies that we 

represent and represented, and the people in your constituencies 

that call us on a daily basis, Madam Minister, they say, don't 

back off on this; don't let this minister change the system until 

we find ourselves where we're headed, which is a two-tier 

health care system where if you happen to be fortunate enough 

to live in the vicinity, the near vicinity of a hospital, that you'll 

be provided with services.  But if you're unfortunate enough to 

live in a part of Saskatchewan where you are a little more 

remote, you won't have those kind of services. 

 

And that's what the question is I guess, Madam Minister, is the 

people in Saskatchewan . . . are the people of Saskatchewan, all 

parts of Saskatchewan, 

going to be adequately served with health care services, 

Madam Minister?  And the answer is no, they don't believe that 

they are. 

 

Well ask people over on the west side of the province, Madam 

Minister.  You were there.  You were there in communities like 

Eston when there were 1,500 people were there that night, 

Madam Minister.  And they watched you and the minister, your 

seat mate, laugh at the kinds of concerns they had.  Sat there in 

front of everyone there that evening and laughed.  And they 

thought it was extremely ignorant, Madam Minister, that you 

wouldn't consider their concerns more than giving it passing 

comment and laughing and joking with the person that was 

sitting there that evening, Madam Minister.  And they were 

astounded. 

 

I think a lot of people expected a lot more from you that 

evening, Madam Minister.  They expected you would provide 

them with answers to their questions, answers to their concerns. 

But you didn't, Madam Minister.  You didn't do it because you 

don't care, Madam Minister.  Unfortunately you don't care 

about Saskatchewan health care services, and the people out 

there understand that, Madam Minister. 

 

And that's why, Madam Minister, there's people all over this 

province believe that you should resign from that portfolio.  

And that's why there's increasing speculation that the Premier 

will relieve you of that duty before very long, Madam Minister.  

There is . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  It being 5 o'clock, 

the committee will rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


