




















































Hansard: May 17, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2377 

 May 17, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Acting Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Kowalsky, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Estimates, presents the third report of the said 

committee, which is tabled. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Standing 

Committee on Estimates is given the job of scrutinizing the 

budget for those areas that no minister is responsible for, and 

that in this case is the estimates for the Legislative Assembly 

and all the monies that are paid through the Legislative 

Assembly Office and through the auditor's office.  The 

members have considered them all and are herewith submitting 

the report. 

 

And I move, seconded by the member from Regina Albert 

North: 

 

 That the third report of the Standing Committee on Estimates 

be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me to introduce on behalf of my friend and 

colleague, the member from Rosetown-Elrose, seated in your 

gallery, to you and through you to my colleagues in the House, 

the Rosetown Central High School grade 8 class.  They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Kathy Johnston and Norm 

Cline.  And I understand that we'll be meeting later on for a 

photo and a visit. 

 

So I'm really looking forward to meeting these good people and 

I ask you to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with the 

member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden in welcoming the students 

from Rosetown, but especially because my cousin, Norman 

Cline, is one of their teachers.  And I'd like to welcome 

Norman here and his students.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the legislature, 18 Grade 10 students from the Wynyard High 

School seated in the Speaker's 

gallery.  They're accompanied by their teacher, Nick Jordan, 

and chaperons Roger Moskaluke, and Marlene McGillivray. 

 

I want to say to the students I hope you have an enjoyable stay 

here in the city of Regina and, in particular, in the legislature.  

I'll be meeting with you at 2:30.  I ask members to join with me 

and extend a warm welcome to the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure today to introduce through you to the Assembly, four 

guests from the autonomous region of Inner Mongolia of the 

People's Republic of China -- Madam Zhao, Mr. Cui, Madam 

Cuo, and Madam Yu are accompanied by Mr. Peter Lavalley, 

an instructor from the Wascana Institute. 

 

Our visitors are participating in a project, Mr. Speaker, 

sponsored by international service division of SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

and the Canadian International Development Agency. 

 

Inner Mongolia, you may know, Mr. Speaker, has a climate 

similar to South Dakota, in fact, somewhat similar to 

Saskatchewan.  The people there grow wheat and other grains, 

and raise cattle.  Inner Mongolia has large coal reserves and 

they also have a similar highways situation as to the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Madam Qingmei will be working at the 

placement at SaskPower to look at our system of coal-fired 

generation.  Mr. Chongxue and Madam Xia will work with the 

Department of Highways.  Madam Qiuju will be studying our 

education system. 

 

I look forward to meeting with our guests after question period 

today.  And I ask all members of the House to join with me in 

welcoming them here today and wish them all a very, very 

pleasant visit to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you to the Assembly, I'd like to introduce my nephew 

who's visiting with us -- Daniel Toth.  His dad happens to work 

as a realtor in Saskatoon and he's taking the time while his dad 

is at a meeting to come and join us.  He's sitting in your 

Speaker's gallery. 

 

And as well, a former schoolmate, I guess, Marlene 

McGillivray.  Actually I had the pleasure of attending school 

with her sister, Diane, and it's a pleasure to say hi and see her 

again.  Welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, Gerry 

Kristianson, the president of the Western Brewers Association, 

seated in your gallery. 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

 Maybe, Gerry, you'd just stand up and be recognized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kristianson is here for what has become an 

annual event, where the brewer's association holds a reception, 

and I'm sure all members are planning to attend tonight.  And I 

know they're all welcome; this is an all-party event. 

 

I just want to, on behalf of the members of the Assembly, 

welcome Mr. Kristianson here to the Assembly again.  I look 

forward to talking and seeing you later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- It is my pleasure today to welcome some 

guests from my constituency.  I think I have 70 Grade 6, 7, and 

8 students from Queen Elizabeth School.  I believe they are 

seated in the west gallery.  They are accompanied by their 

teachers, Ms. Boyle, Mr. Toles, and Mr. Cherkewich. 

 

I will be meeting with them shortly after question period when 

the Deputy Speaker will take over my duties here this 

afternoon.  I look forward to meeting with you, and I ask all 

members to give them a hearty welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

North Battleford Comprehensive High School -- First Place 

in Drama Competition 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

offer congratulations to the North Battleford Comprehensive 

High School drama club for winning first place in the 

provincial high school drama competitions. 

 

The 13 female students and their teacher, Mr. Roy Challis, are 

to be commended for the unique and inspiring performance of 

The Matriarchs.  Although the production borrows selective 

pieces from many famous playwrights, including William 

Shakespeare, Mr. Challis is to be congratulated and credited for 

the excellent play. 

 

I now wish to inform the Assembly that the students have been 

invited to perform at the International Theatre Festival to be 

held in Liverpool, Nova Scotia, later this week.  It is important 

to note that this is the only high school in Canada who has been 

invited to attend this prestigious event.  In fact, a high school 

from Japan is the only other high school in the world invited to 

attend. 

 

I ask members of the Legislative Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the drama club from the North Battleford 

Comprehensive High School and wish them well during their 

performance at the International Theatre Festival. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

100th Anniversary of Saltcoats 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would 

like the House to join with me in recognizing the 100th 

anniversary of the town of Saltcoats.  In this historical year of 

1994, I feel a great amount of pride and happiness for the 

residents of this community which happens to be within my 

constituency. 

 

In the history book, History of Saskatchewan, volume 14, it is 

stated: 

 

 The first community to take the necessary steps to establish a 

village in the Northwest Territories was Saltcoats. 

 

This began as a collective effort in late 1893 by the people of 

the area who felt municipal status was necessary.  By April of 

1894, the process was completed and Saltcoats was officially 

the first village in the Northwest Territories to receive 

municipal status.  A great celebration followed this 

announcement and a general holiday was proclaimed. 

 

Saltcoats has been the home for many influential and important 

people in Saskatchewan's history.  I will give a few examples 

from this list, including James Anderson, premier of 

Saskatchewan from 1929 to 1934; Thomas M. MacNutt, first 

Speaker of the Saskatchewan legislature; William Eakin, 

Speaker of the Northwest Territories legislature, 1899 to 1902; 

and James Snedker, Speaker of the Saskatchewan legislature, 

1965 to 1971. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout the rest of the year, Saltcoats will be 

celebrating its anniversary with all kinds of events.  Some 

highlights will include the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) musical ride on July 10, and the Saltcoats Agricultural 

Society's 106th annual fair day on August 10. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating and recognizing the town of Saltcoats with its 

rich history and outstanding citizens on its 100th anniversary.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Claybank Brick Plant Historic Site 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to report on 

the efforts of some dedicated people in my constituency and 

area who are working to preserve the memory of a vital part of 

Saskatchewan's economic and social history. 

 

The town site of Claybank is just west of Avonlea, and from 

the 1880s right up to 1989 some of the finest bricks in North 

America were made from the rich deposits of clay found close 

by.  Homesteader Tom McWilliams first discovered the 

deposits, selling his product to Moose Jaw until a 

manufacturing plant was built in 1914.  Production kicked into 

high gear in 1916 as the Dominion Firebrick and Pottery 

Company.  At peak production 10 large kilns were in 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

operation producing bricks for heavy-duty industrial purposes, 

and for such famous edifices as the Chateau Frontenac in 

Quebec City and the Capitol Theatre in Regina.  And as well, 

the factory supported a thriving community. 

 

Now the Claybank Brick Plant Historical Society, a partnership 

of local citizens and businesses working with the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Foundation, is endeavouring to have the plant 

declared a national historic site.  This historic facility is the 

most complete such plant in Canada, possibly in North 

America. 

 

The board of directors of the Historic Sites and Monuments 

Board will tour the site in June in order to make a decision.  

This site has great potential for a tourism destination and many 

options, from self-guided tours to a restored plant and town site 

with interpretive centres. 

 

I congratulate the historical society for its dedication and wish 

it well in its attempt to preserve this significant part of our 

history, as well as creating an exciting partnership of economic 

development, tourism and heritage in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Swift Current Hockey Coach 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

acknowledge the work of a hockey coach in the Swift Current 

area for the last eight seasons.  His name is Graham James.  

Graham James provided to the people of Swift Current some 

very exciting and dynamic hockey, and I want to say to the 

people in the province that we were pleased to have him there 

as a part of a well-functioning organization. 

 

He went to the Memorial Cup, and I believe in 1989 he made 

some significant contributions.  He had set a record for the  . . . 

or the hockey team set a record for the most goals scored in the 

least amount of time -- three goals in 16 seconds.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I was at that game and they almost did it the second 

time in the same period.  They had the outstanding hockey 

team of the year.  They went 17 games in winning the 

Memorial Cup, only losing one game in all of that series. 

 

They set a record, Mr. Speaker, for the amount of penalty 

goals, short-handed goals that they had.  They set a record for 

the amount of power play goals.  And they are to be 

commended for their season that year. 

 

But they have also contributed through the years for their 

dynamic contribution to the community.  And I want to say to 

Mr. James, thank you very much, and I'm pleased to have been 

part of that community development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Maidstone School Band Visits North Dakota 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I am 

proud to tell the House about the efforts this past weekend of 

the Maidstone School Band in my home town, Maidstone.  The 

band was a participant, along with hundreds of other musicians, 

in the 64th annual Parade Day Festival in Williston, North 

Dakota. 

 

This was the first big trip the band has ever had together.  They 

have competed in the Moose Jaw band competition and the 

Lloydminster music festival.  But this trip to North Dakota was 

the largest yet.  Over 39 bands performed last weekend, 

including bands from all over western Canada and the United 

States. 

 

The point of the trip was to have fun as well as to create 

awareness for the band members.  The Maidstone School Band 

consists of 70 members from grade 6 to grade 12 level.  The 

band instructor, Jim Best, a former senior director of music 

with the British Army, felt the trip would allow the students a 

chance to perform in a large and exciting festival as well as 

provide an opportunity for the parents to hear and see what 

their children have accomplished in the band program. 

 

It's only a few years ago that cut-backs and declining numbers 

jeopardized the existence of the Maidstone School Band.  

However actions by concerned citizens and teachers who felt 

music education was important, changed that bleak outlook. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to once again congratulate the 

Maidstone School Band on a great effort at the Parade Day 

Festival in Williston, North Dakota. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Promotion for City of Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  I would like to inform the House of 

the initial results of a unique partnership between economic 

development authorities and tourism agencies in Saskatoon. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, part of the government's Partnership 

for Renewal strategy to increase job opportunities in 

Saskatchewan is to focus on six strategic sectors.  One of these 

sectors is tourism.  Therefore I am very pleased that Tourism 

Saskatoon and the Economic Development Authority of 

Saskatoon have worked together with the Marketing Den to 

design a word mark featuring the word "Saskatoon" with a sun 

over the O's. 

 

This exciting word mark will be used in advertising materials 

and promotions to help sell Saskatoon to potential investors 

and tourists.  It represents our sunny climate, our 

agricultural-based economy, and the upbeat attitude of our 

people.  It will be shown off soon to over 400,000 people in a 

tourism tabloid that will be sent to potential visitors from 

western Canada. 

 

I would like at this time to congratulate Tourism Saskatoon and 

the Economic Development Authority of Saskatoon on the 

development of this innovative word mark.  Thank you. 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, your government 

employed the services of Price Waterhouse to determine the 

costs of your Labour Standards Act to the Saskatchewan 

businesses.  Now without any in-depth study or survey they 

determined that the cost will be around $9 million, a number 

that you have used extensively in this Assembly and 

throughout the proceedings of the House. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you still stand by this number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the number is not ours.  The 

number was done by Price Waterhouse.  I can only assume, 

given their competence and reputation, that the work was well 

done.  Yes, I'm prepared to use the figure.  It is theirs and I trust 

them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we 

recently received an in-depth and detailed analysis of your 

Labour Standards Act from the Hotel Association of 

Saskatchewan.  Now the hotel association represents 84 per 

cent of the 476 hotels in the province and employs 

approximately 13,000 people; over half -- 7,000 people -- are 

part-time. 

 

Mr. Minister, the cost analysis conducted by the association 

shows that your changes to The Labour Standards Act will cost 

their industry $27,172,450 annually; let me say that again so 

you get it exactly: $27,172,450 -- not 9 million -- for every 

business in Saskatchewan, over $27 million for the hotel 

industry alone, Minister. 

 

Now based on this information, Mr. Minister, will you now 

admit that the study that you conducted was flawed and 

completely unrealistic for the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's scarcely possible without 

knowing a little more about the study.  It is not that I don't trust 

the opposition implicitly with figures, and it is not that we 

haven't learned that you people are to be trusted to the nth 

degree; it's just that, I guess when I see the member from 

Maple Creek brandishing about figures -- I'm from Missouri -- 

I'd like to see them for myself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I remind you that 

the Price Waterhouse study was done using the same draft 

legislation that the hotel association used; and I remind you that 

your final Bill was much worse.  Mr. Minister, this analysis 

clearly shows what kind of damage your Bill will have on just 

one industry in our province.  The report has an ominous 

conclusion, and it states, and I quote: 

If serious changes are not made, some existing hotels may be 

forced to close and hotel industry development in the 

province may be virtually halted.  Careful consideration must 

not only be given to the hotel business but also to the 

potential effects of the legislation on the hotel industry's 

labour force and the negative repercussions these 

amendments may have on the overall economic growth of 

the tourism industry in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you said once businesses understood your 

Bill that everything would come up roses.  Well here's one 

industry that understands your Bill from the start to the finish 

and they are predicting business closures and job losses. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now admit that you have made a 

mistake, that in fact your Bills are anti-labour, anti-business, 

anti-jobs, and only pro-union? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The people at Price Waterhouse, 

whom I would remind the hon. member are one of Canada's 

more reputable chartered accounting firms who put their name 

at the bottom of the study, they had the advantage of working 

closely with the government and the officials from the 

department and so they knew what was going to be in the 

legislation.  I have no knowledge of this at all, but one might 

speculate that they didn't have quite the same advantage and 

that to some extent, this represents their worst fears. 

 

This also is reminiscent of last year's scare story, which we had 

at this time, that the changes in the WCB (Workers' 

Compensation Board) was going to increase the premiums by 

300 per cent.  We said 10 per cent and 10 per cent it was. 

 

And this is reminiscent of the same thing.  One might suppose 

that what this is is their worst fears.  Well I've said to 

businesses from one end of the province to the other, your 

worst fears are not going to be realized in this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, your 

red herrings are not accurate.  I have a copy of the analysis here 

in my hand. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have been shown time and time again what 

your labour laws will do to job creation and business 

investment in Saskatchewan.  You have received hundreds of 

letters, hundreds of phone calls.  There are full-page ads 

appearing in the papers.  The Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce has called for your resignation, a precedent in itself.  

The Woolco store in Moose Jaw has closed shop; it's finished.  

There are now rallies being planned by the business community 

in this province.  That's a hint that there's trouble in your 

paradise, Mr. Minister.  Someone wants to rain on your parade. 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

Several months ago, you and your Premier refused to meet with 

the business community in an emergency summit on the 

economy.  In light of your labour Bills, they are now knocking 

on your door again. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you and your Premier meet with the business 

community before you force these Bills through the legislature 

and listen to their concerns, instead of scorning them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to answer the 

question on behalf of the government by reminding the hon. 

member from Maple Creek and all the members in the 

Assembly that the Minister of Labour, the Minister of 

Economic Development, in fact numerous of the ministers and 

ministries, have met extensively with both business groups, 

businesses, and trade union people with respect to the drafting 

of The Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union Act. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, one should understand that voices such as 

Mr. Botting's on behalf of the Federation of Independent 

Business, Ms. Byers on behalf of the Federation of Labour, 

their job is to seek more.  Their job is to always seek more from 

their point of view. 

 

Our job is to try to define the proper balance in the public 

interest, and we think we've done that through a deficit 

reduction program, through a Partnership for Renewal 

program, for tax reductions for small business over the last 

couple of budgets, and we've done it through the various 

changes to the amendments to The Labour Standards Act and 

The Trade Union Act. 

 

So what we're seeing here is the middle ground, the sensible 

ground for working men and women, and for the proper 

business and investment climate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, our office has received a letter from 

Mr. Doug Kalesnikoff, who is a chartered accountant and also a 

certified fraud examiner.  Mr. Kalesnikoff has been examining 

the fraud your government is perpetrating on the people of 

Saskatchewan through your no-fault insurance advertising and 

he says that you have produced no figures to substantiate your 

claim of a potential 24 per cent hike in SGI rates.  He says, and 

I quote: 

 

 I have had the opportunity to review the 1992 financial 

statements of the SGI auto fund.  The losses were not as a 

result of an increase in claim payments, but rather as a result 

of an increase in the reserve set aside for unpaid 

claims.  I have requested information from SGI that would 

assist in determining whether the SGI estimate is bearing out 

to be true. 

 

 My request has not been answered. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is this 24 per cent estimate based on, and 

why won't you provide Mr. Kalesnikoff with the information he 

needs to make an independent evaluation of this estimate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the question 

on the figures by SGI, I'll remind the member, on the loss, you 

know, a couple of years ago.  We have about a $7 million loss 

and last year, it was over 34 million and 19 this past year.  So 

we're looking at about approximately a $60 million loss over 

the past three-year period. 

 

We estimated that if we continued the way we were on the 

system, the people of the province would have to pay 24 per 

cent increase in premiums in the next three years.  Now I see 

the member keeps talking about this and I feel that he is 

supporting a 24 per cent increase for the youth in this province, 

24 per cent for the seniors in this province, a 24 per cent 

increase for everybody in this province in regard to insurance.  

On this side of the House, we don't want to see a 24 per cent 

increase.  And I think that the facts that you should have, is 

look at the annual reports and look at the Sobeco study, and 

then you will get the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's interesting 

that the loss in the SGI auto fund reserve from October, 1991 to 

November, 1991 was an increase of $17 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, I guess asking you to justify your figures is a 

little like asking Charlie Farquharson to do Hamlet, but I'll try 

again.  Mr. Kalesnikoff says that according to the figures he has 

been able to gather, there is absolutely no justification for your 

prediction of a 24 per cent increase.  He says that a four and a 

half per cent increase last year cut the auto fund's 1992 loss by 

more than half.  And since this year's loss is lower than last 

year's, how is it that a 24 per cent increase is required to correct 

the problem? 

 

Once again, your government is creating a problem that isn't 

really there, and then using misleading information to suit your 

own political agenda. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that this threat of a 24 per cent 

increase is simply a number you pulled out of the air to try and 

justify your no-fault insurance scheme? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, the members from across, 

including the Liberals, will want the people of Saskatchewan to 

have a 24 per cent increase.  They've fought us all along when 

we dealt with the judges' 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

increase of 24 per cent. 

 

Why do they have one rule in regards to people such as the 

judges with a lot of money, and another rule for the other 

people of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- On this side, we look at the vast majority 

of the people and what we have done in regards to benefits and 

what we have done in dealing with the fiscal situation, we 

simply say that that 24 per cent increase is too much. 

 

I think that we need to clearly examine the motive behind what 

questions the member is asking.  I think he simply does not 

know his facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, it's 

interesting that you suggest we don't know the facts when it's 

you who is unwilling to debate in public this issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, you're the one who's threatening the 24 per cent 

increase; no one on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Kalesnikoff says, and I quote: 

 

 In accounting circles there is a saying that a set of numbers 

must pass the smell test, i.e., they must be reasonable when 

looked at on an overall objective basis.  According to the 

smell test it is my feeling that the numbers being proposed by 

SGI have a very distinctive aroma. 

 

Mr. Minister, your entire handling of this issue has a very 

distinctive odour.  We asked you about specific examples 

involving young people and home-makers and you have no 

answers.  We asked you to hold public consultations and you 

refuse.  And now we ask you to justify some of the figures 

you're using in your $150,000 campaign, and you either won't 

or can't answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, why don't you pull this Bill until you have time to 

hold full public consultations as are being called for by 

Saskatchewan consumers' association and until you and the 

public have an opportunity to understand all of the 

implications? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, if the smell test is going to 

be applied, it should be applied to the members opposite.  For 

nine years, Mr. Speaker, they put this government $16 billion 

in debt.  For nine years, Mr. Speaker, the members from across 

used experts to back up exactly what they would do at every 

step of the way.  I think that the smell test should be applied to 

the members from across. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Charity Revenue from Gaming 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions are 

for the minister in charge of Gaming.  Mr. Minister, you've 

talked about your partners in the casino business -- aboriginal 

people and exhibition boards.  And this morning you were 

quoted on the radio as saying: a charitable component will be 

built in.  Interestingly, when I in fact asked you to do this on 

March 24 of this year you said, and I quote: 

 

 . . . this is the highest form of duplicity that has ever been 

displayed in the legislature . . . 

 

And that I should be ashamed of myself. 

 

Now the Swift Current Exhibition Association wrote to you on 

January 21, 1994, about how your gaming policy was killing 

their casino.  And this is what they wrote to you: 

 

 Your new policy announcement effectively puts us out of the 

gaming business.  With the introduction of two major casinos 

in the province, combined with the VLT program that is 

already in place, we can no longer compete. 

 

Now that you have done an about-face on charitable 

compensation, Mr. Minister, will you assure all charities in 

Saskatchewan, including the Swift Current Exhibition board, 

that they will have an opportunity to share equitably from 

gambling profits in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 

the member for yet another question.  And let me say in 

response to her question, I'm having a bit of difficulty.  She's 

now asking for a charity component in gaming revenue, an 

initiative which some days she opposes but some days she 

supports. 

 

Now I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, we 

have been monitoring very closely the impact on the 

introduction of the video lottery terminals on other forms of 

gaming, since we put them into place in this province.  And we 

realize that there is some impact, limited impact, on the 

revenue that was and is generated in break-opens that goes to 

the hospital foundation. 

 

We've also noted, Mr. Speaker, an increase in the revenue to 

the amount that's played through bingos by some 17, $18 

million in the last fiscal year.  So there are some forms of 

gaming that are up, and there are some that are down. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are cognizant of the 

reliance on charities with respect to bingo and to break-open 

and other gaming dollars, and we will ensure, Mr. Speaker, in 

our negotiations with respect to the revenue sharing on the 

casinos, that that will be taken into account. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there's only been one place and one person 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

and one side of the House that's been inconsistent on whether 

or not there'd be a charitable component built in, and that is on 

the government side and yourself, sir. 

 

Many charities run lotteries, as you know, and Sask Lotteries 

sells many varieties of lottery tickets, some of which give away 

free tickets as prizes.  The Saskatchewan Elks clubs, in 

partnership with the RCMP, have sold tickets to snowmobile 

rallies to raise money for drug youth awareness programs and 

they promote alcohol-free grads and other drug abstinence 

programs. 

 

In the past few years -- and you will know this, sir, because 

they wrote to you -- their lottery has made more than $100,000.  

Now they've been informed by your department because they 

encouraged ticket sales by giving away a free ticket per book to 

ticket sellers, they will no longer be licensed to operate their 

fund-raiser. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the government pays its lottery sellers a 

commission and gives away free tickets, Mr. Minister.  Why 

the double standard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me thank the 

member again for yet another question.  And let me say that I 

am really confused.  Yesterday she's opposing gambling, today 

of course she's lobbying for more gambling revenue on behalf 

of the charities who have been part of the revenue from 

gambling in this province for many, many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority is a regulatory and a licensing body.  And I want to 

say that we regulate the promotion and we regulate the 

licensing, and we will continue to do that. 

 

Now if the member opposite would want to see gratuities and 

perhaps more given to those as an incentive to sell lottery 

tickets, then she should say so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we're not quite clear 

because one day she supports gaming initiatives, and on the 

other day she opposes them.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

the inconsistency is more than glaring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

you keep getting one opportunity after another to show that you 

have some level of competence to run the ministry of Gaming 

and you've displayed none. 

 

Charities all over Saskatchewan are seeing the results of your 

government competition, your government competition on 

charitable revenues.  And I have a copy of a fax from the 

Gaming Commission advising the Shaunavon Knights of 

Columbus and other chapters all across Saskatchewan that their 

5/18 raffles will no longer be licensed by you because it 

resembles the Lotto 6/49 too closely. 

Mr. Minister, lotteries are lotteries as you know and they've 

been around for many years in Saskatchewan.  They all follow 

exactly the same concept.  You're already draining hundreds of 

thousands of dollars because of VLTs (video lottery terminal) 

going into your government coffers. 

 

The Knights of Columbus, the Elks, the Swift Current 

exhibition boards, the hospital foundations are all getting the 

same message from you that their good work that they are 

doing in their local communities with youth, with seniors, in 

health care you don't care about and they are not important to 

your government.  And you, sir, are tossing them the crumbs 

when the government gorges itself on the whole gaming pie. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, when will you admit that your government 

is the place where there is true addiction to gambling revenue, 

and when will you get some help before you rob local 

community charities blind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say on 

the outset that there's no reason for the member opposite to get 

personal with her attack.  If in fact she's concerned about the 

policy, or if she's concerned about the direction of the 

government, we'll accept that.  But I want to say that this new 

form of Liberal politics with personal attacks is less than 

becoming the member from Greystone, who is purported to be 

over and above that by many of the members of the press 

gallery. 

 

Let me say this, Mr. Speaker: what she has done one more 

time, is she has shown that in her mind there is good gambling 

and there is bad gambling.  What I say to the member from 

Greystone, that gambling is gambling; we will regulate, we will 

control, we will license, and we will develop policy that's in the 

best interests of the province of Saskatchewan as long as we sit 

on the government side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Arts Board Grant 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board.  Madam Minister, your hand-picked Arts Board 

awarded a grant of $9,500 to a Christopher Leffler.  As you 

know, Mr. Leffler was recently expelled from the U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan) because his artwork defamed a 

Saskatchewan resident. 

 

I find it strange that your government would want to give 

taxpayers' money, Madam Minister, to an individual whose 

so-called artwork defames people and clearly invades their 

right to privacy. 

 

Madam Minister, do you support this $9,500 grant to Mr. 

Leffler, and do you think Saskatchewan taxpayers should be 

paying for the type of defamatory artwork that he is doing?  If 

not, will you rescind the funding and find some better use for 

the money? 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for that question.  I think it's important to put on the 

record the status of the Saskatchewan Arts Board.  The Arts 

Board is an arm's-length agency that works independently of 

any political interference of the government.  Their policy has 

been for many years established, that they provide grants 

through a juried, peer-selection committee.  That means that 

they select peers of artists who review the applications, decide 

the merit of those applications, and award grants on the merit 

and on the size of that application. 

 

So the government does not interfere, it has never interfered, in 

the application of the funds for the Arts Board grants; we don't 

intend to do it now.  In regard to the, I suppose you would call 

it the appropriateness of this grant, I think we all have our 

personal opinions about whether this was appropriate or not; 

I'm not going to respond to that. 

 

I'm going to tell you that the process that has been in place for 

the last 50 years by the Arts Board is being followed and we do 

not intend to interfere in that process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll go to the 

Premier with the next question, because the minister doesn't 

seem to get it. 

 

Mr. Premier, we recently brought up the case of Vicki Lissel in 

this House.  She's got hepatitis C.  It takes about $7,500 a year 

for that individual to continue living.  Your government as yet, 

Mr. Premier, hasn't come up with $7,500 for Vicki.  But you do 

have $9,500 to support artwork that defames and infringes on 

the privacy of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Your minister, your friend, the Minister of Justice, tells us 

about priorities.  And he says, there is law and then there's 

justice.  Well, Mr. Premier, I ask you: will you see that justice 

is done and that this grant to that individual be removed so that 

people in our society, like Vicki Lissel, who need funding from 

your government, will get the priorities they need, and not this 

kind of individual who's getting money from your government?  

Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I explained the process that 

the Arts Board goes through in the awarding of their grants to 

applications. 

 

I will though say to the member opposite that we also are 

concerned.  I will ask the Arts Board to give a full and 

complete report to me about this application, and we will 

review the process to make sure that all people who receive 

grants from the Arts Board are given the best due process that 

we have as far as juried peer selection.  But also that we do 

make sure that the taxpayers' money is being spent 

appropriately. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 91 -- Independent Commission on MLA 

Remuneration 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

with a sense of irony that I rise today on the 70th sitting day of 

this legislative session, to move a motion urging the 

government to put in place the structure for an independent 

commission on MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

remuneration. 

 

As members of this Assembly know, the 70th day is the day on 

which their daily per diems or showing-up-for-work bonus 

expires.  That is the per diems expire for all members of this 

House but one, Mr. Speaker, the seconder of my motion today, 

who is the member for Regina North West, who has refused to 

collect the per diems since her first day in this legislature. 

 

Until such a time as an independent commission on MLA 

remuneration has been struck and a more sensible and equitable 

reimbursement system is established, this per diem payment 

structure is only one quirk in the system through which we 

disburse taxpayers' money to ourselves.  It is only one reason 

that I and my caucus believe that an independent commission . . 

. it is only one reason -- pardon me -- that I and my caucus 

believe that we require an independent commission on MLA 

pay and allowances, and that this must be charged with the task 

of reviewing all of these expenditures and determining what is 

fair and what is equitable to all of the people concerned. 

 

I made my position known on the first meeting of the Board of 

Internal Economy that was held on January 6 of this year.  At 

that meeting the concept of an independent commission into 

MLA remuneration was discussed and the following motion 

was proposed, and I quote directly, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 That the Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, the Leader of the Opposition, and 

the Leader of the (Third) . . . Party, report to the next meeting 

of the Board with, but not limited to: (the following) terms of 

reference, membership, and budget for an independent 

commission on MLA compensation and payments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the board unanimously passed that motion.  And I 

left the meeting feeling a sense of urgency to prepare for the 

upcoming meeting with the minister and with the Leader of the 

Opposition.  I endeavoured to prepare some background 

information on what other jurisdictions had done regarding 

similar commissions. 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

From Alberta I obtained a copy of Bill 322, Members of the 

Legislative Assembly Salaries, Allowances, and Expenses 

Review Act, that was debated during the fourth session of the 

twenty-second Alberta legislature.  From Manitoba I obtained a 

copy of Bill 55, the Legislative Assembly Amendment and 

Consequential Amendments Act, which was assented to on 

January 27 of 1993 . . . pardon me, it was July 27 of 1993, by 

the Manitoba legislature. 

 

And I researched The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act for Saskatchewan to see what already existed to 

empower the type of committee that the Board of Internal 

Economy members had in mind.  What I found is that there 

exists in The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

a provision for the government to empower a committee to 

examine MLA pay.  The provision, which is found in section 

67.1(1) reads as follows, and I will quote directly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

 

 Subject to subsection (2), the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

may appoint a committee consisting of not more than five 

individuals, each of whom is not a member, for the purposes 

of reviewing and of making reports respecting the amount of 

allowances, disbursements and other payments described in 

sections 41, 42, 43 and 60 to 63 of this Act and subsections 

8(1) and (2) and 11(1) of The Government Organization Act. 

 

Before I go on further, the sections of the Act mentioned cover 

the following aspects of payments that would be subject to 

review by this special committee . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

sections of the Act mentioned cover the following aspects of 

payments that would be subject to the review of this special 

committee . . .  

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I do know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not 

a topic close to the heart and soul of all the people on per diems 

in the legislature, but we will try again. 

 

The following aspects of the payments that would be subject to 

review by the special committee, as outlined in the provision of 

67.1: section 41 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act specifies the annual indemnity of each member 

and for each northern member; sections 42 and 43 contain the 

amount to be paid for the sessional allowance; section 60 

specifies the allowance to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker; 

section 61 specifies allowance to whips; 62 specifies 

allowances to the leaders, or leaders of the opposition; and 

section 63 specifies the allowance and grant to the Leader of 

the Third Party. 

 

Sections 8(1) and (2) of The Government 

Organization Act specify the salary of each minister and the 

Premier, and section 11(1) specifies the salary to be paid to the 

legislative secretaries. 

 

Now these are the powers that can be granted, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to a committee under subsection (1) of section 67.1 of 

this Act, provided, according to subsection (2), that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council shall not appoint a person to 

the committee without prior approval of the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

The powers of this committee are further defined, and they're 

further defined in subsection (3), which reads, and I quote: 

 

 On or before July 1, 1988, and thereafter as required by 

resolution of the Assembly, the committee shall submit a 

report to the Speaker as chairman of the Board of Internal 

Economy recommending the following: 

 

  (a) the amount of; 

 

  (b) the manner of payment of; 

 

  (c) the manner of adjusting from time to time; and 

 

  (d) any other matter or thing that the committee considers 

relevant respecting; 

 

 allowances, disbursements and other payments. 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in section 67.1(4): 

 

 The Board of Internal Economy shall review every report 

submitted pursuant to subsection (3) and may issue 

directives: 

 

Directives that include: 

 

 (a) approving the report; 

 

 (b) rejecting the report; or 

 

 (c) varying the report so as to reduce the recommended level 

of allowances, disbursements or other payments. 

 

This then, sir, is the existing framework within which we have 

to work when considering the formation of a commission to 

review MLA pay.  The statutory framework, I believe, does not 

go far enough -- far enough -- so what I've done is to draw up 

an additional list of areas that need examination if we are to 

demonstrate a real commitment to reforming the underlying 

principles of MLA pay and benefits. 

 

The mandate of the commission must include an examination 

of all allowances under section 50 of The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act.  It is in section 50 that we find the 

authority, the authority for all payments, for per diems, for 

travel, for telephone expenses, constituency office and 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

secretarial expenses, communication expenses, and committee 

expenses. 

 

Another important aspect of this section, section 50, that I want 

the independent commission to review deals with caucus 

allowances -- caucus allowances for office staff, for general 

expenses, secretarial expenses, and research expenses.  I 

believe that not only must the amount of these allowances be 

reviewed but the guidelines for their use must come under more 

specific scrutiny. 

 

Now a recent example of this, which raised my concern even 

further, was brought to my attention, and it underlines my 

concern about the rationale for certain expenses by caucus 

offices, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That example is a document on 

Saskatchewan New Democratic caucus letterhead, addressed 

to:  Dear Constituency of Greystone Resident, dated April of 

1994.  The document is concerning the amendments to The 

Labour Standards Act that are currently before this House in 

the form of Bill 32. 

 

Attached to the letter from the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

caucus is a publication titled, and I quote: "Important News for 

Saskatchewan Workers and Employers." 

 

This publication, interestingly enough, is produced by the 

Department of Labour and contains a mail-in coupon which 

one can complete and send to the Department of Labour in 

order to receive more information on this legislation. 

 

The constituents who brought this letter and its attachments to 

my attention, wanted to know why the NDP caucus was taking 

responsibility for circulating government material.  Has the 

Department of Labour had its communications budget cut -- cut 

back so much that they must now rely upon the NDP caucus to 

do their promotion? 

 

My constituents also asked whether the Department of Labour 

would have been asked to subsidize the cost of this mail-out by 

the NDP caucus, and were all residents in Saskatchewan sent 

this material by the NDP caucus. 

 

I think that those are fair questions that I've been unable to 

answer for my constituents who have brought this to my 

attention. 

 

If my constituency is being targeted for this kind of mail-out of 

government propaganda, and I think it very clear that NDP 

caucus funds are being used for partisan political purposes, but 

what can we in this Assembly do about it?  Well if the recent 

debacle over partisan communication allowance expenditures 

by certain members of this Assembly are any indication, we 

can do absolutely nothing. 

 

This is an unacceptable situation and it must be addressed.  

And we believe that it should be addressed by an independent 

commission as part of its mandate.  The only way to remove 

these uncertainties 

surrounding the payments of members, of ministers, of the 

caucuses, is for immediate amendments to The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act -- amendments that will 

allow the expanded type of committee that I've proposed, 

followed by the immediate formation of an independent 

commission. 

 

I've done my homework on this issue and I am prepared to 

meet today with the Leader of the Opposition and with the 

minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation), just as I have been prepared, and I understand 

that the Leader of the Opposition has been prepared, since 

January 6 of this year. 

 

I think that the time has come to stop talking about this 

commission and that what we need to do is to get on with the 

job.  To that end, I move the following motion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, seconded by the member for Regina North West: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to demonstrate its 

commitment to the formation of an independent commission 

on MLA remuneration by directing the government minister 

responsible for the Board of Internal Economy to call a 

meeting with the Leader of the Official Opposition and the 

Leader of the Third Party, as he committed to on January 6 

and March 3 of this year, 1994. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

second the motion by the member for Saskatoon Greystone 

calling for a meeting by the three party representatives to 

determine the mandate for an independent commission into 

MLA remuneration. 

 

During the recent by-election campaign in Regina North West, 

I made a promise to my soon-to-be constituents, a promise that 

I would not collect the $94 per diem.  I want to read into the 

record today the following letter, which I sent to the Clerk of 

this Assembly, dated February 24 of this year. 

 

 I am returning the form, solemn declaration regarding 

attendance, covering the period February 7 to 18, 1994.  You 

will note that I have not signed this form, as I will not be 

claiming the $94 per diem to which members of the 

Legislative Assembly are currently entitled. 

 

 During my recent election campaign in Regina North West, I 

stated publicly that I would not accept this form of payment.  

I understand that the Board of Internal Economy will soon be 

empowering a commission to examine all aspects of pay and 

reimbursements for MLAs.  Until such time as this 

commission has made recommendations to the Assembly on 

this issue and those recommendations have been adopted, I 

do not wish to receive any more declarations. 

 

 Thank you for your assistance in this matter. 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge, no other member of this 

Assembly has chosen to forego this allowance.  The reason my 

constituents were offended by this particular allowance to 

Regina MLAs is that it does not reflect any real increase of 

expenses on the part of those members.  However, as the latest 

Public Accounts reveals, no other Regina MLA has chosen to 

forego the $94 per day sessional payment. 

 

(1430) 

 

The MLAs for Regina Albert North, Regina Rosemont, and 

Regina Churchill Downs -- all three of whom have tried to 

impress us all with their heartfelt concerns for ordinary 

working people -- all three of these members will, as of today, 

collect $6,580 in per diems just for showing up for work. 

 

They merely drove to work, like they supposedly did every 

other working day of the year; they probably bought their lunch 

or dinner as they would have had to any other working day of 

the year.  Yet they collected over $6,500 for exerting this 

minimal effort. 

 

They are not alone, Mr. Speaker, however, because the other 

Regina MLAs have happily collected their bonus.  The MLAs 

for Regina Lake Centre, Regina Wascana Plains, Regina Albert 

South, Regina Hillsdale, Regina Dewdney, and Regina Victoria 

have all in the past claimed their full per diems during the 

sessions.  The member from Estevan has also collected $155 

per day per diem for his rural constituency while living for the 

past 10 years in Regina. 

 

I would be interested to know on what basis these MLAs think 

they deserve this payment.  How does this group of Regina 

MLAs rationalize to their constituents the collection of over 

$59,000 in per diems among . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member for Regina North 

West places the Chair in a difficult position because the 

member for Regina North West chooses to involve the Deputy 

Speaker in her remarks, yet it's difficult for those who occupy 

the Chair to respond to someone.  And therefore the member 

for Regina North West should be cognizant of the rulings that 

have been made over time and the contents of Beauchesne's 

which suggest that members ought not to involve those in the 

Chair in their debates. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

apologize for that inclusion. 

 

I am not aware that any of these members has had to incur the 

expense of setting up a second residence in order to attend the 

legislature.  How then can they justify collecting this perk?  I 

could not justify it, which is why I chose not to collect it. 

 

Another point that the member for Saskatoon Greystone just 

told this House was that our caucus conducted research into the 

commissions into MLA remuneration that have been proposed 

elsewhere in Canada.  We also obtained from the Manitoba 

government a copy of the Report of the Indemnities 

and Allowances Commission, dated March 1994, the most 

recent commission of its kind. 

 

I think it is important to share with all members of the 

Assembly some of the findings of that commission.  To 

illustrate the degree of importance with which the public views 

this issue, the Manitoba commission received more than 1,200 

submissions during the public hearings held last fall.  In a 

section entitled, The Public Viewpoint, the commission's final 

report contains the following paragraphs, quote: 

 

 There is much public dissatisfaction regarding the current 

system of MLA indemnities and allowances.  The tax-free 

allowance, the car allowance, and the level and accessibility 

of pension benefits were all seen by the public as unfair 

provisions in the current system. 

 

The report continues on: 

 

 Commentary on pay levels of MLAs, ministers, and the 

Premier often focused on the adequacy of the level of service 

provided by elected officials, rather than on the 

responsibilities of the positions themselves.  There is public 

confusion surrounding the actual level of MLA remuneration 

due to the number of allowances and their varying tax status. 

 

Chairman of the Manitoba Indemnities and Allowances 

Commission, Mr. Wally Fox-Decent, said that: 

 

 Manitobans spoke loudly and angrily about MLA pay and 

pensions, often expressing the general view that elected 

officials should not receive benefits that ordinary taxpayers 

do not get.  "We were told this tax-free business is not on," 

Mr. Fox-Decent said.  "And so we are the first jurisdiction in 

Canada to abolish the tax-free allowance." 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I support this motion because I believe, 

know, and understand that it has the support of people across 

this province.  The tax-paying, voting, hard-working people 

who keep Saskatchewan moving, all too often find their wallets 

at the mercy of politics. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, why do the people of Saskatchewan support 

a motion to set up an independent commission to review MLA 

salaries?  The answer is obvious.  One does not have to look far 

at all to find out why people across this province support this 

motion. 

 

The reason why people support it is so obvious it underlines 

just how out of touch . . . and how little concern this 

government holds for the feelings of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  If this government would begin to ask itself 

what people think, it might begin to truly represent the people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want an 

independent commission to review MLA 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

salaries for several reasons.  They want the commission 

because they suffered from 10 long years of recession, drought, 

collapsing prices, economic restructuring, Tory 

mismanagement at both federal and provincial levels, and more 

recently they have suffered from high tax loads by this 

government. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have indeed suffered, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  The people of this province suffer, and they do so 

patiently because they're an optimistic people who believe 

tomorrow will be brighter than today.  They know the day will 

soon come when Saskatchewan has a government that listens 

and responds to their needs and concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people in this province suffered under the 

weight of hard times, and most believe politicians have not.  

They're right in believing this, Mr. Speaker.  They believe 

politicians have not suffered because they can set their own 

salaries and benefits.  While the government may have claimed 

to have taken cuts, these are far less than what the farmer in 

rural Saskatchewan has experienced, or what the welfare 

recipient who once had work must deal with. 

 

While benefits have been frozen until the budget is balanced, 

politicians are still a privileged lot.  Elected officials are here to 

represent the people of Saskatchewan.  On this issue, this 

Assembly does not even try to represent the people.  As 

representatives of the people we should emulate them and lead 

them.  While the good people of this province are suffering 

economically, losing work, facing hardships that harm their 

lives and their families, politicians -- that's us -- give 

themselves raises and severances in the 1980s.  They did this as 

though it didn't matter to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

While the gravy train may not be getting more generous, we do 

need to lead by example.  This problem can be changed by 

placing the decision-making power over the benefits in the 

hands of the public, in the hands of an independent commission 

where it rightfully belongs, where the public believes it should 

belong. 

 

Saskatchewan people also support this resolution because they 

believe in accountability.  The government tells them there is 

accountability and then turns and tells them that they, the 

politicians, will set the salaries and benefits.  Where else except 

in political life can employees set their own salaries?  Salaries, 

benefits, should always be set by others, and someone should 

be held accountable for the decisions made.  Not so in politics, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan support this 

resolution because they are just plain tired of politics and 

politicians.  They're offended by people who promise one thing 

and then go off and do another.  They're weary and suspicious 

of elected office holders who greet them with a warm smile and 

a handshake, call them by their first name, and then forget who 

sent them to sit in this House, and who it is who pays the bills.  

Nowhere is this more true than when it comes to salaries and 

benefits. 

Mr. Speaker, this reminds me of a candidate for office who one 

time went on and on to a constituent about all the patronage 

waste and deceit in political life.  The constituent turned to the 

candidate and asked, well what are you going to do to stop it?  

The candidate sharply replied, stop it?  Well no, I want to get in 

on it. 

 

This motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will do much to get rid of 

the politics of those who want to shower themselves with perks 

and benefits.  Mr. Speaker, people have little regard for politics 

and little regard for politicians because they do not feel that 

they as a people are part of the legislative process.  They feel 

even less welcome in the governing process. 

 

They look at what goes on in the papers, and on television, and 

they see a closed clique of people that can afford to live in 

extravagant houses and collect money just for showing up to 

work.  This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what the heart and soul of 

our population considers normal . . . it isn't what they consider 

normal. 

 

The average Saskatchewan resident would feel a lot better 

about institutions like the legislature, about our government and 

our democratic process, if they were welcomed to take a more 

active part.  They would be less cynical about bad decisions if 

they were consulted more often and in a more meaningful way. 

 

Everyone will accept tough decisions, even wrong decisions if 

they played some role in making them.  We can tell this just 

from looking at the members opposite on the government side.  

At times they make questionable decisions and sometimes 

wrong decisions, but they accept them and even defend them to 

the end because they somehow feel part of the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is all people want.  As Wilfred Laurier used 

to say to the British, if you want our help or our money, invite 

us to your councils; let us have a say. 

 

We in this province could take a significant step forward to 

letting people into the system by supporting the creation of an 

independent commission to decide how our politicians are paid. 

By having citizens -- ordinary citizens -- invited to sit on a 

commission, politicians would be on the road to regaining 

public respect lost over the many years of scandal and 

cynicism. 

 

Politicians could likewise go to sleep at night knowing when 

they picked up their cheque they were paid for a hard day's 

work, paid what they deserve and nothing more.  They could 

live with the comfort that they lived up to one of the standards 

and principles that has made our economy productive; our 

province and our country, one of those envied in the world. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I urge the members opposite to 

support this resolution.  Let the people in.  Make them once 

again part of the legislative and governing process. 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2389 

The pay of MLAs is a fundamental issue.  Certainly it does not 

account for much of the overall government spending, but it 

has a significance well beyond dollars and cents.  When dealing 

with this issue the members opposite must realize that they are 

dealing with something much more valuable.  They are dealing 

with the principles of honesty, fairness, and openness.  These 

are at the heart of democracy, the heart of this province, and 

our country.  Should we ignore these, we will certainly falter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I repeat that I am pleased to second the 

motion by the member for Saskatoon Greystone today.  I trust 

that in the dying days of this legislature, the members of this 

House have not lost their will to reforming the payment system 

and that the member for Prince Albert Northcote will commit 

to calling a meeting of the three parties, as he has said he would 

four and one-half months ago. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this debate 

do now adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Resolution No. 28 -- Accountability of Crown Corporations 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. McPherson and the amendment thereto 

moved by Ms. Lorje. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 36 -- Commendation of Farm Support 

Review Committee 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. Flavel and the amendment thereto moved by 

Mr. Neudorf. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:47 p.m. until 2:54 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Britton Muirhead 

D'Autremont Devine Goohsen 

Martens McPherson Boyd 

Bergman Toth  

-- 11 

Nays 

 

Thompson Murray Lingenfelter 

Hamilton Anguish Trew 

Teichrob Draper Johnson 

Serby Goulet Sonntag 

Atkinson Flavel Carson 

Roy MacKinnon Cline 

Penner Scott Cunningham 

Crofford Upshall  Wormsbecker 

Bradley Stanger Koenker 

Knezacek Lorje Harper 

Lyons Keeping Lautermilch 

Carlson Renaud Langford 

-- 36 

 

The division bells rang from 2:58 p.m. until 3:26 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Thompson Draper Lingenfelter 

Serby Teichrob Flavel 

Goulet Roy Atkinson 

Cline Carlson Scott 

Penner Crofford Cunningham 

Stanger Upshall Knezacek 

Bradley Harper Murray 

Keeping Hamilton Carlson 

Trew Langford  

-- 26 

Nays 

 

Swenson Toth Muirhead 

Britton Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen Boyd 

-- 9 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much.  I'd like to introduce 

to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to the rest of the Assembly 

my oldest son, Bob, in the west gallery, and my brother, Ron.  I 

just ask all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 

and through you to all the members 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

of the House a former constituent of mine, Mr. Lonnie Sowa, 

who's seated up in your west gallery.  Lonnie is the RM (rural 

municipality) secretary for the RM of Bayne 371 with its head 

office . . . with the office at Bruno. 

 

Lonnie is down here in Regina today as part of the RM 

secretaries' convention.  And Lonnie is, as I said, a former 

constituent of mine, having been born and raised in Hyas, 

Saskatchewan, where his parents, Harry and Sonya, who are 

very good friends of mine, still carry on a very active and 

prosperous farming operation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'll ask all the members to offer Lonnie a 

warm welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Resolution No. 44 -- Integrity of the Justice System 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. Toth. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Before I get 

into my remarks, or short remarks on this, it was a few years 

ago when I could remember seeing faces in the gallery and I'd 

like to welcome the administrator from the RM of Bayne in my 

constituency as well, along with the member for Canora.  I 

normally borrow some glasses to look up into the gallery . . . 

galley, rather. 

 

Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Mr. Speaker, I have read the resolution 

very carefully and I want to say that this government in the last 

two and a half years have had to make very many tough 

decisions, but I believe that every one of those decisions was a 

law-abiding decision based on the fact that the government 

makes laws, amends laws, and the fact that the tough decisions 

had to be made fairly.  And I think in every instance they were 

made very fairly within the context of the legislation and the 

amendments that we put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that no person or no government 

is above the law and I think this government has proven that in 

the decisions that they have made to date.  And I just wanted to 

make those short comments and now I would like to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 59 -- The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 

Amendments 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. McPherson and the amendment thereto 

moved by Mr. Upshall. 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 66 -- Reduction of Number of Cabinet 

Ministers 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. Swenson and the amendment thereto moved 

by Ms. Hamilton. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

Resolution No. 80 -- Health District Board Elections 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. Martens and the amendment thereto moved 

by Mr. Cline. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

Resolution No. 86 -- Government's Gambling Strategy 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Ms. Haverstock. 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Swenson that Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Legislative 

Utilities Review Committee) be now read a second time. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:36 p.m. until 4:06 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Britton Martens 

D'Autremont Boyd Goohsen 

Toth   

 -- 7 

Nays 

 

Romanow Murray Van Mulligen 

Trew Lingenfelter Serby 

Teichrob Sonntag Johnson 

Flavel Goulet Cline 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

 

Atkinson Scott Carson 

Crofford MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Stanger Upshall 

Knezacek Lorje Keeping 

Pringle Carlson Renaud 

Langford   

-- 28 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to all hon. members.  It gives me great pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly 31 grade 8 students from Alvin 

Buckwold, in my home in Saskatoon.  It's good to see you here.  

This is the second year in a row that the group has come to 

visit.  And Alvin Buckwold is just a half a block from our 

place.  Our two sons went to Alvin Buckwold, and I had the 

pleasure of sharing the day care centre there for three years, 

and it's still there and functioning very well. 

 

And it's my pleasure to introduce, along with the students, Mr. 

Joorisity, Mr. Semko, the principal; chaperons, Mrs. Butcher, 

Mr. Smith-Jones, Mrs. Cammidge, Mrs. Spratt -- I hope these 

people are all there -- and bus driver, Mr. Wallace. 

 

And we'll be meeting in a few minutes for pictures and drinks, 

and I look forward to having a chat with some people from 

home.  So I invite all members to help me in welcoming the 

Alvin Buckwold School to the Assembly.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Swenson that Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Four Year 

Term) be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to say a few words about this Bill.  I find it a little bit 

hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite would 

table legislation that would look at four-year fixed terms for 

government when in fact it wasn't very long ago when the 

members opposite were government, and went a full five years 

plus a day.  Mr. Speaker, that doesn't really . . . it's not in sync 

with what this motion says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would remind the House as well, and the 

members opposite, that before that time elections were held 

basically every four years.  It was right around the four-year 

mark, was a tradition in this province for Houses to rise and 

have an election about the fourth year. 

 

So this legislation coming now from members in opposition 

who abused that tradition when they were government, is very 

hypocritical . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, 

the member opposite would like to get into the debate.  And I 

must have hit a little nerve, because that is true and he knows 

it's true. 

 

So the truth is, Mr. Speaker, that five years is far beyond, far 

beyond what the norm in this province was. And I would 

encourage the members, I would encourage the members 

opposite if they were to ever, if they were to ever be 

government in this province again -- heaven forbid -- then the 

first thing they should do to save us all some grief, is to put 

forward a motion or a resolution . . . legislation rather, that 

would fix a four-year term. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the debate do 

now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:12 until 4:23 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Lingenfelter Murray Teichrob 

Trew Johnson Serby 

Goulet Flavel Atkinson 

Scott MacKinnon Crofford 

Cunningham Stanger Upshall 

Knezacek Hagel Keeping 

Koenker Carlson Calvert 

Langford Renaud  

-- 23 

Nays 

 

Swenson D'Autremont Martens 

Goohsen Boyd Haverstock 

Toth Bergman Britton 

-- 9 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (Free Votes) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me pleasure to rise in the Assembly 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

today and talk about another one of the Bills put forward as 

part of a package of democratic reform by the official 

opposition over the course of this session. 

 

And the Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, the one that we're 

discussing, is the idea that free votes in this Assembly should 

be used far more than what they are at present.  In fact to my 

recollection, Mr. Speaker, that has almost been nil in the nine 

years that I've sat here. 

 

And it was one of the things that when I was in government, 

that I had a lot of people talk to me about, Mr. Speaker.  They 

felt that there were a lot of things that MLAs should be able to 

deal with in a less confrontational manner than what we have 

been able to do under our present system and rules. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of very 

contentious issues arise in this province over the last decade.  I 

think of the agricultural situation; I think of the questions 

surrounding Crown corporations and whether they should be 

private or public -- issues which have been widely talked about 

and thought about by members of the public. 

 

We in this institution, Mr. Speaker, tend to get very isolated at 

times, I think, from reality.  And one of the reasons that we get 

isolated is because the party system in Canada has become very 

strong.  The idea that prime ministers and premiers, that 

cabinets, can pretty well dictate the agenda of the elected 

bodies in our country, is something that people are increasingly 

becoming uncomfortable with. 

 

So what we have done, Mr. Speaker, with this particular Bill, is 

bring the issue to the floor of the Assembly so that members 

can debate this and show the public that they aren't afraid of 

representing their constituents on a 

constituency-by-constituency basis. 

 

My study and look at Canadian parliamentary history, Mr. 

Speaker, tells me that until very recent times there was a lot 

more latitude for individual members to represent their 

constituents in our elected Houses.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if 

you look at the example of Great Britain which is the 

parliament that we model ourselves after, we see all sorts of 

situations where that particular parliament has evolved to the 

place where members quite often speak out against their own 

party, against their own Prime Minister, their own cabinet, and 

they do so without the repercussions which appear to happen in 

the Canadian system. 

 

And I would remind all members of what has taken place in our 

own House this session, now that the member from Shaunavon 

has moved from the government benches over to the Liberal 

Party.  And every time that an issue arises where the member 

from Shaunavon maybe had material which he received when a 

member of the government benches, there's quite a foofaraw in 

here and lots of activity. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in the British House that 

event isn't uncommon, not uncommon at all.  And the fact that 

a member may disagree with his party on a number of issues 

doesn't mean that that 

member should be ostracized.  We have this idea that has 

developed in Canada over the last number of years that caucus 

is the only place where you voice dissent, where you argue. 

 

The problem with caucuses, Mr. Speaker, is that they're not 

public, you're not accountable in any way for what you say in 

there, that you can take a stand on an issue and then you can 

change your mind a few weeks later; and in that forum you are 

all members of the same party who may be ideologically the 

same and you represent nowhere close to a majority of the 

population. 

 

And that happens in Canadian parliamentary systems all the 

time, where we see parties attaining power with 30-some per 

cent of the vote.  And then they would say that that particular 

caucus has got all of the answers on issues.  And I think it's 

time in our parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker, that we grew up 

a little bit. 

 

If Great Britain, the very people who defined and developed 

parliamentary democracy for the world, have the ability to have 

government members regularly voting against their own Prime 

Minister, their own cabinet, their own party, on issues, then for 

goodness sakes, places like the Saskatchewan legislature and 

the Canadian parliament should also have the self-confidence 

and the latitude to do likewise. 

 

(1630) 

 

I remember a very contentious debate in the British House on a 

defence issue where Margaret Thatcher, the then prime minister 

of Great Britain and considered at that time one of the most 

powerful leaders in the western world -- this was shortly after 

the Falklands war -- lost a major defence vote on the purchase 

of equipment because many of her own back-benchers would 

not support her. 

 

And what was the repercussions of that, Mr. Speaker?  They 

didn't buy the equipment.  No one was ostracized, no one was 

thrown out of the party, no one was shoved aside because they 

stood up and expressed a belief on behalf of the people that 

elected them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, is that not what we are sent here for?  Are 

we not elected by constituencies, by people, not political 

parties?  That's the process, Mr. Speaker, that we operate under.  

I was elected by the constituents of Thunder Creek, not by the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan chose me 

to be their candidate to seek election, but the people elected me.  

A member across the way says, when did I start thinking like 

this?  I started thinking like this many, many years ago.  And 

my experiences in government . . . my experiences in 

government taught me that there has to be better ways.  Just as 

the experiences when you people were in government in the 

1970s should have taught you a lesson or two.  But it didn't 

obviously, because I see the same old garbage 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

and mistakes made in the 1990s that I saw in the 1970s, 

because no one in the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan 

or Canada woke up to the fact that the people are dissatisfied 

with the existing system. 

 

So that's why we have things like the family of Crown 

corporations forging ahead because might is right.  And now 

that some of these fine members here who ran on a package of 

democratic reform while in opposition now sit in the treasury 

benches, they don't like these initiatives any more. 

 

I mean we just had the member from Humboldt want to adjourn 

debate on the concept of four-year terms.  And yet I looked at 

the pamphlet of the New Democratic Party in the last election 

and there it was in bold headlines -- bold headlines, Mr. 

Speaker -- elect us and we'll change.  Have they changed?  No.  

They don't want to even bring it to a vote in this House. 

 

They don't want to have to stand in their place on behalf of the 

constituents that elected them because they're afraid of the 

party they represent.  And that's the problem.  That's the 

cynicism that is so ripe in the public today, Mr. Speaker.  There 

is some sin for me to stand in this House today and talk about 

the concept of free votes, that I shouldn't have that right, that I 

shouldn't express that belief. 

 

The member from Saskatoon says, when did you change?  How 

does she know that I ever changed.  Maybe I've always felt this 

way.  But it's time, Mr. Speaker, as I do now, to have a position 

of leadership, to express those views -- express those views 

because they are the views of the majority of people, I believe, 

in this province today. 

 

And I would challenge all members of this House no matter 

what party they belong to, to walk down the streets of their 

community and ask people what their views are on party 

solidarity, on always having to vote the party line.  Ask people 

in your communities if they feel that brings about the best 

legislation.  And they will tell you, they will tell you time and 

time again that that doesn't, that they are tired of the old 

politics, the old system. 

 

I bring this Bill before the House and my party brings it before 

my caucus not because we expect it to pass -- that simply will 

never happen in this term of government -- but it is something 

that we should not be afraid to discuss.  What would be wrong 

with speaking on the issue, one by one, on behalf of your 

constituents and at least bring it to a second reading vote?  

What would be the harm in it?  Why the fear?  There should be 

no fear because you simply are representing the people that 

sent you here. 

 

There isn't a member in this House that has not had a problem 

with standing and voting on an issue because they were ordered 

to.  I've had that problem.  It is not a comfortable position to be 

in.  It is not a comfortable position.  And it is incumbent upon 

us to design a system that doesn't turn us into an Italy where we 

would have a new government every few months, but 

allows the members of this House to vote on issues, on an 

issue-by-issue basis, and not have the government fall.  

Governments elected by majority should have the right to 

govern.  That is a concept that is fundamental to the British 

parliamentary system. 

 

But there are issues of importance and they should be ranked, 

as they are in the British parliament; that it should allow 

members to cross party lines because they would be 

fundamentally good decisions on behalf of the people we 

represent and the taxpayers that we represent.  Because often 

the decisions arrived at by cabinet and by caucus will have 

more political ramification to them than they will the 

well-being of the people.  And that occurred in my caucus 

when I was in government and it occurs in the caucus of the 

New Democratic Party now, and it occurred in the caucus of 

the Liberal Party in the 1960s. 

 

And that is the challenge.  That is why members should not be 

afraid to stand and debate the issue.  Members should not be 

afraid to design a mechanism that allows those types of votes 

on certain issues without the government falling, without the 

government falling. 

 

The budget, Mr. Speaker, of a government is the foundation of 

that government.  That is the principle that we've always 

subscribed to and that should be protected -- that should be 

protected.  And that's why, Mr. Speaker, as members, we come 

in here and we go through the estimates so that there is 

grievance before supply.  And if a government were defeated 

on their budget, then they should fall. 

 

But you and I both know, Mr. Speaker, there have been many 

issues come before this House.  There are moral issues.  There 

are social issues.  There are issues that I don't believe a 

government should fall on if that initiative comes to a halt 

because this House has some displeasure with the way that it is 

brought forward. 

 

And that is right and proper.  And there should be no stigma 

attached, Mr. Speaker, there should be no fear attached.  And 

that's the problem that we have to overcome in this House, that 

political parties are going to have to overcome.  Because 

political parties, I believe, Mr. Speaker, will not continue to 

survive in their present form if they do not change. 

 

There isn't a person in urban Saskatchewan today that doesn't 

have access to American cable television.  Now I grant you, 

Mr. Speaker, the American system is far different than ours -- 

far different.  But people sit there and they watch confirmation 

hearings of major public officials.  They see Democrats and 

Republicans voting together on many Bills and issues.  They 

see all sorts of things going on which they then turn around and 

ask their elected representatives about.  And they say, why are 

we not taking the best of all systems and putting them to work?  

Why do we fear, why do we fear, Mr. Speaker, even talking 

about it? 

 

And it's obvious from the reaction of the government members 

that they fear the issue.  Are New Democrats so hidebound, are 

they so controlled by special 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1994 

interest groups that they fear this type of discussion?  It makes 

me wonder, Mr. Speaker.  It makes me really wonder. 

 

If they are so afraid of the people that control the party side of 

the New Democratic Party that they would take that into 

consideration over the people that they are duly sworn to serve 

-- the people that elected them. 

 

And the same goes, Mr. Speaker, for members of my party.  

And my party has special interest groups, the same as everyone 

else does.  And how you handle and address those special 

interest groups, Mr. Speaker, I believe would be best done in 

this Assembly with the knowledge that you could freely speak 

and vote on issues without repercussion.  Because if you have 

the knowledge that at the end of the day your constituents will 

support you above all else then, Mr. Speaker, you have the 

entire freedom to do what needs to be done, because ultimately 

they are the most important people to you as an elected 

representative. 

 

So I find it very strange, Mr. Speaker, that members would not 

want to stand and debate a Bill like this.  Yes, sponsored by the 

official opposition this time; perhaps sponsored by the third 

party next time; perhaps sponsored by the government or a 

government back-bencher another time.  But I tell you what, 

Mr. Speaker, we had better start talking about it and let the 

public know that we aren't afraid of it before they turn on the 

political system in this province, in this country, and say a pox 

on all of you.  A pox on all of you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if I'm going to have one of the government 

members stand up and recite a long series of ills about 1982 to 

1991, then they will have learned nothing because the recourse, 

Mr. Speaker, is for someone on this side to stand up and 

recount a long series of ills from 1971 to 1982 and from 1991 

to 1994.  And at the end of the day what will we have solved?  

Absolutely nothing.  Will the cynicism go away?  No.  Will the 

people on Main Street, Saskatchewan quit asking the question 

about democratic reform and changing our system?  Will they 

quit asking those questions?  No, they won't quit asking those 

questions. 

 

Will their cynicism in the political system go away?  No.  Will 

the taxpayer be better served?  I don't think so, I don't think so 

at all.  The taxpayer will be better served when they know for 

sure that their elected representative will stand in this House 

and speak on their behalf on an issue without somebody telling 

them, no, you must be silent; or no, you must say this; or no, 

you must toe the party line.  That's when the taxpayer will be 

better served, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I say to the members of this House: let's have the maturity 

and the initiative to at least talk about it.  Let members say 

what's on their mind about free vote, and get it on the record as 

a starting point, Mr. Speaker, as a starting point for the future, 

as a starting point for the future. 

If the member from Cumberland, who's been talking from 

somebody else's seat for several minutes now, had used this 

approach in designing no-fault insurance rather than the one 

he's done, he'd be in a lot less hot water today, a lot less hot 

water today. 

 

Because what he is implementing today is a classic example of 

toeing the line.  And toeing it at all costs, toeing it at all costs.  

Because that minister's performance, Mr. Speaker, in this 

House -- that minister's performance in this House is a classic 

example of what people don't like, don't like about the political 

system.  And the minister knows it, the minister knows it. 

 

Those kind of issues, where you are talking about rate increases 

and serving the taxpayer, would be better dealt with, in my 

view, Mr. Speaker, removed from the political realm. 

 

The Minister of Finance is different.  The Minister of Finance 

has a budget to bring down and a game plan to follow, in a 

totally different category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue is no different than the committee 

structure being enhanced; utilities being discussed by members 

in this House in a format that allows them to have control of 

Crown corporations.  The issue of free votes, Mr. Speaker, is a 

direct, has a direct correlation to all of those issues.  And it is 

what the public expects of us. 

 

(1645) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to say any more on the issue, 

but I do say to all members of this House, regardless of where 

they sit, let's see if you've got the courage to stand up and say 

the things that you hear in your constituencies, on the main 

streets of your towns and villages and cities when people 

discuss this issue.  Let's see if you've got the courage to tell the 

truth in here, or simply talk the party line.  Let's see if you've 

got the courage to discuss the issue as it should be discussed -- 

on its merits -- the merits of free votes or the demerits of free 

votes. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, shortly we will find out if that 

courage exists to all parties and all members, or if they simply 

refuse to listen to the people of this province and the people of 

this country who, any pollster and anyone that is in touch with 

the public today, will tell you the issue is there, it's on, and we 

should discuss it. 

 

I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin, that Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act (Free Votes) now be read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I would move that this debate do 

now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:47 p.m. until 4:57 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 



May 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

Yeas 

 

Shillington Trew Teichrob 

Serby Carson Cline 

MacKinnon Scott Upshall 

Crofford Hagel Wormsbecker 

Pringle Stanger Calvert 

Carlson Murray  

-- 17 

Nays 

 

Swenson D'Autremont Martens 

Goohsen Boyd McPherson 

Toth Bergman Britton 

-- 9 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 


