




















































Hansard: February 07, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

 February 7, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that I have 

received a communication from the private secretary to Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 

open the fourth session of the twenty-second legislature at 2 

p.m. today, the 7th day of February, 1994. 

 

2:01 p.m. 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the fourth session of the 

twenty-second legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our province will mark two important anniversaries during 

1994.  June 6 will be the 50th anniversary of the D-Day 

invasion when Allied troops stormed the windswept beaches of 

Normandy, launching the deciding battle of World War II in 

Europe.  Of course, D-Day celebrations symbolize the final 

victory, but this battle was but a part of the whole. 

 

Nearly 75,000 Saskatchewan men and women served in the 

army, navy and air force during the Second World War.  They 

fought in the Battle of Britain, the Battle of the Atlantic, at 

Hong Kong, Dieppe, Sicily, Italy, and Holland. 

 

My government will join with veterans' organizations to mark 

this important anniversary and to honour those who fought to 

preserve democracy, so that we and generations yet to come 

could live as free men and women. 

 

1994 also marks the 50th anniversary of the election of Tommy 

Douglas and the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation -- North America's first social democratic 

government.  This historic election changed not only 

Saskatchewan, but ultimately shaped many important changes 

across Canada. 

 

The Douglas legacy is a deep commitment to economic and 

social justice and an unyielding faith in the power of 

community and cooperation to achieve them. 

 

A Journey of Renewal 

 

That faith has been tested and sustained over the last two years 

as the people of Saskatchewan have joined my government on 

a journey of renewal -- a renewal of our economy, renewal of 

the Saskatchewan spirit. 

 

The journey has often been difficult, with unprecedented 

challenges along the way, but Saskatchewan people have 

undertaken it together, and together, we have made great 

progress. 

Restoring Sound Financial Management 

 

The overriding problem which faced my government on the 

day it took office was the legacy of a decade of deficit 

spending.  Necessity demanded that the first priority be to 

restore confidence in the province's ability to manage its 

financial affairs. 

 

The results have been positive.  In a few days, this legislature 

will be presented with a budget which will confirm that the 

deficit for this year is $294 million.  That is a reduction of more 

than $1 billion from the projected deficit which faced my 

government when it took office.  The government remains on 

target to present a balanced budget in 1996 as promised. 

 

Important though this is for ourselves and for future 

generations, the government attaches even more importance to 

the way in which it is being accomplished -- by sharing the 

burden equitably and protecting those least able to sacrifice.  

My government reiterates its conviction that reducing the 

deficit is important not as an end in itself, but as only the means 

to move forward, to restore confidence, to create growth and 

jobs. 

 

Jobs and Economic Development 

 

The economic development strategy which my government 

introduced in 1992 -- Partnership for Renewal, has three key 

goals: to create a positive climate for economic renewal, to 

build on existing strengths, and to seek full employment. 

 

The partnership is working.  We continue to have the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country.  However, we must strive 

constantly to do more to create long-term employment 

opportunities for young people. 

 

My government will work with communities and development 

organizations to form a number of regional economic 

development authorities.  These regional authorities will help 

communities work together on economic planning, promotion 

and marketing. 

 

Pending final consultations with the tourism industry and 

communities, the tourism authority Act will be introduced to 

establish a joint industry-government tourism authority.  It will 

be responsible for developing and marketing Saskatchewan as a 

tourist destination. 

 

The trade development corporation Act will permit the 

establishment of a trade development organization to manage 

all provincial export marketing services. 

 

A new research and technology commercialization plan will 

support product and process development for international 

market opportunities. 

 

A new transportation policy council is developing a 

comprehensive transportation policy to ensure 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

competitive market access for Saskatchewan exports and to 

provide links to move products in and out of Saskatchewan. 

 

To replace the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation, now being wound down, the government will 

introduce the Saskatchewan opportunities corporation Act to 

establish a new corporation with a sharper focus and a 

better-defined mandate. 

 

Saskatchewan was one of the first provinces to join the 

federal-provincial infrastructure program, which will enable 

our governments, in partnership with our municipalities, to 

rebuild key elements of our public infrastructure.  These 

projects will provide jobs in urban, rural and northern 

communities. 

 

My government is determined that Saskatchewan benefit from 

the proposed Canadian network for the advancement of 

research, industry and education, what has been commonly 

called the "electronic highway" project. 

 

This project represents a massive expansion and upgrading of 

Canada's information technology.  This could mean more 

high-tech jobs for the future. 

 

An Information Technology and Telecommunications Strategy 

Committee is already at work, trying to maximize 

Saskatchewan benefits from this project.  The committee 

includes representation from private industry, the education 

field, and the provincial government.  Our province is likely to 

play an important role in this national effort because SaskTel's 

information technology network is already one of the best in 

Canada. 

 

In fact, SaskTel International is exporting our 

telecommunications expertise around the globe.  SaskTel 

engineers and technicians helped to design and install the 

communications system in the tunnel which will link the 

United Kingdom with France.  This export of expertise 

supports continuing research and development here at home 

and helps to maintain high-tech jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

After a rigorous environmental review, the Governments of 

Saskatchewan and Canada have given conditional approval for 

development of two new uranium mines in northern 

Saskatchewan.  This $250 million expansion of the uranium 

industry will play a significant role in northern economic 

development over the next four years. 

 

My government is determined that northern residents benefit 

from the development of new uranium mines.  In partnership 

with the federal government, industry, and northern educational 

institutions, my government will participate in a multi-party 

training plan which will train Northerners for at least 60 per 

cent of the permanent jobs created by this expansion. 

 

Agriculture 

 

Agriculture is a critical component of any economic 

development strategy for Saskatchewan.  My government has 

released Agriculture 2000 -- Strategic Direction for the Future 

of Saskatchewan's Agriculture and Food Industry.  The strategy 

is a vision for the future created by the people who have a stake 

in that future. 

 

Over the last decade, farm families have adapted to the need for 

change, often more quickly than governments or government 

policy.  Saskatchewan today is the world's largest producer of 

green lentils, mustard and canary seed.  The acres committed to 

these and other specialty crops have increased sevenfold in 

twelve years.  The production of cattle and hogs has increased 

to the point where livestock-related farm income in our 

province exceeds a billion dollars a year. 

 

My government will adapt its programs and services to support 

more diversity in Saskatchewan's agricultural production. 

 

An agri-food equity fund will be established to encourage new 

value-added agricultural businesses in Saskatchewan.  The 

potential here appears limitless.  Just one example is the recent 

announcement by Biostar, a Saskatoon-based biotechnology 

company, which plans to build an $8 million manufacturing 

plant in that city.  Eventually employing up to 40 people, the 

plant will manufacture vaccines for the livestock industry and 

export them worldwide. 

 

A beef industry development fund will be established to 

improve products and enhance markets for the beef industry.  

The beef industry requested that such a fund be established 

with the cooperation of the federal government, following the 

termination of the national cattle tripartite stabilization 

program.  This will meet industry needs while a whole-farm 

plan is being developed. 

 

The Saskatchewan Farm Support Review Committee has 

completed a report on safety net options.  The report provides a 

basis for the Government of Saskatchewan to negotiate with the 

federal government and other provinces on a national, 

whole-farm safety net program that better reflects the needs of 

the family farm. 

 

The Family 

 

Last year my government announced its intention to better 

focus on the needs of children and families with the 

introduction of the action plan for children. 

 

We have initiated a number of projects to address problems 

such as child hunger, family violence, and illiteracy.  These 

projects have grown out of innovative work done by 

community agencies and schools to meet the changing needs of 

children and families. 

 

The integral relationship between family well-being and 

community action is nowhere better illustrated than in the West 

Flat community of Prince Albert.  Initially there were three 

concerned citizens and their families.  They spoke to others, 

they involved groups, 



February 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

they organized.  Consensus led to action and the West Flat 

Citizens Group was formed.  Adults, teens, and children shared 

ideas for community improvement.  The group enlisted the aid 

of the action plan for children. 

 

Today there is a community preschool for ages three to four, a 

community centre in what was a vacant school, and community 

resources being combined with those of provincial government 

departments to focus on meeting the needs of families and 

children in an integrated way. 

 

In the year ahead the action plan will concentrate on two 

fundamental objectives -- prevention and support.  That is 

prevention services to help children and families avoid 

problems before they occur, and support services to assist 

families and children in crisis. 

 

The Ombudsman's Act will be amended to establish a 

children's advocate within the Ombudsman's office.  The 

advocate will provide public education on the needs of children 

and youth, will be responsible for responding to individual 

children who are receiving government assistance, and will 

work with government to ensure that programs and services 

better meet the needs of children and youth. 

 

The victims of domestic violence Act will provide remedies to 

address situations of immediate danger and minimize the 

disruption to victims' lives whether they are spouses, children, 

seniors, disabled persons or any others in an intimate or family 

relationship. 

 

Legislation will also be introduced to accommodate the 

expansion of the Unified Family Court on a province-wide 

basis.  This will ensure that the justice system deals with family 

breakdown and other family law issues involving children in a 

more responsive, supportive, and less adversarial manner. 

 

The Saskatchewan family and the Saskatchewan labour force 

are undergoing major changes.  The participation rate of 

women in the workplace has increased dramatically, leading to 

more dual-earner families.  In addition more single parents are 

participating in the paid labour force.  Today's workplace is 

dominated by employees who share at least some responsibility 

for the care of family members. 

 

Recognizing that balancing work and family responsibilities 

faces more workers than every before, my government will 

introduce amendments to The Labour Standards Act and to The 

Trade Union Act which will help respond to this need. 

 

Amendments to The Labour Standards Act will have the 

greatest benefit for the 70,000 people working in 

Saskatchewan's lowest-wage jobs, most of whom are women 

and young people. 

 

Amendments to The Trade Union Act will ensure that it is fair, 

balanced, and up to date, while at the same time encouraging a 

healthy climate for job creation 

and economic development.  These amendments follow an 

extensive consultation process with both workers and 

employers. 

 

It is fitting that the action plan for children and the amendments 

to legislation which will improve the working conditions faced 

by Saskatchewan families are moving forward in 1994, the year 

the United Nations has proclaimed to be the International Year 

of the Family. 

 

Health 

 

In the year just passed, Saskatchewan communities took the 

first long stride toward renewing our health system.  They came 

together in a spirit of cooperation to form 30 health districts.  

District boards now begin the task of shaping the health system 

to meet the particular needs of their residents. 

 

With the course now firmly set toward a more coordinated, 

responsive, community-centred health system, my government 

will continue to enhance its support of district health delivery.  

To assist boards in this task, the government will place before 

you several legislative changes, including a new public health 

Act. 

 

My government would like to acknowledge the people who 

have worked tirelessly for the betterment of our health system.  

Those who have served on district boards, health professionals, 

community volunteers, and employees of health programs, 

have all made immeasurable contributions.  To all, the 

government extends sincere appreciation. 

 

Together we will renew our health system to keep it secure for 

our communities, our families, our children, and our 

grandchildren. 

 

Education 

 

Building on the initial successes achieved with integrated 

school-based services, the government will widen their 

application during the coming year to ensure children have the 

support they need to learn. 

 

We will also introduce amendments to The Education Act 

which will remove barriers for school divisions that want to 

amalgamate.  In doing so, we will work closely with 

communities and school divisions to assess these voluntary 

amalgamations and determine their impact on the quality of 

education. 

 

We will work in partnership with post-secondary institutions to 

develop common objectives for a more integrated, coordinated 

education and training system that serves the economic and 

social needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

People must have access to services and skill training programs 

that assist them in the labour market.  My government will 

work with the Government of Canada, business, labour, 

training institutions, and our communities to ensure that 

training and employment services are coordinated and 

responsive. 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard February 7, 1994 

This is especially crucial for young people whose future 

depends on the quality of their education and skills training, 

and how that training relates to the modern workplace. 

 

High school apprenticeship pilot projects in La Ronge, 

Nipawin, and the Eston-Elrose area, are building better 

linkages between school and the world of work.  Participants in 

these programs will receive both high school credits and credit 

toward apprenticeship training. 

 

Electoral Boundaries 

 

With the completion of its public hearings, the constituency 

boundaries commission is expected to submit its final report for 

consideration by this Assembly.  You will be asked to approve 

recommended boundaries for 58 constituencies, a reduction of 

eight. 

 

The revised boundaries will also establish a new and better 

standard for representation by population. 

 

Conclusion 

 

Twenty-seven months ago, our province began an historic 

journey of renewal.  It is a source of pride for all Saskatchewan 

people that we have come so far in so short a time. 

 

Because our community was willing to make difficult choices 

and was prepared to accept sacrifices today to build a better 

tomorrow, we can now look to the future with renewed hope 

and optimism. 

 

The journey has been difficult, the sacrifices deep, but we are 

beginning to see the positive results.  That this is so, is a tribute 

to the courage, energy, and commitment of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1994, will be 

submitted.  I leave you now to the business of this session, with 

full confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties 

and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 

guide the legislature in all its deliberations.  God save the 

Queen. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:22 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting the administration of 

oaths of office be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: -- I wish to inform the Assembly that the pages 

for this session will be: Scott Grabarczyk, Lesley Strelioff, 

Daryl Beadnell, Melissa Bennett and Troy Davies. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague the Deputy 

Premier, the member from Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, February 8, 1994. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  I 

move, seconded by my colleague the House Leader, the 

member for Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 

after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that he do 

appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he 

shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I do have a few announcements to make.  

The music that you have been listening to this afternoon is 

provided to us by Ambiance Music.  The members of this 

group are Brian Johnson and Lisa Simmermon.  Later this 

afternoon you will be entertained by the Regina Conservatory 

of Music junior orchestra.  They will be playing under the 

direction of Lisa Simmermon.  Our thanks to Ambiance Music 

for a fine performance.  We look forward to hearing the music 

of the junior orchestra later this afternoon. 

 

I would also like to thank all the guests and members of the 

public who have joined us today.  In the west gallery I want to 

welcome members of the Thom Collegiate choir from Regina.  

I will be calling on them to sing for us immediately following 

the adjournment. 



February 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

Following the choir selections, I would like to invite everyone 

to join Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, the Premier, the 

Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Third Party and 

members of the Legislative Assembly at the Speaker's tea 

which will take place immediately following the Chamber 

ceremony.  The tea will be in two locations -- room 218 in the 

west wing and the Legislative Library in the east wing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- I now welcome the students of the Thom 

Collegiate choir and invite them to perform under the direction 

of Mr. Tom Magnuson.  The choir will begin by singing "River 

in Judea" and "African Folk Song".  Their third selection for us 

this afternoon, will be "O Canada" and I ask that everyone 

please stand at that time. 

 

(The choir sang.) 

 

The Speaker: -- On behalf of everyone present here, I would 

like to thank the choir and the director, Mr. Magnuson, for a 

very splendid performance.  Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 2:27 p.m. 

 

 


