




















































Hansard: April 25, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1821 

 April 25, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Health to reintroduce 

her officials as we continue the review of the Health spending. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  I'd like to 

introduce the deputy minister, Mr. Duane Adams, to my 

immediate left; and to his left, Kathy Langlois, the acting 

executive director, management support services.  Immediately 

behind her, Mr. Rick Kilarski, acting executive director, 

finance and administration; and to his right, Dan Perrins, 

associate deputy minister; Glenda Yeates, immediately to Mr. 

Perrins' right; and Lorraine Hill on this side, the senior 

associate deputy minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

welcome to your officials as well this evening.  Madam 

Minister, we this evening would like to do a few things a little 

bit different.  We have a number of questions that were of the 

"Mr. Premier I want to know . . ." nature that came in from 

people across Saskatchewan that we would want to bring to 

your attention. 

 

The first question this evening comes from Len and Hilda 

Tieszen of Hepburn, and it is as following; why are you 

wasting money on opening women's reproductive health units 

in smaller communities to kill helpless little people?  Why don't 

you rather promote the Teen-Aid program? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The government established a Family 

Planning Advisory Committee, you will recall, about a year ago 

I understand.  And there are representatives from or a 

representative from Teen-Aid on that committee.  They have 

done a tremendous amount of work already in the province in 

trying to bring awareness to issues concerning reproduction and 

concerning family planning in the province.  So I think the 

Family Planning Committee has done a very excellent job, and 

I should point out that the views of Teen-Aid are heard on that 

committee. 

 

As to reproductive health centres in small communities, there is 

a reproductive health centre in Regina.  I'm not aware of 

reproductive health centres of that nature being established in 

small communities; however I will check that out.  And I do 

know, however, that the whole issue of family planning and 

many of the issues pertaining to fertility, infertility, and other 

reproductive issues are under discussion throughout the 

province, and that there's considerable amount of work being 

done in that area.  So I will need further detail on the specific 

item you 

were referring to. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next question 

comes from Myron Wright, of Pennant: these health boards are 

costing the taxpayer an awful amount of money.  They're 

holding meetings at high-class resort hotels east of the region 

and getting mileage and expenses plus per diem pay.  Would 

you make public the cost of these boards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  We don't have the 

details of the total cost at this time.  However these boards will 

have to have public meetings, and at those meetings they will 

have to make public their cost and what they are spending.  Not 

just a plan for health care services for the next year and beyond, 

but also the cost of their own per diems and their own expenses 

will have to be made available to the public, and it's my 

understanding that that should take place in a couple months, 

within two months. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next question 

comes from Shirley Philip of Waldeck: when and how are you 

going to stop closing beds for level 4 patients?  These people 

cannot be cared for by home care.  Nobody can give 24-hour 

service to another.  I don't understand why a yearly hospital fee 

won't work.  It did for years, and everyone could afford a 

couple of hundred dollars per year. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Health Services Utilization and 

Research Commission has done a fairly extensive review of 

long-term care needs within the province, and you may or may 

not be aware of that study.  However, I should want to point out 

a few things from that study. 

 

There is a recommendation that the district boards do an 

analysis on a district basis of what their long-term care needs 

are and that plans be put in place to address those needs.  Now 

with respect to level 4 or heavy-care patients, I should point out 

that the plans to put more home care in, in the province, the 

plans to put in more home care will determine the rate at which 

people are admitted to institutions because the plan is, is to 

establish more home care so that some of the lighter-care beds 

are freed up for the heavier-care people, the level 4.  So there is 

a plan in district by district to try and free up lighter beds so 

there's more beds for heavier-care people, so we make better 

use of the existing beds that are there. 

 

Level 4 patients . . . they're not closing beds for level 4 patients.  

What is taking place is some level 4 patients have been 

transferred to other facilities; and as well, when we look at the 

regional centres, there's a scaling back in terms of the regional 

centres because of an analysis done province wide and bed 

targets set for certain areas.  However, the level 4 people are 

being looked after.  They're not being removed from the 

system. 

 

The HSURC, the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission, points out that most level 2 clients can live 

independently with support from 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

home care and that the home care system appears to be working 

well in maintaining the independence of clients.  And there's a 

number of recommendations in that regard. 

 

The other important point that the Health Services Utilization 

and Research Commission makes in its findings is that in the 

past two years almost a third of admissions to institutional care 

-- in one large home care district for example -- were not from 

the priority waiting-list.  The point being that before, we had 

priority waiting-lists that were institution-by-institution based. 

 

And on the larger, overall district scale, it wasn't necessarily the 

heavy-care patients, the more difficult patients, who would be 

on the priority list who would receive admission.  As a result of 

the study done by the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission, we have seen in this province district boards 

moving to have one, uniform priority list in the district so that 

heavier-care patients can get first access to beds because there 

would be one list rather than a list institution by institution.  I 

think that's a very positive step in the long-term care sector. 

 

The Health Services Utilization and Research Commission 

points out that we do need a better priority system in the 

province in the long-term care sector, not necessarily more 

beds.  And they have set out a criteria to try and achieve that 

and the districts will move in that general direction. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, I'd like to group 

together the next questions, I guess, since they are worded 

essentially the same.  And they come from Mr. and Mrs. 

Schneider of Eston, Peter Peters from Dalmeny, Wayne Friesen 

from Swift Current, Ed and Marion Regier from Swift Current, 

Neil Hein from Regina.  And all of these have essentially the 

same question: when will you abide by the results of the 1991 

provincial plebiscite and end publicly funded abortions in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to thank the member opposite for 

that question and just point out that, as we have said on 

numerous occasions, the Department of Justice has done a 

review of the law, which was done incidentally by the former 

government before we took office, and the results are the same 

before we took office and after we took office.  The results are 

that it's unconstitutional and that we cannot proceed to remove 

funding for abortions. 

 

I have tabled in this legislature lengthy legal opinions to that 

effect and also, I believe, an opinion that the former premier 

from Estevan had received when he was in government before 

he drew up the plebiscite.  It's not simply a question of people 

saying we want to do this and the government being able to 

move to do it, because the law does not allow the de-insurance 

of funding for abortion.  And that is the advice that we have 

received from the Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next question 

comes from E.H. Laursen of Gull Lake, 

Saskatchewan.  Why is the government building a native 

hospital worth millions at Lac La Ronge and a health care 

hospital at Maple Creek worth millions and a new hospital at 

Gravelbourg worth millions, when the government just has 

closed over 50 perfectly good hospitals in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Also, what is the cost of this idea of wellness centres that your 

department has set up? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  First of all with 

respect to Maple Creek, the Maple Creek healing lodge -- I 

imagine is what the writer is referring to -- is a federal 

government project.  It is not a provincial government project.  

It's also my understanding it's a correctional facility and a 

healing lodge. 

 

With respect to Gravelbourg; we are not building a new 

hospital in Gravelbourg.  What is happening in Gravelbourg is 

the construction of a long-term care facility, which of course is 

long overdue in that particular area.  And as the members 

opposite are aware, there are some fire regulations that must be 

met with respect to the Foyer, the long-term care facility at 

Gravelbourg.  And that is one of the reasons why we are 

proceeding quickly with the long-term care facility at 

Gravelbourg but it is not a hospital. 

 

With respect to La Ronge; I would invite . . . or I should advise 

the writer to consider the fact that in the La Ronge area, first of 

all, La Ronge is the only hospital on the west side of the north 

half of the province.  Which is quite a bit different than the 

situation in the south half of the province.  There are and have 

been for many, many years, great inequities in the delivery of 

health care services in northern Saskatchewan as compared to 

southern Saskatchewan.  And although we cannot address those 

inequities overnight it's time for Saskatchewan society to begin 

to address those inequities.  One hospital on the east side of the 

province, in the north half of the province. 

 

Also on the La Ronge hospital, the medical profession were 

reviewing that whole situation about a year or two ago and 

came forward with the finding that there was an urgent need for 

a new facility in that area because it needed substantial 

upgrading.  We are acting to try and correct the inequities and 

the problem that was pointed out to us by the medical 

profession in the La Ronge area. 

 

As to the cost of wellness: when the facilities were converted 

we moved to health centres to provide basic emergency 

services for the population in the area as well as X-ray and 

diagnostic.  And other services that could be run out of the 

facility can also be provided from those health centres.  For 

example: if the doctor wanted to locate his offices in the 

facilities; if the public health nurse wanted to set up an office in 

that area.  We are looking at alternative uses for these facilities. 

 

The cost of operating these facilities prior to the conversions 

was 23 million.  The operating costs now 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

are approximately 6 million.  That's the basic operating costs 

for the converted facilities.  So the cost of wellness from that 

point of view is $6 million.  It's down from the 23 million in 

terms of operating costs. 

 

However wellness is not simply converted hospitals.  Wellness 

is also health promotion and disease prevention.  It's taking a 

much broader look at health and health care, where we consider 

a much more intersectorial approach and we consider things 

that impact on our health that are outside the traditional health 

care system, such as the environment, and adequate sewer and 

water, and issues of that nature. 

 

And what does it cost us to move in the direction of 

considering more disease prevention and health promotion?  

Well of course that is something that one cannot calculate at 

this point in time because it will be developed as time goes on 

and it will be watched very closely as time goes on.  But if the 

writer is referring to the health centres that were converted 

from the facilities, I have given the answer then in my earlier 

remarks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next is again a 

number of questions, essentially the same question that come in 

from folks -- Gerard Fornwald of Lampman, Connie Dyck of 

Herbert, and Charlotte Sharp of Dodsland -- and their question 

is as follows: 

 

How can you justify the cancellation of the drug plan, charging 

for insulin for diabetics, and increasing fees for eye exams 

when you continue to provide full public funding for abortions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, the drug plan has not been 

cancelled, there's some -- how many million in the drug plan -- 

51 million that taxpayers pay towards the drug plan, so the drug 

plan has not been cancelled.  And diabetics still are entitled if 

they have high drug costs, or high drug costs and low income, 

depending on what the formula is, are entitled to receive 

coverage for their drugs under the drug plan. 

 

With respect to funding for abortions, I have said it many times 

in this legislature, that we cannot stop funding abortions, the 

law simply doesn't allow it.  And so the government continues 

to fund abortions although there was a considerable amount of 

research and review of the matter after the plebiscite.  The 

conclusion we came to -- which is the conclusion I believe that 

the former government came to because it had nine years to 

de-insure abortions and chose not to -- that it was simply 

unconstitutional to do so. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next question 

comes from Anne Marie Bayet of Landis:  We would like to 

know what you are going to do about the lay-offs in lodges.  

There is much care to be given to the old-timers and not 

enough staff to keep up with the demand.  They are needing 

more care than those in hospitals. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When the writer refers to lodges, is the 

writer referring to personal care homes or level 2?  Like we're 

not sure what they're referring to 

because it makes a difference. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I presume level 2. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to level 2 then, the level 2 is 

being phased out over a period of time.  However anyone who 

was classified as level 2 and is staying in a level 2 home will 

continue to be looked after.  However most level 2 clients can 

live independently with support from home care.  And in fact, 

the Health Services Utilization and Research Commission point 

that out in their report.  So over a period of time, the level 2 

funding is being phased out and will remain in the system and 

be used in home care to look after level 2 patients. 

 

And if there's extra money, it will also be used with respect to 

higher level needs, such as level 3 and 4.  So the money isn't 

being removed out of the system; it's staying there, and we're 

providing an alternate service for level 2 people. 

 

However if through this transition period, in a level 2 home, if 

there is a problem with respect to staffing, that particular 

problem should be brought to our attention so that we can take 

a look at it and determine whether or not there is adequate care 

in the facility. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The next question 

comes from Harry Froyman of Vanguard, and he writes as 

follows:  We had a hospital and a very fine doctor.  They are 

both gone now, so here we are 75 kilometres from the nearest 

hospital and no ambulance at hand.  What happens if we take 

sick during a winter storm?  How are you going to give us 

better service than we had? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to Vanguard, first of all I 

want to point out to the person who wrote the letter that there is 

emergency services in Vanguard.  There are ambulance 

services, the health centre will provide emergency services, and 

they do have a good ambulance service.  In an emergency 

situation and in many situations where someone has a serious 

emergency, earlier, before conversions, they would go to the 

hospital and would be stabilized and sent on to a larger centre.  

That will still occur in Vanguard and other places where 

conversions have taken place. 

 

I believe that what Vanguard should be doing, and I understand 

that they are, is working very closely with the district board to 

put in as much programing that is needed for their particular 

community.  This programing could operate through the health 

centre and would operate in conjunction with the district.  

Vanguard should look at its needs and its programing in the 

context of the district that it is now a part of, and should work 

very closely with the district board in that regard. 

 

It's my understanding that there is a lot of very good 

programing taking place in Vanguard -- plans for good 

programing in any case -- and I think that overall the 

community of Vanguard is moving forward in a very positive 

fashion.  By that I mean they are working with the district 

board to look at future 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

services for the community and I think they are to be 

commended for that.  And I just urge them to continue to work 

in that fashion. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The last one in this 

series of "Mr. Premier I want to know . . ." questions -- and I 

remind the minister that we will be sending the verbatim 

transcripts of your answers to the folks that have asked these 

questions -- the last one in this series comes from Tena Isaak of 

Rosthern, and her question is as follows:  What I'd like to know 

is amongst all the cuts to health care and finance for hospitals, 

how can the government feel it is just and fair to give complete 

financial support and care for abortions.  They should pay too.  

Another thing that I am saddened by, the installation of all 

those gaming gambling machines in different locations.  To me 

this is a health problem because it spells less food for helpless 

children. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, in responding to the writer's 

inquiry, the Minister of Health, earlier tonight and on many 

occasions in this legislature, has indicated the fact of the matter 

regarding the funding of abortions is, that it is by all due 

considered legal opinion illegal in this country for any 

provincial government to withdraw funding from the abortion 

procedure.  Other provinces have tried and have failed.  The 

legal opinions have been tabled in this legislature, legal 

opinions that were available to the former government before 

they put the question to a plebiscite. 

 

On the second part of the writer's question, it is recognized by 

this government that gambling in our society has the potential 

to create problems for those who may become addicted.  This 

has been true for many years.  We are the first government in 

Saskatchewan to put in place a program to treat and assist and 

prevent the gambling addiction.  It is a substantial program 

involving not only health professionals but community 

organizations with a strong component on public education and 

prevention, and it is in comparison to other provinces in 

Canada a much more generous financially funded program than 

others across our nation.  And so we are optimistic that the 

program we have in place and are now implementing, will 

serve to both treat and prevent the addictions and the problems 

that may arise from gambling. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair.  

Good evening, Madam Minister, and Associate Minister and 

officials.  Just to bring us up to where we left off last time.  If 

you recollect, I asked you questions about the department 

mandate.  I then asked you about department objectives and 

goals.  We then moved into department structures and 

processes, and I think I left off asking a question which was of 

interest to your officials, in particular, and that was regarding 

the changes that have been taking place in your department and 

what stresses that have caused tensions that were created by the 

kinds of changes that had occurred, and asked you to 

characterize the 

morale of your department. 

 

I have one final question in that area of department structures 

and processes that I would like to ask you now that I didn't 

have an opportunity to last day, and then I'll move into more 

general administrative questions for the remainder of the time. 

 

I'm wishing you to describe the nature of the 

union-management relations in your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I wonder if the member from Greystone 

could clarify somewhat her question.  Is she, in her question, 

referring to direct employees of the Department of Health or 

more broadly the relations between health care workers and the 

health care system generally? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- My question specifically is regarding 

people within the Department of Health, tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, these are not easy times for 

any employee of government, in any department of 

government, when government is faced with some financial 

restraint.  These are not easy times. 

 

In the Department of Health, we take some pride that of all the 

departments of government, we are the first to have, in place 

and functioning, a union-management advisory committee.  

That's with our SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' 

Union) employees, and we're proud of that.  In all of the 

relationships between the department and the employees, we 

endeavour as best we can to make those relationships amicable 

and respectful of our workers. 

 

One of the most significant issues facing workers within the 

Department of Health is the planning that's now taking place 

and the soon-to-occur transfer of their employment to 

employment with the district boards.  This has caused us to 

enter into discussions and negotiations with our workers on a 

very intensive basis, and I'm very pleased tonight to be able to 

announce that we have very recently signed a devolution 

agreement with SGEU, and we are in the process of active 

discussion with our CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 

Employees) members. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Associate 

Minister.  I will be asking questions regarding 

union-management as far as outside of the Department of 

Health as well, but I won't be asking that of you this evening. 

 

I would like to move to more administrative questions.  The 

total budget for the department is increasing by $13.5 million 

which is an increase of 1 per cent.  What benefit will the people 

of Saskatchewan receive as a result of that kind of increased 

spending? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That amount is largely taken up by, first 

of all, capital construction, and secondly, by negotiated 

in-scope salaries that are in line with 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

government guidelines and that are throughout the entire 

department. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Were there 

other areas that had to -- for want of a better term, I can't think 

of another one at the moment but -- be sacrificed for that 

increase?  In other words, I'm wondering where the source was 

for that particular, additional funding -- spending, pardon me. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The budget is . . . First of all with respect 

to what has suffered as a result of that, well I don't believe 

there's anything that has suffered as a result. 

 

You will recall that last year in the budget there was an 

announced 2.8 per cent decrease in acute care for this year.  

That was announced last year.  That was implemented in this 

budget.  However in addition to that, district boards received a 

slight increase over last year over the funding that they would 

have received based on the facilities and programs they were 

operating last year. 

 

So there was an overall increase for district boards.  There was 

a $10 million rural initiatives fund established and increases for 

home-based services.  So the government gave us a target.  We 

continued through with the reductions in acute care that were 

announced last year -- not in this budget, but the last budget.  

And there were slight increases in some areas.  And that 

brought us out to approximately a $13.8 million increase 

overall. 

 

I'm just getting a few more details that I'll be able to give to you 

in a minute. 

 

Just to give you a little bit of a highlight, the administration, in 

other words the Department of Health and its administration, 

had about a 2 per cent decrease.  The accommodation, facilities 

to house the government administration, took a decrease of 

approximately 4.7 per cent.  District health services overall got 

a slight increase of 1.1; provincial health services and support 

-- a slight increase of 1.8; the Saskatchewan prescription drug 

plan -- a slight increase of .2. 

 

Special assistance programs -- now this is one of the larger 

increases -- that's 12.2 per cent.  That consists of 

Saskatchewan's Aid to Independent Living, supplementary 

health programs, and multi-provincial HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) assistance.  That's a 12.2 per cent 

increase.  Health capital is the largest increase.  It's 40.4 per 

cent in terms of Health capital. 

 

So that gives you some sort of an idea of the general trend that 

was taking place in the Department of Health. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- To ask leave to introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank all 

members of the Legislative Assembly for this interruption. 

 

In your gallery, Mr. Chairman, you will find there are the 

Walsh Acres 80th Cub Pack B group.  There are some 10 cubs, 

and the leaders are Ron Schmiedge, Glen Ferguson, and Orest 

Schiller.  I look forward to meeting this group from Walsh 

Acres at 7:45 for pictures and a visit with them.  I ask all of my 

colleagues to join me in welcoming this group to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  On page 

4 of the budget speech, it states and I quote: 

 

 Last year, almost $18 million was saved by making common 

sense changes to the day to day operations of government . . . 

This year we will save an additional $12 million. 

 

Now I think you have made some reference to what your 

department was able to save last year, at least I think, made its 

share of some of those savings last year.  If you could more 

clearly outline what some of those were but also where you 

intend to make the savings this year. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There was an overall $2.3 million savings 

absorbed by the department, just right across the department in 

terms of administration in the Department of Health, just very 

generally. 

 

In addition to that, the physicians will be required to put in 

automated billing which will result in some savings.  The 

administration of public health, mental health, and addictions is 

being combined until those services are evolved and . . . 

devolved, pardon me, but we don't want to pre-empt any 

discussions with staff so I can't get into too much detail about 

that.  But we are combining that administration at this point 

which is going to result in some savings. 

 

The department also has been working on new computer 

programing that will result in a much more efficient system and 

will result in further savings for the department.  So off the top 

there's a 2.3 million that was absorbed by the department, and 

in addition to that there are ongoing efficiencies being built into 

the Department of Health. 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I assume then that you're 

saying that the projected savings this year of what you've been 

outlining then would be the $12 million.  Is that right?  Do I 

have that correct from the budget speech saying that this year 

we will save an additional 12 million; that's the number that 

you'd be referring to? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The 12 million in the budget speech isn't 

the Department of Health, it's the whole government. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I'm interested in the actual 

process that's used to identify savings.  Are outside consultants 

ever used, or efficiency audits performed?  Is there particular 

methods for identifying cost-cutting measures in your 

department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The process generally is as follows.  First 

of all the Treasury Board gives the Department of Health 

certain options and says your budget must come in below two 

per cent less or zero or one per cent more, but we're given sort 

of a set of options to take a look at.  As a result of this set of 

options that's provided to us, the deputy minister examines how 

we might achieve those options within the context of the 

programing that we provide.  And we work through how we 

will achieve these targets in that fashion, and options are then 

presented to Treasury Board and Finance, and decisions are 

made as to the general direction that we will move. 

 

If new technology emerges, the departmental staff will review 

it.  If it makes sense we adopt it, which is some of what's taking 

place right now with respect to the systems in the department.  

We also keep in touch with Health administrations across 

Canada.  We talk constantly to other departments of Health and 

other ministers of Health; and if there is anything that they're 

doing that we feel we can adopt and it makes sense, we'll put it 

into effect.  They likewise keep in touch with us and adopt 

many of the things that we're doing, so there's a lot of sharing 

of information that takes place interprovincially. 

 

The use of consultants -- I am advised that occasionally we use 

consultants.  But we find that for the most part the officials we 

have in the Department of Health are pretty well on top of what 

is possible, what's feasible, and how we should achieve many 

of these things.  We find that in a number of areas 

Saskatchewan is out in front of the other provinces.  So 

although we may use consultants occasionally, it's not that 

often that we use consultants for interdepartmental efficiencies.  

We primarily rely on our own people. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I'm very interested in some of 

the things that you are saying.  I actually have been asking you 

about spending, about savings, and now I actually want to talk 

to you about revenues, although that may sound rather bizarre 

in the Department of Health. 

 

Overall, in 1993 the Health department managed 

$1.548 billion, and in the same period the department only 

achieved $31 million in revenue.  Now for all the spending in 

the department, only two per cent of it is ever returned.  Now I 

do realize that the first objective of the Health department is 

definitely not profit or even to break even.  But in addition to 

talking about cost reductions, I'm really wondering if you can 

talk to me about greater cost recovery.  And I'm interested in 

one of the things you stated because you said that you've 

actually looked across Canada and dealt with other people in 

other places and gotten ideas for how to deal with the savings 

side and perhaps even examined how some people are spending 

differently. 

 

I'm wondering if you and your officials have considered 

alternatives for cost recovery in the Department of Health -- I'm 

really quite interested in this -- if you could outline what areas 

show potential, as well as anything that you're familiar with 

that is under way in other parts of Canada that would address 

cost recovery. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  With respect to 

where revenues come from, the projected revenues for '94-95 

will be approximately 36,819,000. 

 

The revenues come from . . . the biggest item is really from 

receipts from other governments.  For example, federal 

contribution towards services provided to social assistant 

recipients, rehabilitation services, young offenders, and air 

ambulance.  That's where our biggest source of revenue is in 

the Department of Health.  There also is of course some sales 

and service fees and privileges, licence and permits, things of 

that nature, public health inspection, and vital stat fees and so 

on.  This year it'll come to a little over 36 million, actually 

closer to 37 million. 

 

You said, are you examining other options.  Well there aren't a 

lot of options in the health care area.  There are always the 

options of course of moving to premiums or user fees.  This 

government has made the decision not to move to user fees, 

and premiums we largely see as another form of taxation.  And 

therefore we have chosen to pay for the health system through 

taxation as opposed to user fees or premiums, although some 

governments, such as Alberta next door has premiums of 6 or 

$800 a year per family.  And other jurisdictions have premiums 

of that nature which bring in a source of revenue. 

 

The government had considered that in some detail in the past 

when it was controversial, and was raised as you remember, 

and came to the decision after we looked at it that it would be 

better to maintain the health care system through the taxation. 

 

We do look at other possibilities with respect to using some of 

the data that we are compiling in the information systems that 

we're developing; we may be able to market some of that in the 

future as that becomes better developed.  So we will be looking 

at that possibility as things move along. 

 

So there isn't a lot of places that you can obtain 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

revenues in terms of the Department of Health.   But the 

Department of Health is aware of it, does look for 

opportunities, and we are not moving to institute premiums or 

user fees for the reasons I gave. 

 

(2000) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, the 

Saskatchewan Health annual statistical report in 1991-92 tells 

us that between the period of 1986 and 1992 that services per 

patient rose steadily, and that was year after year they rose 

steadily.  This means each patient received more medical 

service of some nature than the year before, but over exactly 

the same period of time the number of persons receiving care 

stayed the same, and the cost is what sky-rocketed.  And I'm 

really very interested in where these costs came from. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I appreciate the member's question.  It is 

a very complex issue as to what is generating the cost increase.  

One of the reasons is the ageing population.  Another reason is 

the new technology and the high technology that we are 

bringing into the province and the fact that that in itself 

increases utilization. 

 

However the utilization commission, and the Department of 

Health, have also discovered that there is a general increase in 

all age categories in the population.  Not just with older people, 

although older people do require more services quite naturally, 

and we do have an ageing population.  But there is an overall 

increase right across the entire province -- and in urban 

Saskatchewan as well as rural Saskatchewan.  So there isn't one 

population group that hasn't increased the services.  No more 

people but a substantial increase in costs, as you pointed out. 

 

So when people talk in terms of a lot of reductions in health 

care they must realize that there have been massive increases in 

the last few years and that people have been receiving more and 

more and more services and the health status has not 

necessarily changed.  In other words, overall population health. 

 

So the utilization however in the last year has decreased by 1 

per cent across the board.  And one of the reasons for that is 

that there has been substantial debate in the public about the 

need to be more careful in terms of utilization of services.  As 

well we have worked very closely with physicians, talking to 

them about utilization.  And the utilization commission has 

been doing studies and sending out guidelines to physicians.  

And I believe all of that discussion and review and debate has 

resulted in a slight decrease in utilization. 

 

And we will continue to look for the most appropriate services 

because it is not to decrease services where they're needed, but 

it is to target funding and to target real population needs and 

the most appropriate services.  That's what the global funding 

formula attempts to achieve.  It attempts to fund the greatest 

need in the population. 

 

So throughout Canada and in Saskatchewan we are 

focusing on health outcomes vis-a-vis services and population 

needs, and trying to get health professionals and the population 

to think in terms of appropriate services and needs.  Because 

you're quite right, there has been a substantial escalation in 

costs, in the amount of services being delivered, and there has 

not necessarily been an improvement in the overall population 

health as a result. 

 

So we are trying to address that issue.  And we have solicited 

the help of the utilization commission to do scientific studies of 

what appropriate services would be and whether we're spending 

our dollars effectively to result in better health.  And also we 

are asking the Provincial Health Council to focus on other 

determinants of health that go outside the traditional health care 

system that may have more of an impact on overall population 

health than many more high-tech machines in our base 

hospitals for example. 

 

My deputy points out, for example, that the thyroid study that 

was done by HSURC that was accompanied with guidelines to 

physicians has resulted in a $1 million saving already in that 

particular area. 

 

So your question was well put, and you're quite right.  It is very 

strange as how that has happened.  We are attempting to 

address the issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

when you were last here I asked you some questions pertaining 

to an employee at Crop Insurance that had been terminated that 

had not been settled with.  Have you got any further 

information for me this evening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not certain 

which case the member refers to, but we believe it's one that's 

before the courts and it probably is wise of us not to discuss it 

if that indeed is the case. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I understand there is only one of these outstanding so 

I suspect that it's the same one that you referred to the last time 

we met.  And my understanding is that one of the problems is 

they haven't been able to get to court yet because the lawyers 

for the Crop Insurance Corporation keep stalling the process on 

it. 

 

There's been, twice, the motion for discovery so that they can 

get on with some kind of a court action and your legal firm of 

Olive Waller and Waller keeps putting this issue off.  This 

individual has got to date -- and I've checked the sequence of 

events through the entire case history -- you said last time that 

he'd had an offer made, and I've checked with the individual, 

Mr. Minister; there never has been an offer made by 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

the Crop Insurance Corporation, and yet this individual is 

continually put off and dragged through the process.  And I'm 

wondering why this issue has not been settled.  And it was 

some weeks ago when I brought this to your attention in 

estimates last.  I don't think that answer is satisfactory. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, again, this is before 

the courts.  But I can say that there was an offer made from 

Crop Insurance Corporation, that they were very far apart 

between the individual and the offers or demands that he was 

making and the offers that Crop Insurance made.  And this will 

eventually be settled in court if a negotiated settlement isn't 

reached in the meantime. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You're saying, Mr. Minister, that this issue is 

now before a judge?  That it is actually before the court?  

Because my information is that isn't the case, that the 

individual's lawyer has asked that the issue be taken before a 

judge so that they can get on with this. 

 

I have copies of letters here to the president of the Crop 

Insurance Corporation, letters to the individual.  This issue, Mr. 

Minister, is now approximately 2 years old.  I believe the 

termination occurred on May 25, 1992.  And I can't believe that 

some place over that corresponding 2 years that you could not 

arrive at some sort of a settlement with this individual. 

 

We aren't even talking about anybody that was up at the top of 

the ladder here in the terminations that you did, and I think that 

it's a very poor way of handling people that were public 

servants. 

 

(2015) 

 

I asked you, Mr. Minister, what the legal costs the taxpayer had 

incurred in prosecuting this case to date, and I believe the 

lawyer is a Mr. Ellson for the Crop Insurance Corporation of 

the firm of Olive Waller and Waller.  Can you tell me then how 

much money has been expended to date by your legal counsel 

in not settling this particular case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there was an 

examination for discovery in January of 1994.  Subsequently 

the corporation has made four offers, each of them better than 

the preceding one, and it's just a simple matter of being some 

distance between the individual and the corporation and the 

guidelines that we settle these sorts of cases on, and therefore it 

has not yet been settled. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there was an examination 

for discovery on September 9, '93 at which time the proceeding 

came to a halt because the lawyer for the Crop Insurance 

Corporation refused to state the reason for the dismissal of the 

employee. 

 

And you're right that there was another continuation of that 

process on January 31 at 10 a.m. in Melville.  And Melville 

was chosen, Mr. Minister, to help out the Crop Insurance 

Corporation, because the individual no longer lives there but 

complied with the wish of 

your lawyer and your officials to be in Melville so that they 

would have easier access.  And at that time the issue of the 

overtime that should have been due and payable was brought 

up and once again things came to a grinding halt at the behest 

of the lawyer for the Crop Insurance Corporation.  And now we 

are going into the month of May, Mr. Minister, and we're 

nearly two years down the road. 

 

It just boggles my mind.  I mean if this guy had been the 

president, or the past president, or even someone with . . . an 

area manager, but we aren't dealing with that, we're dealing 

with an accountant who was down the ladder, and I can't 

believe for the life of me that the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation would be so mean-spirited with a former public 

employee that you would drag this out over two years time, run 

up all sorts of legal bills with the individual, spend all kinds of 

money to your own law firm to handle this case and not come 

to some kind of conclusion. 

 

I mean, if we'd have settled this thing a year and a half ago the 

taxpayer probably would have been ahead by thousands of 

dollars, and that isn't the case.  And I wonder what in particular 

about this individual your Crop Insurance Corporation feels so 

mean-spirited about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's certainly 

not mean-spiritedness on the part of Sask Crop Insurance.  We 

have guidelines for settling these sorts of cases, and with some 

flexibility to bend them somewhat.  But in this particular case, 

what we normally offer apparently hasn't been acceptable to 

this individual, and therefore the dispute goes on. 

And certainly we would prefer to have it settled as quickly as 

possible, but we do have some responsibility to follow 

guidelines and treat all employees in a similar manner. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, can I have your assurance here 

tonight then that you will instruct your officials at 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance to get this issue to trial, if there's 

no way to amiably settle this particular dispute, before the 

taxpayer has to spend much more money on your legal help?  

Wouldn't it sound like a reasonable conclusion that we then get 

this thing in before a judge and then let the judge sort it out if 

your officials are incapable of doing that?  Can you give me 

some assurance that you will move this process on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I will certainly give you the 

assurance that I will instruct officials to proceed with this in or 

out of court, to settle it as quickly as possible because certainly 

that's in everybody's best interest. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that.  

Perhaps by the time you come back in this Chamber for 

estimates again, we can hope that there is a reasonable 

conclusion to this matter. 

 

I have another issue that I wish to deal with you on this 

evening.  A number of months ago I brought an issue forward 

to your staff pertaining to community pastures and particularly 

the Grainland pasture north of 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

Central Butte where the one field, a particular field that had 

Charolais bulls in it, had the new trichominiasis that affects 

cattle and had a very significant failure rate in there.  There's a 

strong indication, Mr. Minister, that some of these bulls have 

been infected over the last two years.  And I asked at that time 

on behalf of constituents both in my constituency and the 

member from Morse if the government was prepared to do 

anything in regard to the failure rate that occurred there which, 

in some cases, was over 50 per cent of the cows coming home 

open.  And I'd like to know if there's any further response at 

this time from the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm told that there 

were seven bulls in that pasture, and they were tested, and I 

think three were confirmed positive.  In all, seven will be 

slaughtered by the cooperative; so we are moving.  We will 

attempt to test bulls.  We will ask people -- the patrons -- to 

bring cows who have calves at foot so that we know that cows 

aren't carriers, and that we ask them not to breed at home 

before they come to these pastures so that we can control this 

disease. 

 

We think with those measures that we will get it under control.  

It is a difficult disease to handle under these circumstances, but 

certainly we hope to, that measures we take will control it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, do you have the total number of 

cattle that were in that particular field, that were serviced by 

those bulls, and what the failure rate was in that field? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm told there were about 

approximately 200 cows in this particular field and about 35 or 

40 per cent were opened, although that certainly may not be all 

attributable to the disease but very likely, certainly, a 

significant portion of it would be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- If they're open they're all liable.  Mr. 

Minister, would you agree that given the calf prices -- and let's 

take a very conservative figure then -- that the loss in that 

particular field incurred by producers was around $50,000 

plus?  Would that seem like a reasonable figure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If indeed those were all caused by 

the disease, that would be approximately . . . the loss would be 

in that neighbourhood.  If you have 50 or 60 calves, open cows, 

and you can use your estimate of calf price, but that's certainly 

in a ballpark. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because in fact 

I do have the list of all the producers, and the number of open 

cows that came back, and the economic loss suffered by these 

individuals is actually in excess of that figure.  That's a lot of 

money these days, Mr. Minister, in rural Saskatchewan for 

someone to entertain losing. 

 

Now I'm wondering if you could provide me with the ear-tag 

numbers of those bulls that were in that field and give me a 

two-year history prior to being in that 

particular pasture; where those bulls were wintered; and the 

success rate, if you have it, of the pastures that they were in 

before.  And I'm sure that the pasture managers will have a 

pretty good idea of what the success rate on those bulls was 

prior to them going to Grainland. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have the ear-tag numbers 

with us.  We could get those, and we can certainly trace where 

they were.  We know that they were bulls that were wintered at 

Val Jean pasture the winter before.  We could get that 

information for you; exactly which pasture those bulls were in 

the year before. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  

The patrons of that particular pasture last year are very curious 

as to the case history of those bulls.  And they have been told 

by people that should know that there was a significant failure 

rate attached to some of these animals a year previous to that, 

and nothing was done about it.  And those bulls were turned 

around and wintered and put back into the system when they 

probably should have been culled the year previous. 

 

And if that is the case, Mr. Minister, then I think there is some 

negligence on behalf of people in your department that are in 

charge of that type of thing.  And I think the only way that you 

and I can reasonably understand is for you to provide me that 

information about those bulls and where they were and where 

they were wintered and the pastures that they were in previous, 

if it was previous, to entering the one at Grainland. 

 

I'll have to wait, Mr. Minister, for you to provide that 

information to me but I would hope that that would come 

before this session winds up, because we may at some point be 

able to have a further conversation about this. 

 

I believe in one pasture that has a $50,000 loss -- and I'm told 

that there are other circumstances around the province -- that 

there should be some ability of government to accommodate 

people that have sustained that kind of a loss.  This is way and 

above normal death rates, accident, anything else that occurs 

within the community pasture system.  And I know that you've 

taken initiatives to make sure that it doesn't happen again, and I 

applaud you for that, sir. 

 

But the simple fact is I believe that this was evident to some 

people prior to last year.  And if that is the case, then I think 

you have a direct responsibility to think about compensation 

with these individuals.  And I guess the only way we're going 

to know is to discuss that stuff in this Legislative Assembly, 

and we can see where those bulls went. 

 

And I can satisfy my constituents that I've done everything I 

can on their behalf to press this issue with government, because 

they're very upset about the whole process.  There's a couple of 

them that are going to have a darn tough time staying in the 

farming game without that 50 per cent of the calf crop that they 

were  



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

expecting to happen.  There isn't a lot of money out there that 

they're going to get from any other source, and it would be a 

real sad thing if we lose a couple of pretty good operators 

because they entrusted their cattle to the community pasture 

system and they weren't looked after properly. 

 

So I'll allow you to send me that information, and we can 

discuss this again. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we will get 

that information -- in very specific detail.  I believe it should be 

available. 

 

I can assure the member opposite that there was no negligence 

on the part of the community pasture system.  We often have 

conception rate problems for various reasons.  And certainly 

when it shows up as serious as it has, we investigated and took 

action.  But it was not negligence on the part of the community 

pasture system. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, I welcome you this evening and welcome to all of 

your officials as well. 

 

I'm very interested in the direction of your department.  And 

I'm going to begin with broad, but what I consider very 

important, matters such as mandate, vision, and goals.  I then 

want to have you talk more specifically about public policy 

objectives, how you are organized within your department to 

meet those objectives, how you measure your progress toward 

those objectives and toward your goals.  And from this basis I'll 

be then asking further questions -- and they will become more 

and more specific -- about spending, program design and 

program results in each of the subvotes, and quite obviously we 

won't get that far this evening. 

 

So let's begin.  And I'd very much appreciate it if you would 

simply give your own point of view on this.  I don't think you 

will need to consult your officials on what your vision is for 

your department, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think our 

vision for the department is laid out quite clearly in the Ag 

2000 strategy.  I think obviously the member will have read our 

strategy paper.  I think it lays out quite clearly what our vision 

for agriculture in rural Saskatchewan is and we certainly intend 

to carry forward with that strategy.  I think it's one of the first 

in Saskatchewan where we've actually laid out a strategy that 

talks about more than the next year, and the year after, but a 10- 

to 15-year strategy for agriculture.  We are assessing it as we 

go, and I think we're making some strides at carrying out that 

strategy, and we can demonstrate that we've moved along the 

road to accomplishing it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What is your 

vision for the department?  Not what has actually been put 

forward in the document that was brought forward by the 

Department of Agriculture, but what is 

your vision for your department?  You are halfway through 

your mandate probably -- I would suggest maybe perhaps even 

more than that at this juncture -- and you came into the 

department at a particular time and I know that as a minister 

you would have your own view as to not simply the mandate of 

the Department of Agriculture because much of that is already 

specified.  But what is your vision for your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, very much of 

my vision is reflected in the Ag 2000 and it is after all a 

government strategy that carries forward and it's not the 

personal vision of the Minister of Agriculture that is crucial.  

We did talk with many producers, and many farm groups, and 

community leaders in developing our strategy. So it's very 

much a community strategy which is part of my vision, is 

having a community develop the strategy. 

 

I think my personal vision is that we will help producers to 

survive in the competitive market-place.  I can see a vibrant 

agriculture in rural Saskatchewan and a vibrant rural 

Saskatchewan.  I think we have a lot of opportunities, and we 

have a lot of problems, and we're certainly dealing with those. 

But I think that agriculture has been the number one engine that 

has driven the Saskatchewan economy since this province was 

formed and I believe it will be for a long, long time into the 

future. 

 

And I see all sorts of opportunities if we adapt and learn to 

control the forces that are outside Saskatchewan -- the trade 

deals and so on that we have to live with.  And I think if we do 

that and we get our producers motivated -- we have the best 

producers in the world; we have the most innovative -- and I 

think if we challenge them, we will have not only a vibrant 

industry but we'll have an industry that will employ people and 

it'll grow communities on the same basis that we've had in the 

past.  It will keep our values that we've had and continue with 

those.  We will have to change and change rapidly but I think 

we can hold our values and hold our way of life and I think 

there is a great future in agriculture. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, what is the 

specific mandate then for the Department of Agriculture?  In 

other words, why do you exist in the Government of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, just in case that is a 

trick question I will read the mandate that we have:  For the 

purpose of improving and promoting Saskatchewan agriculture 

and assisting persons engaged in the industry, the Minister shall 

encourage production and marketing of agriculture products, 

promote cooperation within the industry, collect statistics and 

issue reports; may enter into agreements to improve the 

industry, fund research, provide financial assistance to industry 

and individuals, finance international aid and make awards; 

may require industry organizations to submit information, 

authorize land to be entered onto, establish revolving funds to 

buy and sell agriculture supplies or conduct any appropriate 

program of conservation or 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

development and make regulations. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  What are the 

specific public policy objectives that actually drive your 

department?  And I'd like you to outline for me what the key 

policy objectives are that you wish to pursue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think we have many objectives 

but I think the key ones would be to provide opportunity for 

farm families to manage their land, establish better control of 

their future and to be economically successful; to diversify 

agriculture in the food industry and add value to our 

agricultural products; and to promote production, marketing, 

research, education, and training institutions which contribute 

to the development of family farms and value added 

production. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'll actually ask three questions and I'd like 

you to try to address these.  Who has established these 

objectives?  How are they reviewed and revised?  And what 

means do you use to communicate them to your employees as 

well as those you would consider your clients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I thank the member for those 

questions; they're very good questions.  Our public policy 

objectives were as a result of public hearings that we had last 

year as a result of elected politicians on this side of the House 

determining what public policy should be. 

 

And how we measure those -- again we have the Ag 2000 

strategy which fairly clearly lays out what we're trying to do.  

As a matter of fact, tomorrow we're having a meeting of farm 

leaders from around the province together with department 

officials, which I will attend.  And we will try to attempt to 

measure how well we've done, assess what we've done to date 

on the ag strategy, whether we're successful in doing what we 

set out or not.  So we'll be talking to some real farmers and to 

the department to determine how we're progressing. 

 

As to how we communicate that to the department, we try very 

hard -- from my office to senior management, from senior 

management to all the branches -- we've worked very hard to 

try to communicate the Ag 2000 strategy and what our overall 

objectives are so that we get all of the department working 

towards the same goals.  And I think we've been fairly 

successful at that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

interested in this way that you've talked about some structures 

and I actually will get into department structures and processes 

a little bit later.  I'd like you to just spend a moment talking 

about . . . I mean a lot has transpired over the last several years 

in agriculture and I'm sure that that has led to changes in public 

policy objectives that have been having to be adopted by the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

Could you discuss what has actually been happening over the 

last two and a half years that has resulted in 

public policy objectives changing?  There have been things that 

have transpired that I know that have happened throughout the 

world and elsewhere, but I'm wondering the kinds of things that 

you had to consider in coming up with your public policy 

objectives, the sorts of influences, things perhaps outside of 

your control and as well as things that are within the 

government's control. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I would be glad to answer that 

question.  There certainly are many things happening in 

agriculture which have forced change on Saskatchewan 

farmers.  I don't think that's a new phenomena.  And as I often 

say at public meetings, the first tractor I drove had steel wheels 

on it and you pulled the old rope to lift the one-way out of the 

ground and that's certainly changed in my farming lifetime and 

I'm not all that old.  And I think the change is going to be even 

more rapid for those of us who are farming today.  So I don't 

think that's totally new. 

 

But we have been . . . as the member pointed out there have 

been many external forces pushing on us.  We have a 

international price war going on.  We've got a CUSTA 

(Canada-U.S. Trade Agreement) deal, a NAFTA (North 

American Free Trade Agreement) deal.  We've just signed 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) which is 

going to impact on our policies to a great extent.  We've had 

shifting markets with the eastern European market disappearing 

on us, rapidly growing markets in Asia.  All of those world 

things impact on Saskatchewan very greatly because we sell 

almost all of our commodities in world markets.  So we 

certainly are impacted by those sorts of things. 

 

We're impacted by actions of the federal government.  Changes 

to federal programs certainly affect Saskatchewan.  In fact, 

Saskatchewan agriculture is a joint federal-provincial 

responsibility and so those sorts of things affect us and we have 

to change to adapt to those things. 

 

Certainly budgets have had some effect on agriculture.  I think 

the province still spends a good deal of money on agriculture.  

We have I think, maintained that spending to a very high level, 

a higher level I think than any other province in Canada as a 

percentage of our overall spending.  We have had to make cuts 

in agriculture and be sure that we spend our money as smart as 

we can because we also have constraints on our budget and that 

certainly is something that we can't ignore in adapting our 

policies. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'm interested in, if 

you have an established planning structure in your department 

for goal setting.  Who would be involved in goal setting?  How 

does it work if there is a structure?  Even how does one go 

about defining the goals?  Like there are ways that people will 

define from being either bottom up, top down, there are various 

kinds of ways of doing that. 

 

And when I spoke of your . . . asked questions regarding public 

policy objectives earlier, which 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

some people refer to of course as goals or objectives, I think 

they can be differentiated.  But I am interested in, you outlined 

some objectives -- whether we call them objectives or goals.  

Of the ones that you've enumerated, I want to know how they 

in fact are measured.  Do you have a set of criteria against 

which you measure the goals that you have, the objectives that 

you're trying to reach?  And is there even a program within the 

department to evaluate results? 

 

That's a lot actually.  If you need any of those repeated, I'd be 

more than willing to do so. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we do have a planning system 

in the department, very much so.  We have again groups of 

planning . . . groups that involve federal government as well, 

because we work with them.  We've done an awful lot of work 

in some areas with the neighbouring provinces, particularly 

with regards to new safety net programs and so on.  We involve 

farm groups, and we involve individual producers to whatever 

extent we can. 

 

And I think we have the Ag 2000 strategy, which is the overall 

plan, and that's the purpose of the meeting tomorrow, is to 

begin the assessment as to how well we are achieving those 

goals.  We've attempted to break many things down into teams 

in the department so we work on particular areas.  We have a 

hog strategy which we announced last week.  We have the ag 

equity fund which is set up to deal with our goals of value 

added, and certainly we will continue to try to build in some 

monitoring process to see how well we are accomplishing these 

goals. 

 

And we struggle within budgets.  We have committed funding 

to programs that are there.  We don't have huge amounts of 

money, but we are moving.  I think you can see in our budget, 

if you go through it, that we are shifting and trying to spend our 

money in ways that will promote our strategy and achieve our 

goals and that we are not doing things in an ad hoc basis; that 

we have a plan, and we are attempting to follow it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Would you 

describe the senior management structure in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I can attempt to describe it.  I 

can maybe send you over the chart that would be of some help. 

 

We have our department set up with the deputy minister and 

two assistant deputy ministers, and we have three main areas.  

One is financial support and program management.  We have 

another division that's the policy and planning, and we have 

one which we call the marketing and development division.  So 

we're basically into three major divisions. 

 

That's a reduction from when I took over the department, from 

eight down to three.  We're trying to, rather than split it up by 

livestock and grains and oilseeds and so on, we tried to split it 

up into 

functions.  And this is, I think, functioning fairly well right 

now. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I think perhaps one 

of the things I might do to make a little clearer where it is I'm 

going here is to reduce this, and then I'll ask a few more 

specific questions. 

 

I'm most interested in people being able to define what 

objectives they're trying to reach, that they can indicate a 

specific time line in which they can attempt to achieve those 

specific objectives, that there's someone within a department 

who is identified in ensuring that those objectives can be met, 

that in fact at some point there is a clarification as to the 

measurability that those are being met, and that at some point 

there is a way of evaluating expected versus actual results. 

 

And I think really that's how I try to conceptualize so that I 

have a better understanding of what is taking place.  That's 

really where I'm moving through, and I'm trying to understand 

in a more specific way how your responses are fitting into my 

framework.  It's very difficult for you to fit into my framework 

if I don't tell you what it is, so I decided to do that. 

 

Now the reason that I asked about a description of your senior 

management structure in your department is the structures that 

are in your department, that take place in your department, are 

the things that are going to ensure that your objectives are 

being met.  So I'm interested in knowing what structures are 

there to ensure that that happens.  And where necessary, we 

know when adjustments can be made. 

 

I'm also interested in knowing how objectives are specifically 

documented.  What measurements you would use once those 

objectives have been documented, what types of measurements 

-- if any -- you've actually had developed or invented in your 

own department to deal with this.  And I am interested in 

knowing whether or not the staff, in particular, have a specific 

role in helping to define the objectives that are laid out in the 

department. 

 

And finally, the ultimate question: are staff regularly informed 

of objectives and particularly if any changes ever take place 

because you're much more privy in an ongoing basis to things 

to which you have to respond.  And it's important, of course, if 

objectives have been laid out, that all the people who are 

involved in making sure that you reach those objectives are 

well informed and involved in the process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the 

member opposite makes excellent points.  I think the overall 

objectives need to be set by the politicians.  We are elected to 

set objectives, and we deal with the producers and come up 

with objectives.  Certainly we get help from the department in 

doing that, but it is government's role to define the objectives to 

their department.  And that's what we've done.  We do it in the 

general sense, and I think ag strategy lays out our government 

policy and objectives. 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

What we've done in the department is we have what we call a 

management team, an executive management team.  And when 

we did the budgets, they got together and listed out eight 

absolute priorities in looking at ag strategy and the overall 

objectives, and they've planned our priorities, given the budget 

constraints, in order to meet those objectives.  And from there, 

those go on down to the various branches.  And when we did 

budgets, we also told them why the decisions were made, 

which ones were . . . where we priorized the money, and why 

we priorized the money. 

 

And certainly we attempt to not be changing our objectives on 

a daily basis.  I think that's one of the things in the long-term 

plan.  But when objectives do change, we certainly attempt to 

get that into the department so that they know what we want.  I 

think that government's role is to set out the objectives of the 

department's role, and the civil servants' role is to devise plans 

that meet those objectives. 

 

Measuring objectives in agriculture is a little difficult, 

particularly when our role . . . we see our role very much as a 

facilitator with the industry.  That's one of the reasons why 

tomorrow, when we're having this meeting, we're having 

industry people in because I think they will have the feedback 

as to whether or not we're meeting our objectives as well as 

anybody.  And we certainly will attempt to measure that. 

 

I think that's going to be crucial, and I think we can see at least 

progress being made on the ag strategy, that some objectives 

are being met and probably will be some change in those 

objectives, as you mention, when world conditions change and 

other things change, and we may have to make some changes 

to our objectives.  But I think we do have a pretty good system 

of defining objectives and attempting to measure achievement 

of them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And, 

Mr. Minister, welcome here again tonight.  I was listening with 

some interest to the discussion you were having with the 

Leader of the Third Party as we delve into some philosophical 

searchings for what we stand for and what we hope to do in 

particular in the Department of Agriculture, and I think 

sometimes a little bit of soul-searching has some value when 

we take a little step back and re-evaluate perhaps where we are, 

where we have been, and sometime in the future where we 

hope to be. 

 

But one thing I think that struck me about the questions is your 

repeated assurance to the member opposite: that's a good 

question; that's a good question.  Well I've been in classrooms 

for many, many years, and when I think back, every time I said 

that to a student that asked me a question like that it was 

because of the premiss that I didn't know the answer, so it must 

have been a pretty good question, so I took some interest in the 

discussion as it was going along. 

 

And you were talking about change.  You were talking 

about how today may not be the same as yesterday, which 

reminds me, and I know the member beside me here, as I 

believe, quoted Confucius who said at one time that no 

individual can ever step into the same river twice.  It's 

impossible because if you step into that river and remove your 

foot, by the time you put it back in conditions have changed, 

the river has changed.  And I think that's the natural process 

that is ongoing and we have to, Mr. Minister, be aware of that 

because we do live in a dynamic world.  It's a world of constant 

change and woe be to any individual or woe be to any political 

philosophy that does not allow itself to adapt to that change. 

 

As you know, your federal counterparts are undergoing a great 

degree of navel gazing right now, and admittedly I believe our 

party is doing the same thing at the federal level as we are at a 

provincial level.  And so if you don't change, and if you're not 

willing to recognize change, then ultimately you're going to pay 

the price for that.  I found it kind of intriguing to listen to your 

discussion that you were having because I think the answer to 

the status quo is no, we cannot maintain the status quo and be 

successful in our endeavours. 

 

And so therefore this is, I believe, Mr. Minister, a sign of the 

times that we live in and the evidence of that is all around us.  

The evidence of that is around the implications to the world 

trade, for example.  You were, in some of your discussions, 

indicating the changes that have gone on with NAFTA, with 

the GATT situations, and we have to recognize that and have to 

recognize that this change is going on around us and I would 

submit to you that in recognition of that we must be prepared to 

change.  We must be prepared to change the philosophies and 

some of the ways in which we have done things before. 

 

So one of the questions that I would have you respond to at this 

time, in recognition of the fact that this change is an ongoing 

phenomenon that is upon us in ever-increasing it seems 

proportion . . . correct me if I'm wrong, but it just seems to me 

that the person who gets caught up in this change aspect, 

almost exclusively since we're dealing with the Department of 

Agriculture, happens to be the farmer.  There are changes that 

the federal government is bringing about.  There are changes 

that you, as a provincial government, have been responsible 

for, and farmers are asking me, why is it always the farmer that 

winds up paying the shot?  Now I know again that I'm talking 

about a broad approach to it as the discussion has been this 

evening, but I'd be interested in your response to that question. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that's a good 

question too.  I never taught school but I always thought that a 

good question was one I knew the answer to, so I don't think 

"good question" when I don't know the answer to. 

 

I think the member is right, that change is occurring and that it 

will occur mostly on the farm.  Certainly we 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

have to change in the department when farmers change.  Right 

now we've got demands for manuals on how to grow 

raspberries and manuals on how to grow saskatoons, and 

people are wanting to know what you feed wild boars.  And so 

our department has to change with that. 

 

I think other farm institutions and businesses are changing.  

The Pool is undergoing change; UGG (United Grain Growers 

Limited) has undergone change; I think rural communities are 

undergoing massive change.  So it's certainly not limited to 

farmers.  And unfortunately -- change does provide 

opportunities and I think many farmers will benefit from some 

of the opportunities that are provided by the change -- 

unfortunately also many farmers have paid the price for the 

change and that . . . we done what we can to mitigate that, but 

unfortunately that has also occurred. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, what I want to do now is talk 

about your Ag 2000 in relation to what we've been discussing.  

You know by now what my opinion is of your program called 

Ag 2000, and it's not very positive I might say. 

 

But how do you equate your objectives -- you were talking 

about objectives before -- your objectives as you indicate in 

your document of Ag 2000, how will those objectives be met in 

terms of the fact that farming is, I think you would recognize, is 

a very seasonal occupation.  It's got its highs and it's got its 

lows, at least in the grain farming sector perhaps more than 

anything else.  Of course when you come into the livestock 

industry it's a little bit more consistent on an ongoing basis. 

 

But the question I want you to answer is this: as a cabinet 

minister sitting in the decision-making process of your 

Executive Council, and when you have come up with the plans 

as the Minister of Labour has for example with The Trade 

Union Act and The Labour Standards Act and the implications 

that has on the economy of the province in terms of business, in 

terms of employers being able to exist on a competitive basis in 

already a very tight economic structure that we face in this 

province, how do you foresee The Trade Union Act and The 

Labour Standards Act affecting the farming scene? 

 

How is it going to affect the farmer and the farmer 

organizations that are out there, whether it be UGG, whether it 

be the Pool, whether it be whatever kind of an organization that 

we have -- Intercon, for example.  Intercon, as you know, it's a 

business that has tremendous potential and yet it struggles at 

times just because of some of the inherent problems.  Have you 

given this any consideration at all, what effect The Trade Union 

Act and The Labour Standards Act, the changes -- since we're 

talking about changes -- the changes in those Acts and how 

they are going to affect what you're trying to accomplish with 

your Ag 2000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, I'd 

be glad to comment on that.  Those Bills, The Labour 

Standards Act, the farmers themselves are 

exempt from that . . . farm workers.  Very few farms are 

unionized so The Trade Union Act has little impact on the 

farms themselves. 

 

Certainly when we get into the area of value added, which the 

member rightly points out we are attempting to promote, I think 

that those Bills will not have any negative impact on those 

industries.  Certainly there are . . . One of the impacts that they 

will have is improving life for a good number of farm families.  

In my riding there are a huge number of farmers and farm 

families where one spouse works off the farm and works at 

part-time jobs and sometimes are not treated the best, have no 

notice of when their shifts are going to be, have no prorated 

benefits that full-time employees get.  And I think without 

harming those industries, we can have better conditions for 

many rural people in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think we've been at a great deal of pains.  I think we've 

exempted small businesses from very many of the provisions, 

so that it will not impact on the very small businesses.  And I 

think the overall impact on rural communities will be a better 

standard of living for farm families and for rural families in 

rural Saskatchewan.  And that is the objective of it.  I don't 

think we can help farm families or rural families by forcing 

them to work on conditions that are unfair to them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I believe we were doing pretty good until your 

last statement there.  Could you expound upon that please?  I 

heard you say that it would be unfair for you to have farm 

families working in unfair conditions.  And so I'm assuming 

now, that by that statement, you are indicating that the new, 

revised Trade Union Act and Labour Standards Acts are going 

to help these farm families to work in better conditions.  Would 

you explain that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as I pointed out, 

many, many people in my riding work in the city of Yorkton -- 

places like Zellers and others -- where they get notice of 

whether or not they work on the weekend on Friday night.  We 

again have no pensions or no sick leave.  And I think those 

Labour Standards Act will improve working conditions for 

those people and I think make a better life for the farm and for 

the farm families. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But, Mr. Minister, isn't the end result of what 

you're talking about right now is that while they may not have 

all of the benefits that they would like at this time, or that you 

would like them to have, it could well be that they won't have a 

job after this.  That is the opposition that we are hearing more 

and more in rural Saskatchewan and in urban Saskatchewan: is 

it going to be the direct result of that labour legislation?  So that 

will happen in a small town that you were just mentioning. 

 

I don't think some of those folks are going to have a job at 

Zellers.  Maybe right now they do have a part-time job.  Maybe 

the fact that they're called in at the last moment is the only way 

that that operation can continue to be economically viable. 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

But I'm not only talking about those small ones -- and we 

recognize that they are there and they are a significant 

proportion of the labour force in this province -- but I'm also 

talking about the larger ones. 

 

I'm talking about Intercon.  I'm not quite sure what Intercon has 

right now, but I'm sure it's close to 1,000 labourers, somewhere 

in that neighbourhood.  Flexi-Coil probably has more than that.  

And so we are talking about some fairly significant industries 

that are directly agriculturally related that are going to be 

impacted on this. 

 

Now I know Flexi-Coil is doing well right now, but for how 

long.  For how long is Intercon going to continue?  I just had a 

talk with Fred Mitchell, and sure his company is not doing that 

badly right now, but it's a tough field to be in. 

 

You take a look across the country of Canada over the last five 

years and see the kind of rationalization that has gone on in the 

meat packing industry.  It's highly competitive.  You've got to 

be innovative and you've got to be smart in order to stay alive.  

And that's the only reason we have Intercon in Saskatoon right 

now. 

 

But can you imagine the devastation to an industry like the 

pork industry, for example, that is second only to wheat in all 

of Canada as far as export is concerned in this province -- that's 

the magnitude of what we're talking about.  And for 

Saskatchewan, for your model of doubling or tripling the hog 

production in Saskatchewan as being something that we have to 

look forward to, I would agree with. 

 

But why put an impediment in the way of doing that by perhaps 

causing packers like Intercontinental Packers an increased 

period of grief where they will have to compete against this 

kind of increase in their labour force and increase in their 

labour bills that they have to pay at the end of the month? 

 

This is what we're talking about, and I want you to tell me, and 

reassure the producers of this province that this Bill and these 

Bills are not going to have that impact. 

 

And so I ask you now, what does your study show you in terms 

of jobs lost, as an impact?  I'm sure you've done a study on this.  

How many jobs will be impacted --  negatively or positively, 

I'll give you that -- as a result of the implementation of these 

two labour Bills that are before the House now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite is absolutely correct in saying that it is a competitive 

world out there and people have to be innovative and 

competitive if they're going to survive in any of these 

businesses.  I think that part of being innovative and 

competitive is having top-quality, highly motivated workforces.  

And I think many of the companies that he refers to are already 

well in excess of some of the standards that we are setting and 

that will have no impact on some of those companies. 

I think that Zellers and Wal-Mart may tell you that paying 

part-time employees fair benefits and giving them fair notice 

will ruin their business and they will have to leave.  I disbelieve 

that, but I think the impact on businesses certainly will be a 

small added cost for some businesses, but I think the overall 

effect will be happier and better labour force, and I think more 

productivity in the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just one more question.  Mr. Minister, let's go 

on record now.  The Minister of Agriculture and Food of the 

province of Saskatchewan has tonight gone on record saying 

that he fully supports the implementation of The 1994 Trade 

Union Act and The Labour Standards Act.  And that in his 

opinion it will have no negative effect on any of the 

agriculturally associated businesses that exist.  Is this correct, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly that is true.  There 

may be some small effect on some businesses and that's . . . 

Obviously some may be positive, some may be slightly 

negative in cases.  But I think overall it will not harm our goal 

of increasing manufacturing and value added in this province.  

In fact I think it may well be beneficial overall. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to 

ask the minister a question about the Saskatchewan Council for 

International Co-operation and whether you see the government 

getting back to the matching grants program that has been part 

of the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I would like to thank the 

member for that question.  Our funding for SCIC 

(Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation) this 

year is $250,000.  That's up somewhat from what it was last 

year.  We've this year made some changes that will give them a 

little flexibility in administration, and certainly it's a very 

deserving program and does very good work worldwide.  And 

as finances permit, we certainly would like to support that 

program as much as possible in the future. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The government assistant House Leader is 

very anxious over there, but this prompted me to ask the 

supplementary question that the member from Sutherland just 

raised about the SCIC. 

 

I recall very distinctly when we were in government at one 

point . . . you just said now, Mr. Minister, if I'm correct, that 

government is now supplying $200,000 for this current year.  Is 

that correct, $250,000?  Thank you -- $250,000.  And in some 

of the years, during the time that we were in government, it was 

over a million dollars, I believe, if I'm not mistaken.  How 

much more than a million I'm not quite sure.  And then when 

we, through necessity, found ourselves reducing it -- and 

admittedly, we were reducing it -- I remember members on this 

side howling and screaming in indignation saying you can't do 

that. 

 

Now we recognize the value of those dollars and the multiplier 

effect that any monies that the 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

Saskatchewan government gives, but I just find it somewhat 

ironical, I guess, when members get up and kind of pat 

themselves on the back and say, yes we're going to maintain it 

at $250,000, when they soundly chastised and castigated us for 

the movement that we had done. 

 

And I guess all I have to say to you is that maybe we were not 

all that good, but I would suggest to you that you're no better. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well those are cruel words, but we 

have increased it by 25 per cent I guess in the time we've been 

in office, and certainly hope to increase it further in the future. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:16 p.m. 

 


