




















































Hansard: March 18, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 991 

 March 18, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

delighted this morning on behalf of my good friend and 

colleague, the member from Swift Current, to introduce to you 

and through you to my colleagues in the Assembly and seated 

in your gallery 22 grade 8 students from St. Joseph's Middle 

School in Swift Current. 

 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Kelly Hammond, 

and their chaperons Ms. Kathy Wasiak, Mr. Ted Lambert, and 

Mr. Ken Seymour. 

 

Now I've had the privilege of meeting with schools from Swift 

Current before, and they're just a great bunch.  So I'm really 

looking forward to talking to you.  And I would ask all 

members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming them here 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to join 

with the member from Lumsden in welcoming the people here 

from St. Jo's in Swift Current.  And I know that some of them 

are from my constituency and I want to welcome them as well. 

 

I know Mr. Seymour is from my constituency and I want to 

welcome him here as well.  So I'd ask the Assembly to join 

with me again and welcome him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Our guests today 

are going to get many official welcomes and 

acknowledgements, primarily because each one of us here, I'm 

sure, has seen Swift Current, Saskatchewan, as an extremely 

important and significant place from which to come. 

 

I was born and raised in Swift Current and am delighted to see 

all of you here today.  When I was growing up there I never 

thought the day would come where I would be in this 

Legislative Assembly, so some of you some day may be here as 

well.  I hope you find our deliberations interesting.  Thanks for 

coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Canadian Farmers Curling Championship 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to rise today in 

the House, Mr. Speaker, to announce that we have in 

Saskatchewan another Canadian curling championship team. 

I want to pay tribute and congratulate a curling team from 

Govan, Saskatchewan.  The team, consisting of skip Reg 

Lakness, third Leonard Kelln, second Don Dabrowski, and lead 

David Jones, won the Canadian Farmers Curling 

Championships that were hosted by the Melville Country Club. 

 

The Canadian Farmers Curling Championship is sponsored 

nationally by BASF Canada Ltd. and provincially by the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  Participating teams advanced by 

winning their regional playdowns at 14 Saskatchewan curling 

clubs throughout Saskatchewan in November, December, and 

January. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Govan and district should be very 

proud, as we are, to be home of another Canadian 

championships.  And we again say congratulations and wish 

them all the best in their farming this summer and in their 

curling next winter.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pultz Aviation 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to comment this 

morning on the opening of a promising and plausible and I 

think very reasonable aviation business in my riding in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Pultz Aviation has begun operations in February, operating out 

of Mitchinson Flying Service at the Saskatoon airport.  Greg 

Pultz announced his plans to begin manufacturing small, 

economical, recreational aircraft and has already made his first 

sale of a Twinstar Mark III.  The firm will also be offering 

quite economical flight training on the Twinstar aircraft, in 

Saskatoon. 

 

This family, Mr. Speaker, the Pultz family, has been well 

respected in the aviation community in Saskatoon since 1965.  

So it gives us every confidence that the new firm will make a 

very valuable contribution to our economy.  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is the kind of initiative we really need in 

Saskatchewan.  And I know all members will want to join with 

me in congratulating the Pultz family on this venture and 

wishing them the very best. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gull Lake Marketing Workshop 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to announce a fine 

example of cooperation between governments and the local 

community, an example which has to happen if our economy in 

our province is to prosper.  On Monday, March 21, the town of 

Gull Lake is hosting a workshop called: where is the 

customer? -- marketing in the '90s. 

 

This workshop is for entrepreneurs and small-business 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

operators in the area.  This workshop will examine existing 

barriers to marketing and will look at marketing local products, 

and beyond south-western Saskatchewan.  The workshop will 

be funded by the partnership agreement on rural development, 

a cost-shared, federal-provincial initiative to develop new 

economic opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the organizers of the workshop.  I 

believe it demonstrates what we all know, that cooperation 

takes us further along the road to success than narrow 

divisiveness.  Thank you. 

 

Spring Bird Migration 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Well after a 

long, cold winter we are all looking forward to spring, and I'm 

happy to report that indeed spring is here. 

 

The beginning of the spring bird migration is under way with 

Canada geese, crows, marsh hawks, and bluebirds being 

observed.  Other signs of spring reported include gophers up 

and about following their winter hibernation.  And on south 

_facing hillsides the furry crocus buds are emerging from the 

recently thawed ground.  Great horned owls which do not build 

their own nests have selected old hawk and crow nests and are 

now laying eggs. 

 

Bird migration has fascinated man since the beginning of time.  

At one time it was thought that birds hibernated in mud at the 

bottom of the ponds.  We now know that birds use 

landmarks -- the sun and stars and the magnetic North Pole in 

navigating between breeding and wintering grounds. 

 

Bluebirds will return to nest in the same nest box year after 

year.  Many warblers and sparrows invariably migrate on 

cloudy nights.  Some small birds expend upwards of 50 per 

cent of their body weight in crossing large water bodies.  They 

arrive on shore exhausted and many fail to make the trip and 

perish in the water. 

 

A mallard duck banded in Regina was shot in Nebraska two 

days later, a distance of 900 miles.  A family of whooping 

cranes with a radio transmitter attached to their six-month old 

youngster flew non-stop for 23 hours, covering a distance of 

1,100 miles. 

 

As we discover more about bird migration, we are increasingly 

impressed by the abilities of our feathered friends.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that 

spring is almost here.  And we know that for four reasons: (1) 

The calendar says March 20 is the spring equinox; (2) it is 

gradually getting warmer and the snow is melting; (3) as the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley said, life is returning to 

the Prairies; and (4), Mr. Speaker, the defenders of truth and 

the public's right to know, our local media, are having a 

field day reporting on the disasters that come with the spring. 

 

A recent sample, Mr. Speaker, from yesterday's Leader-Post, 

"Lake stench a sign of spring".  One of the television stations 

recently reminded us that spring is the harbinger of the 

mosquito season.  We have also heard about the coming 

dead-fish smell, the algae stink and the potholes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am a politician so crusading reporting doesn't 

affect me.  But I do sometimes wonder who did what to the 

media's cornflakes.  Surely, truth is deeper than the bottom of 

Wascana Lake and as varied as the number of birds in the park 

and in the press gallery. 

 

I suppose though, crusaders being what they are, we can look 

forward to stories of drought, sunburn, food poisoning at 

picnics, and this one from the prophet Mandryk: hypocritical 

politicians take credit for extra hours of sunlight.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

North-West Saskatchewan Business Climate 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development this morning.  And, 

Mr. Minister, the folks in north-west Saskatchewan are facing a 

very difficult situation as spring rolls around in that part of the 

world.  They are having trouble keeping their businesses going.  

The next-door province, Alberta, is busy selling itself again as 

usual and promoting its advantages as a good place to do 

business.  And at the same time, people are promoting the 

Saskatchewan disadvantage to their own ends. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm wondering what kind of damage the growing 

inequities between Saskatchewan and Alberta are causing 

Saskatchewan small business and can you report to the 

Assembly what percentage of business is being driven into 

Alberta.  I'm sure there must be statistics kept on the issue as 

business flees this province.  Would you tell us that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, 

the government has been working hard with local communities 

to develop regional economic development authorities.  Only 

recently, I believe last week, we were in Rosetown for the 

opening of the entrepreneurial economic development authority 

in Rosetown -- a great deal of excitement. 

 

You will have heard of the reopening of Imp-Pak Packaging, a 

failed deal of the previous government, in Swift Current.  There 

is the recent Canamino announcement, Sears Canada moving to 

Regina, and literally many, many businesses that see 

Saskatchewan as a great place to do business.  There are many 

partnerships and alliances being formed between labour and 

business. 

 

The only people who seem to be out of sync with this 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

new partnership and the positive atmosphere for business in 

Saskatchewan are the Tories opposite and the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, who continually whine and complain about what 

a terrible place Saskatchewan is. 

 

And it's hard to understand how your approach to economic 

development . . . or maybe it isn't so surprise, given what 

happened in the 1980s.  But one thing is sure, is that your style 

of economic development will not be seen in this province 

again for many, many years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the same minister.  Mr. Minister, instead of flying around the 

world, why don't you take a run up in the north-west part of our 

own province for a change and do your job? 

 

I'd like to send across to the minister a copy of an ad that is 

appearing in newspapers and billboards all over western 

Saskatchewan, north-western Saskatchewan.  Give that to the 

minister, please. 

 

Mr. Minister, the city of Lloydminster is taking full advantage 

of the Saskatchewan disadvantage.  The Lloyd Mall, who are 

being good entrepreneurs, on the Alberta side have launched a 

massive promotional campaign in north-west Saskatchewan, 

extolling the fact that their province is the place to go.  They 

put out this ad which says: "Hop the border, it's far less taxing."  

There's a picture of a big, large bunny jumping from 

Saskatchewan to Alberta.  And the mail-out says: "Just by 

being here, you've already saved 9 per cent." 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, your taxation policies are making it 

difficult for Saskatchewan retailers to compete, particularly 

near the Alberta border.  What is your government prepared to 

do to counter the Saskatchewan disadvantage which is now 

being promoted by Alberta retailers?  What are you doing, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I was in Toronto 

recently, speaking to business people.  And their comment was, 

is: the only disadvantage Saskatchewan has is the $15 billion 

debt left by that administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, other than that, they 

believe Saskatchewan is a great place to do business.  They like 

the approach of the government.  They believe that there's a 

good working relationship between labour and business.  Even 

though the members opposite in their recent vote on the labour 

standards would indicate they would like to have a bigger war 

going on, it's hard to imagine how that is good for economic 

development.  But they insist on doing that. 

 

And surprisingly, the member from Greystone, the 

Leader of the Liberal Party, voting against the labour standards 

has surprised a great number of working people, especially 

women in this province, as to that approach. 

 

I want to say though that I have an article here from a paper in 

north-western Saskatchewan which says "Alberta no role 

model for Saskatchewan".  And in the Northern Pride it goes 

on to say that: 

 

Incidentally, while many people from Saskatchewan are 

going west to shop, I've been asked by friends in Alberta 

to smuggle booze in the opposite direction. 

 

Now I say if this is the kind of regime that you're talking about 

setting up, I say to you, Mr. Member, that you are wrong on 

your economic development as surely as you were in the past 

10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, it's not my economic 

development, it's yours that the people in the north-west are 

hopping mad about, Mr. Minister.  In Meadow Lake, the local 

paper publishes a picture of a large billboard put up just on the 

southern edge of town and I quote: 

 

The merchants of Meadow Lake are very unhappy with 

this billboard which showed up south of town this week.  

It would seem to a casual onlooker that there is a thumbing 

of the nose at the provincial government with very little 

they can do about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you're the guy in charge.  You're the guy 

that has meant 12,000 less jobs in the province since you took 

power.  You're the guy that is responsible for 78,000 people on 

the welfare rolls; and you're the guy that is responsible for 

Saskatchewan people shopping in Alberta in massive numbers, 

and retailers feeling the pinch. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, will you start solving the problem by first 

recognizing that there is one and then start addressing your 

oppressive taxation regime to do something about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not re-read the 

editorial from the Edmonton Journal which talks about some of 

the new policy in Saskatchewan that sets us in a better position 

than Alberta.  But you will recall yesterday, the Minister of 

Labour referring to that. 

 

I want to say as well to the member opposite who seems to 

believe that nothing they did -- the $15 billion deficit -- has 

created any problem for business in Saskatchewan, he certainly 

has not talked to the president of the chamber of commerce and 

other business people in this province, who say the biggest 

problem we have is the $15 billion in debt left by that  



994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

member, in particular, while he sat around the cabinet table and 

was minister of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation), and all of the bad deals that were 

done by that organization. 

 

And if anything, Mr. Member from Thunder Creek, I am 

tired -- sick and tired -- of going around cleaning up the messes 

in SEDCO which you personally were involved in as minister 

of that economic development . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As usual, from 

this minister we get a dose of inflamed political rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, the problem isn't me; the problem 

is your policies. 

 

Now we'll give you a quote from a letter which your Minister 

of Finance just received.  It's from a mayor of one of the towns 

involved.  It says: 

 

We appreciate that you understand and have sympathy for 

the problem; you have told us that on several occasions.  

However your sympathy does not compensate for lost 

sales and businesses going out of business.  Now it is time 

your government did something to solve the problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, the letter says it all.  Instead of responding to me 

with your inflamed political rhetoric, respond to the mayor of a 

town who is losing his business district.  Will you do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I say again to the member opposite, 

that your sanctimonious approach to the problems of the deficit 

and the reason why we have problems in Saskatchewan on the 

debt side, is amazing to most people in the province. 

 

Never once have you stood in your place and said, look we 

have caused a huge problem for businesses and families in 

Saskatchewan because of the huge debt that we ran up, much of 

it because of our ill-conceived economic development 

plan -- Rafferty, Gigatext, and on and on the list goes -- is the 

reason why we have a problem with the debt which is, I say 

again, the biggest problem businesses in this province face. 

 

But let's look at Alberta's budget, which you are saying is the 

way to go. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Vehicle Inspection Program 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), and it has to do with the new vehicle inspection 

program which is 

coming into effect on April 1. 

 

Mr. Minister, while we certainly agree with the intent of the 

new program, to ensure that vehicles being driven on 

Saskatchewan's roads are roadworthy, there may be some 

problems, serious problems, with the implementation of this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me, when a vehicle is brought into 

Saskatchewan from another jurisdiction and sold to a used car 

dealership, whose responsibility is it to pay for the inspection? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I thank the minister for agreeing with the 

intent.  The intent is to look at the whole issue of safety, and it 

is also the intent of possibly saving lives.  And I thank him 

again for raising that. 

 

In regards to implementation, of course during an 

implementation period you're always going to learn something 

as you go about implementing.  And I do agree in that sense, 

that we will learn something through the implementation 

process and the issue of going about our business in that sense. 

 

On the issue of responsible, of course the person is responsible 

for paying the inspection itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, you didn't answer the 

question as to whose responsibility it was.  You have a 

responsibility for one and one Crown corporation only.  This is 

a policy question dealing with SGI and you don't seem to be 

able to answer it again.  I can get more information from an 

SGI brochure. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's my understanding that the dealer is 

responsible to ensure that the vehicle is inspected.  And from 

talking to some car dealers along the Alberta border, I have 

learned that it poses something of a problem because it makes 

Saskatchewan dealers uncompetitive with those in Alberta.  

And as the Leader of the Opposition just pointed out, the last 

thing we can afford in this province is to be even less 

competitive with Alberta. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is it that the dealers are responsible for 

paying for these inspections? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I notice that the member was talking 

about dealers in Alberta, etc.  And I think that you would be 

surprised to know that many of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan that I know of that we have met with was very 

supportive of this plan. 

 

And the member should know that they were in government all 

these years and didn't do absolutely nothing about this issue.  

And here we are in government, we do something positive, and 

all we get is negative comments, you know, from these people.  

I think they should be very supportive of this issue of  



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

safety which we have introduced in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is a 

supplement, to the minister of SGI. 

 

Mr. Minister, I've spoken to a car dealer at Richmound, 

Saskatchewan, who tells me that he has two options once these 

new regulations come into effect on April 1.  He can either buy 

the equipment to do the inspection himself -- and the 

computerized four-wheel alignment machine alone will cost 

him at least $35,000, perhaps more, and there could be other 

equipment that he will need as well, so that's just a start of the 

cost -- or he can take the vehicles to Swift Current where there 

may be a testing station.  That's 140 miles and that's probably 

up to around the 200 kilometres which he tells me will cost him 

hundreds of dollars for each vehicle, that he has to pass on 

when he sells that vehicle. 

 

Mr. Minister, many dealers in small communities simply 

cannot afford this kind of cost and still hope to be competitive 

with dealers just across the border.  Now perhaps you realize 

that they don't have this cost.  So maybe you should talk to the 

member from Lloydminster-Cut Knife and ask her about her 

town where she's exempt from most of the Saskatchewan 

problems that we have and get some counsel from her. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is being done to offset the cost of your new 

policy on Saskatchewan car dealers for the rest of the province 

besides Lloydminster? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we have been dealing 

with this issue with many of the car dealers and we had 

received input on what was the best policy.  The policy that is 

in place is the one that was presented through consultation.  But 

if there are any specific issues of problems that are related to it, 

we will take them, you know, as are presented. 

 

So if a member has a real specific concern about a particular 

area, I suggest that he send it as a concrete, specific issue to me 

and we will deal with it in that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Most certainly, 

Minister, we will bring you the specific issues but reality is, 

though, that the policy of your whole approach in this matter is 

the problem for the whole province.  It has implications of 

competitiveness for Saskatchewan businesses and it needs to be 

done in conjunction with other provinces. 

 

Now we support the general concept of safety on our roads and 

we don't want to have that misinterpreted.  However, Mr. 

Minister, could you tell us what discussions you have had with 

your counterparts in Alberta and Manitoba.  Have you spoken 

to them about implementing a similar policy in those 

provinces? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think in regards to what the other 

provinces, what the Klein government decides to do or what the 

government in Manitoba wants to do, I mean that's their 

business.  Our top issue over here is that the issue of people 

unknowingly purchasing unsafe or stolen vehicles was brought 

to our attention and we acted upon it.  If they want to act in the 

same fashion as we do, etc., so much the better for everybody. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Funding 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Health today.  Madam Minister, there seem 

to be major discrepancies, not simply minor differences, in 

your funding formula for district health boards.  If one 

compares Regina and Saskatoon, as an example, the Regina 

Health District's funding increased by 1.5 per cent and 

Saskatoon's fell by some 7 per cent.  They have a 7 per cent 

funding shortfall, is to be more accurate. 

 

How do you explain the fact that Saskatoon, which is a larger 

city than Regina, with three hospitals and 18 long-term care 

facilities, will be subject to a funding differential of this 

magnitude? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- To be accurate, Mr. Speaker, the budget 

with respect to Saskatoon, I think, is minus 1.2, not in the 7 per 

cent as the minister . . . as the member opposite says.  The 

minus 7 per cent has to do with a deficit that the Saskatoon 

Health Board has; that's what she's referring to, not to this 

year's budget. 

 

With respect to the budgets, I have said repeatedly that we are 

moving to a formula that's based on population and is based on 

needs as opposed to funding institutions only.  There are a 

number of factors being taken into consideration in estimates, 

because it's quite complex.  I will give the member more details 

about that funding formula. 

 

It results in more equity throughout the province because as we 

analyse the province, we find that some districts have much 

more health care funding, regardless of their population and 

their needs, than other districts.  We must move to a more 

equitable situation, and the funding formula is attempting to 

achieve that.  And that accounts for the discrepancies between 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, I hear you saying that we're talking about equity here.  

And I find it very, very interesting that you would find it 

acceptable that somehow Saskatoon is undeserving of having 

some of the beds that they have and that somehow you think 

that there are beds empty, that they can do without.  It shocks 

me. 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

Rural communities had to threaten court action to get you to 

understand their concerns.  And now the people that you claim 

to appreciate so very much in Saskatoon feel that they're being 

kicked in the shins with this recent directive that's been visited 

upon them. 

 

Madam Minister, we have received several phone calls from 

people who are absolutely stunned that you would give the 

Saskatoon Health Board and its affiliate care homes just three 

weeks notice to make arrangements that will have a lifetime 

impact on the ability to care for seniors, not simply of 

Saskatoon but from all over Saskatchewan, many of whom of 

course are being cared for in Saskatoon. 

 

You kept the health boards waiting and waiting for their 

funding formulas.  The only clues that they had were in your 

budget.  How do you expect people to make these staggering 

changes overnight? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

First of all, the member opposite knows it's not minus 7.  The 

minus 7 is as a result of a deficit that the Saskatoon Health 

Board created over the last year or two.  So the member 

opposite must understand that. 

 

The minus 1.2 or whatever it is -- I'm not sure of the exact 

figure but it's in that range -- with respect to Saskatoon is this 

year's budget and would not be difficult to implement but for 

the fact that they had incurred a deficit over the last couple of 

years.  What is happening in Saskatoon, if the member opposite 

. . . and I'm sure she's aware of this -- they are going out and 

looking at options as to how they can deal with the deficit. 

 

So when they go to the long-term care facilities, for example, 

and say, what can we do with respect to a minus 7 as a 

worst-case scenario, they get back a response and they can 

make these decisions. 

 

Yesterday she was here saying it was minus 7 and everybody 

was going to . . . the sky was falling in.  Mr. Malcolm has 

indicated that that's the worst-case scenario and they're looking 

at options.  The Department of Health will be meeting with the 

Saskatoon Health Board, they will look at their plan, they will 

be discussing their plan, and there will be further notification to 

the Saskatoon public as to how the shortfall created by the 

Saskatoon Health Board will be dealt with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, in the budget speech the Finance Minister said, and I 

quote from page 19: 

 

. . . I am very pleased to announce that for 1995-96, there 

will be: 

 

. . . an increase of 1.6 per cent for district health boards. 

 

Madam Minister, where does it say, except for 

Saskatoon, where the funding will result in a shortfall that none 

of the people expected?  It doesn't say that anywhere in the 

budget.  Now will you please explain to the Saskatoon Health 

Board or the long-term care homes who were promised an 

increase in your budget, where they were supposed to find the 

proper information?  How were they supposed to interpret the 

statement that was made in your budget? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The statement in the budget had to do 

with averages.  Some district boards will be getting as much as 

3 and 4 per cent increase.  Some will have a decrease.  It's an 

average of the 1.6 across the province, but it varies from district 

to district. 

 

Now I know that the member opposite is not interested in 

moving to an equitable situation amongst all districts in this 

province.  I know that she wants to create problems for health 

reform as opposed to working constructively not just with 

Saskatoon and district, but with the entire province.  There are 

many places in this province that have not received adequate 

funding for health care.  And so we must, within the context of 

the global budget for health, move toward a more equitable 

situation. 

 

We are however going to be looking at Saskatoon's situation 

with Saskatoon and trying to work through the problems that 

are not created by this year's budget allocations but by the 

shortfall that was generated over the last two years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, you have been the Minister of Health over the last 

two years, and I guess that's in part what we're talking about 

here.  Why are you meeting with these people now?  Why 

wouldn't you meet with them before?  You have given them a 

completely and totally unrealistic expectation of a 

deadline -- deadlines that you don't seem to care about at all on 

your side of the House. 

 

As a health care worker puts it, the impact on the Saskatoon 

Health District could be very dramatic, and there are several 

options that exist, not simply redistribution of funds.  But this 

could mean site closures, and it could mean significant role 

changes and mergers and amalgamations, all of which can only 

be implemented on a long-term basis, Madam Minister, not by 

your April 1 deadline. 

 

Now will you show some compassion, not just for seniors but 

the people on the Saskatoon Health Board and the facilities 

who are faced with what they consider to be incredible 

challenges?  Will you give them more than the 13 days left to 

plan for the impact of this shock to their budgets?  Just answer 

a simple yes or no. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

comments of the member opposite, I want to make this point.  

She's concerned about mergers and all this, and I wonder where 

she's been in the last 10 to 15 years when the consolidation of 

services in Saskatoon 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

has been a hot topic.  The reason why the former government 

was unable to achieve it is because they got involved in a 

political fashion on every little decision that was being made at 

the Saskatoon level.  And when you politicize these kind of 

decisions, as the Leader of the Liberal Party is attempting to do, 

you achieve no reform. 

 

It is absolutely essential that we have mergers and 

consolidation in Saskatoon.  It will lead to a higher quality of 

health care services.  It will lead to higher quality of health care 

services for less money for the taxpayers, and the academic 

community and the medical community for the most part in 

Saskatoon know and understand that.  That process has taken 

place; we're attempting to let Saskatoon make those decisions 

themselves.  And the member opposite wants to politicize the 

process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Messer Lawsuit Settlement 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, once 

again we have seen the influence that Jack Messer has over this 

government.  I understand, Mr. Minister, that you've come to 

an out-of-court settlement of $20,000 to relocate Jack Messer's 

neighbour, so that Jack Messer won't have to put up with his 

flies. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has no money to keep rats from 

biting people in Estevan, but you do have $20,000 to keep flies 

off of Jack Messer. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think that $20,000 is a worthwhile 

expenditure of taxpayers' money, just to ensure that Jack 

Messer won't have to buy a bug zapper? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll take the question 

because the Department of Justice has been acting on behalf of 

the government in the lawsuit in question. 

 

I'm constrained in what I can say because the settlement has not 

yet been finalized and is still tentative.  And because it is 

tentative, if it falls through . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

don't know if the opposition are interested in my answer, Mr. 

Speaker.  But if the settlement doesn't fall through, the matter 

will go to trial, and consequently I'm constrained about what I 

can say in this House or anywhere else. 

 

The government is very concerned, as was the previous 

government, about its legal position with respect to claims for 

nuisance or claims based upon pollutants, and the members will 

know that.  In fact the members had . . . the now opposition, 

when it was government, had a policy that was available for 

relocating farm buildings in exactly these circumstances. 

So the principle that underlines the controversy here is not a 

new one.  The government has been very concerned about how 

to handle it; we're very concerned about how to handle it.  It's 

nothing to do with Jack Messer; it has to do with the question 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, let's not be cynical about 

this.  Let's treat it for what it is.  It is a problem of pollution and 

a problem of an alleged nuisance, and the position of the 

government is very, very precarious with respect to a claim like 

this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly this 

morning to make a statement of a personal nature. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Statement by a Member 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the Assembly.  During the past week, I have 

become the focus of a controversy which I believe has been 

unjust.  The issue seems to have become whether or not I have 

used my communication allowance inappropriately. 

 

I believe that all of my actions have been within the rules and 

the directives of the Assembly.  I believe that I have done 

nothing wrong or inappropriate.  However, it appears that the 

opposition have decided to use my circumstances as an excuse 

to block wider reforms and clarification of the rules.  I have 

decided today to remove those obstacles and allow the reform 

to take place. 

 

Therefore I have asked my constituency association to send the 

Legislative Assembly a cheque for $93, which I believe 

represents the amount paid by the Legislative Assembly.  I ask 

the Legislative Assembly to hold the cheque in trust until the 

Board of Internal Economy has clarified the directives for the 

benefits of all members of this Assembly.  Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

provide for Mediation 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Queen's Bench (Mediation) Amendment 

Act, 1994. 

 

I would like to set the stage for the amendments that I'm 

introducing today by providing you with a quote published 

some time ago by The Financial Post.  These words were 

addressed to potential users of our  



998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

Canadian justice system.  And I quote: 

 

In the best of all possible worlds, justice would be done 

efficiently, inexpensively and with minimal emotional 

pain to those involved.  But until legal reforms take place 

. . . you're entering a less than perfect world that will 

require caution, stamina and bravery to survive. 

 

I believe that this quote, Mr. Speaker, is significant and quite 

appropriate.  The fact that it was put forward as a warning to 

consumers is also significant.  The fact that it also comes from 

one of Canada's most respected newspapers is also of special 

significance.  It speaks to a great challenge facing the justice 

system.  The challenge is fundamental -- the justice system's 

failure to serve the needs of our citizens. 

 

Now I realize, Mr. Speaker, that that is a sweeping and a 

negative statement, but I want to qualify it in two ways.  First, 

our current system of justice is not failing in a wholesale 

manner.  In Saskatchewan it operates with relative efficiency 

and effectiveness.  Secondly, its shortcomings have not been 

ignored.  Justice reform is a constant process -- a gradual 

process but a constant one. 

 

We have taken some significant steps in that direction in 

Saskatchewan in recent years.  However if you consider the 

justice system from the point of the individual citizen, a 

consumer of justice services, I think the system's weaknesses 

are readily apparent.  The challenge for us is in identifying not 

the weaknesses, but the solutions.  The challenge is to ensure 

that the justice system is both accessible and responsive. 

 

The amendments contained in this Bill address two major 

failings of our system of dispute resolution.  The first failing is 

the high cost and the delay associated with traditional 

adversarial litigation.  This forces many people to forgo their 

rights because they can't afford to pursue them in court.  There 

are law firms in this province, Mr. Speaker, who are advising 

their clients that if their claim is for less than $50,000, forget it; 

it's not economical to pursue the matter by way of litigation 

into the courts. 

 

The second failing is that the formal adversarial basis of 

litigation is simply not suited to resolving certain types of 

disputes.  The most graphic example of this unsuitability of the 

process, of the adversarial process, is a dispute arising from a 

family breakdown.  Assume we were to set out today to design 

a new system for resolving family breakdown issues -- issues 

such as child custody, access to children, maintenance 

payments, and the division of property -- we would not likely 

begin with an adversarial process that pits family members 

against each other with the objective of determining who is the 

winner and who is the loser. 

 

When people are experiencing the upheaval of the most 

intimate relationships of their lives, they have a tremendous 

personal stake in the outcome.  Positions are most often based 

upon the emotion of the 

moment, and the traditional court process does not always take 

these factors into account. 

 

(1045) 

 

This holds true, Mr. Speaker, for other types of litigation as 

well.  Wrongful dismissal, wrongful dismissal actions, personal 

injury actions, issues surrounding estates -- these are examples 

of where the . . . of other types of litigation that have a heavy 

emotional overtone and for which the adversarial system is not 

ideally suited.  Positions can become unreasonable in these 

circumstances; and the people involved become polarized, 

unnecessarily polarized, through the adversarial litigation 

process which we have had in this system of ours for such a 

very long time. 

 

Our system of dispute resolution continues to be primarily 

geared toward litigation.  We provide an elaborate litigation 

structure, but we do little to facilitate or encourage settlement.  

This is not to say that settlement is, where it's possible, is not 

the norm.  In fact the great majority of court cases are settled 

prior to trial. 

 

The Bill before us today recognizes the fact that the system 

already tries to achieve settlement in many cases.  It builds on 

the experience we have gained from collaborative 

problem-solving processes in our current system that work, Mr. 

Speaker, that work.  It is results oriented.  It will facilitate open 

communication.  It leaves consumers in control of, and 

participating directly in, the decisions that are made. 

 

This legislation will formally incorporate the use of mediation, 

front-end mediation, in legal actions.  It does this in the 

following ways, Mr. Speaker.  First, as soon as a civil action is 

commenced in the Court of Queen's Bench, the parties must 

take part in an initial mediation session. 

 

In family law matters, parties will attend an initial mediation 

orientation session and a mediator will screen the matter to 

determine whether the dispute is suitable for mediation.  These 

initial sessions will allow parties to judge whether or not 

further mediation would be useful in their case.  Second, if 

either party refuses to attend this initial session, that could be 

the basis for the court to disallow their claim or strike out their 

defence. 

 

We intend the initial mediation session to be provided through 

the mediation services branch of the Department of Justice.  

And after that it would be open to the parties to use mediation 

services or to obtain mediation from another source or to 

choose not to pursue mediation.  That would be up to them. 

 

There will of course be cases where mediation may not be 

appropriate or may not be effective.  Family breakdowns, for 

example, that involve domestic violence often fall into the 

category where mediation is not effective or not appropriate.  

These amendments provide the flexibility to allow certain types 

of actions 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

to be exempted from the mediation process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in an appropriate situation, mediation does 

provide a less costly and more effective method of solving 

problems.  Mediation must be viewed as an integral part of the 

court process.  To maximize its benefits, mediation must be a 

standard option in the early stages of litigation, an option to be 

explored before positions have become crystallized, before the 

parties have become inflexible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I view this Bill as an important step in the process 

of developing a more accessible and user friendly justice 

system.  I'm pleased to move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to provide for Mediation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

this is a fairly new concept that you're bringing forward, but I 

think it does have a significant amount of merit to it -- the idea 

of speeding up the process within the legal system. 

 

We've seen cases in this province that go for a significant 

amount of time.  And when that happens, people have forgotten 

what the events were, or as you say, people become fixed in 

their positions and it makes it very difficult for people to 

change and it makes it very difficult for the general public to 

understand what is happening.  If the process can be speeded 

up, I think that's a value to everyone in society.  If the process 

can be made more accessible to everyone, that is also of 

significant value to us. 

 

Mr. Minister, this legislation was introduced yesterday I 

believe.  People of this province have not yet had time to digest 

this, to review it, and to understand all of the implications that 

may be involved.  And while I believe it does have a significant 

amount of value, we need more time to have a look at this, Mr. 

Minister.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 

adjourn this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

create a Family Law Division and to enact Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Queen's Bench (Family Law Division) 

Amendment Act 1994.  The Unified Family Court has operated 

in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, since 1978 as a pilot project.  By 

any measure it has been a strong success.  This Bill will expand 

the Unified Family Court concept to the remainder of the 

province.  It will do this through the creation of a family law 

division within the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

Since its inception, support for the Unified Family Court in 

Saskatoon has been consistent and it's been strong and it 

remains so today.  Underlying this level of  

support, Mr. Speaker, is the understanding that family law is 

unique and distinguishable from other types of civil actions.  

There are at least four elements that make this area of the law 

unique and distinguishable. 

 

The first, family law disputes commonly involve a greater 

human emotional element than any other dispute -- a few 

moments ago I referred to that. 

 

Secondly, the dispute most often dramatically affects other 

people, people who are not direct parties to the action, most 

especially the children of the failed marriage as well as 

extended family members and indeed, other members of the 

community. 

 

Thirdly, the disputes are commonly a combination of issues, a 

combination of monetary issues, property issues, and personal 

relationship issues. 

 

Fourthly, the monetary and personal relationship issues are 

continuous and dynamic.  They go on and on.  They're not the 

sort of one-time, one-event situations that are the subject of a 

lot of civil actions, but they deal with elements of a relationship 

which is going to continue on and on into the future. 

 

For those four reasons, Mr. Speaker, this group of cases that we 

refer to generally as family law cases are unique and they are 

quite distinguishable from other types of civil actions which 

come before our courts. 

 

Now evaluations have been made of the Unified Family Court 

experience in Saskatoon as well as in many other provinces as 

this concept has been picked up elsewhere.  And it has been 

found to be an effective and a sensitive approach for dealing 

with the kinds of issues that surround family law type cases and 

family breakdowns. 

 

Now to effectively address the unique nature of these kinds of 

cases, I believe our court system must have a number of key 

elements embedded in it.  The first is that the jurisdiction with 

respect to the issues that surround family law cases should be 

collected into one court.  Citizens shouldn't have to go to 

different courts in order to solve different problems involving 

the same fact situation, the same marriage. 

 

Secondly, the system should have simple rules and procedures, 

and they should be simplified to the greatest extent possible.  

The rules and procedures surrounding civil cases are not 

simple; they are complex and that is probably a product of the 

history of the legal system that we have for dispute resolution 

with respect to disputes between our citizens. 

 

Thirdly, and of key significance, is that the system must 

provide judges who have specialized expertise.  The law 

surrounding family law issues is so complex, so difficult, the 

cases are so time consuming that most people have come to 

recognize that it requires judges with a great deal of expertise. 

 

Now that is not to reflect upon the judges that we have, except 

to say that they have to hear a whole band of cases which may 

involve any kind of civil  



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

dispute at all, and at the same time those same judges have 

responsibility to run major criminal trials, especially jury trials.  

And so their focus over their years of judging has been wide 

and expanded.  And they haven't had the opportunity to focus 

in on this range of cases that we refer to as family law cases.  A 

system that is responsive to the problems that I have outlined to 

the House ought to be headed by judges, run by judges, who 

have the opportunity to specialize in these cases and become 

expert in dealing with the issues. 

 

The fourth key element that I think our court system must have 

is that it must provide a wide range of support services to 

families who are involved in disputes -- a wide range of legal 

and social support services.  The court itself, the Court of 

Queen's Bench, does not have those services, hasn't had them, 

and it is important that the judges who have to hear and deal 

with these kind of cases are able to draw on those support 

services.  It is even more important that the families involved, 

the people involved in these unfortunate cases, have these kind 

of supports available to them. 

 

So our goal, Mr. Speaker, is to provide a single legal institution 

which is specifically designed to deal with the family as an 

organic whole.  This Bill creates a family law division of our 

existing Court of Queen's Bench.  It provides that there will be 

six judges assigned to this family law division.  The family law 

division will be given exclusive family law jurisdiction 

throughout the entire province. 

 

In relation to child protection matters, it will have concurrent 

jurisdiction with the Provincial Court outside of Regina and 

Saskatoon.  The reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is that in a centre 

far removed from Regina and Saskatoon it may be necessary to 

obtain a quick court order when you're dealing with child 

protection matters, and that will most conveniently involve a 

Provincial Court judge.  That is a jurisdiction that they've been 

exercising for decades in this province and we propose that 

they will continue to have concurrent jurisdiction in relation to 

child protection matters. 

 

I mentioned a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, the availability of 

related services and support services as one of the factors that 

are key to the success of a Unified Family Court.  These 

services include the following, and I'll mention five kinds of 

services that will be attached to this court. 

 

First of all, mediation.  Mr. Speaker, we have just debated and 

begun second reading consideration of the legislation dealing 

with legislation, and I mentioned a few moments ago in this 

Assembly that that legislation will require the parties to attend 

an initial orientation session allowing them to decide whether 

or not further mediation would be useful. 

 

(1100) 

 

I mentioned that a mediator would screen the matter at that 

initial session to determine whether the dispute 

was suitable for a mediation process.  I won't dwell on that 

because I've already informed the House about the key 

considerations behind that concept. 

 

The second kind of support services which is very important 

are custody and  access investigation services.  The court has to 

make very difficult decisions about who has the custody of the 

children and what kind of access the other party will have to 

those children.  It's difficult decisions for the court to make 

because the evidence that is presented to the court is as limited 

as it is and it puts the judges in a very difficult position to make 

those decisions when they don't know the entire situation.  So 

we propose to provide expert support services for the court so 

that the court will have in front of it objective reports on the 

issues of custody of children and access to children. 

 

Third is a supervised access service.  The idea here is that in 

certain cases the court will feel that it is appropriate to have an 

access but only on the basis that there is someone there to 

supervise the access.  It may be that the court feels that the 

children are at physical risk or at emotional risk and that in 

those circumstances somebody else should be there to ensure 

that the child is safe and protected.  We will provide services, 

make available people to the court so that that kind of 

supervised access can take place. 

 

The fourth service is to provide counselling in the case of 

family breakdown.  We'll probably have to do this on a group 

basis, but that has been a very effective way of approaching 

this problem in the past and we propose that we would provide 

that kind of counselling support to people who are having 

marital problems within the structure of this family law 

division. 

 

The fifth thing that we propose is that information kits and 

general information about the consequences of marriage 

breakdown be provided to people who want to know what will 

be their legal situation if the marriage does in fact breakdown.  

These are self-help type of kits. And the Unified Family Court 

has in the past had this information available in Saskatoon and 

it has really got a steady run of customers and I think provides 

an important community service. And we propose to provide 

that through the family law division. 

 

Now all of these services might not be immediately available 

all across the province because it will take some time to 

implement this program, but we hope to see them available as 

soon as possible throughout all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an ambitious goal that the Bill sets 

for the government.  Expanding the Unified Family Court in 

the way that the Bill describes is a very ambitious and very 

difficult thing.  But I believe it is fundamental to reducing the 

difficulties that families have in dealing with marriage 

breakdown. 

 

It is, Mr. Speaker, a way also of demonstrating that the justice 

system values children and that has been such 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

a strong emphasis of many of the things that we have been 

doing as a government.  We want to ensure that the justice 

system is responsive to the needs of children and gives priority 

to their needs and helps to ensure their security and their safety.  

We firmly believe that that can be done most effectively within 

the structure of a dedicated court -- a court dedicated to the 

dealing with family breakdown issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is, as we have commented on earlier, the 

International Year of the Family, and in a number of ways in 

this province and other parts of the country, governments and 

others are renewing their commitment to support and protect 

families.  The Bill before us today is one way in which we can 

clearly demonstrate that we are meeting that commitment. 

 

There is another part of the Bill that I should mention, Mr. 

Speaker, that deals with another matter.  And I wouldn't want 

the House to miss that.  It is not related to the family law 

division, but it reaffirms our commitment to improving access 

to the courts.  That is something that the previous Bill was also 

about. 

 

Currently if a person dies in Saskatchewan but was not resident 

here, leaves no property here, the court does not have 

jurisdiction to grant letters of administration or letters probate 

in the estate.  And the effect of the current law is that survivors 

must wait about six months before they can get in a position to 

sue the person who is responsible for the death.  And this 

amendment eliminates that delay.  It is a simple matter of law 

reform to remove a barrier that our citizens who are in this 

unfortunate situation have or encounter when they're seeking to 

enforce their rights. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to create a Family Law Division 

and to enact Consequential Amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

we believe that families and children are the most important 

component in our society.  Therefore any law that would help 

protect and defend families and children is a worthwhile effort.  

In fact the previous administration put in what was called the 

Family Foundation as a department or as a cabinet minister 

responsible for families because they felt families were indeed 

just that important. 

 

I would have to wonder though whether or not a new division 

within the legal system, what effect that is going to have on the 

process.  Will that speed it up or will that slow it down?  If you 

have to go through the family law that is being brought 

in -- division -- through this Act, do you then go some place 

else after that, and what is the process?  Would that be the 

ultimate end until you can go to a Court of Appeal, or what 

would the process be through there.  That would be a concern 

as to whether or not it was going to speed up the system, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Accessibility is always important, and particularly in 

cases dealing with family issues, because they are indeed so 

emotional and so tied together that everyone has a great deal of 

difficulty dealing with the situations.  And mediation and 

consultation, counselling, all of those items are extremely 

important. 

 

But with counselling, I would have a concern if this Bill is 

going to say that counselling is a legal requirement.  I think you 

have a great deal of negativity if you're forcing someone to take 

counselling when they don't want to.  And I think that would be 

a problem if the Act is saying that. 

 

We talked about judges having expertise in a particular field, 

and that's good.  But if that expertise narrows them down to the 

point where they're existing in a vacuum, I think that's a 

problem.  They have to be aware of all of the other implications 

that are going on in society, not just the family law. 

 

Because when you're talking family law, what's the definition 

of family?  How broad, how narrow is that?  Because every 

legal aspect of our society impacts at some point in time on 

families.  So just how broad and how narrow is all this going to 

be?  That's one of the issues I think that would have to be 

addressed, Mr. Minister. 

 

I was interested in your comments on probate of estates 

because I had a constituent approach me just recently dealing 

with that particular issue.  And so perhaps rather than just a 

time frame being opened up on that, there are some other issues 

involved. 

 

When people outside of Saskatchewan pass away leaving real 

property in Saskatchewan, it creates a problem until that will is 

probated in Saskatchewan.  If it's not probated in 

Saskatchewan, there are some difficult legal circumstances that 

become involved.  In this particular constituent that contacted 

me, it was dealing with mineral rights and how to transfer 

mineral rights out of the estates to some other person.  And 

they were having a great deal of difficulty doing that because 

the wills had not been probated in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a fairly complex issue, Mr. Speaker.  It needs serious 

consideration.  It needs time to have consultation with those 

people across the province, those organizations, those people 

concerned with families and children that will be affected by 

this legislation.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move we adjourn 

this Bill at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

Chairman.  First a word about the morning's business to the 

members opposite in both parties.  We had a brief discussion 

about what we might do for the balance of the morning.  It is 

now our intention to adjourn these estimates at 12 and go to 

Highways. So you should govern yourselves accordingly.  I say 

that as well to the member of the third party who is present. 

 

With that, I am pleased to be able to give to the opposition -- if 

I can have the assistance of a page, thank you -- copies of the 

answers to the questions which you'd asked.  We have set out 

in a comprehensive way the legislative costs of last year's legal 

projects -- the occupational health and safety, worker's 

compensation, etc. -- set out this year's costs, set out in a 

complete way the costs of the labour tours. 

 

I want members opposite to compare this with the cost of the 

GRIP tours.  I want members here to note the sparsity of the 

tour.  Unlike members opposite who loaded up trunks with 

alcohol at government expense, none of that occurred here.  

This was a shoestring tour. 

 

Now we also have . . . it was not asked, but we have as well a 

summary of the expenditures on the round table discussions on 

The Labour Standards Act.  And finally, given the pathetic 

nature of the presentation of last night from the members 

opposite, we decided perhaps we should reconsider and do the 

sums for you.  So we took pity on you and did the math for you 

as well. 

 

And I think that is . . . oh, and one more thing.  I have as well 

the breakdown of the costs for The Trade Union Act review, 

the Priel committee and the Ish committee.  We broke down as 

well, since you asked for it, the expenditures on occupational 

health and safety and on workers' compensation last year.  I 

don't think I gave you that actually. 

 

Now one other thing that I'm going to give to the member 

before I take my seat.  I had intimated that there may be some 

other costs, which were legal costs in the preparation of the 

Bills.  That in fact proved to be the case and I've given you a 

breakdown of that as well.  I think you've now got all the costs 

associated with this. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, I 

look forward to receiving the information that you're sending 

across and we will attempt to look through it as quickly as we 

can and respond to its accuracy, which I seriously doubt will be 

there. 

 

As for my pathetic performance, I couldn't possibly stand in my 

place and not say something about that.  You've taken quite a 

bit of time trying to irritate me and promote my temper and to 

see if you couldn't get me to respond in some kind of a 

ferocious manner with your statements, both yesterday and 

again today. 

 

So I guess the thing that I find pathetic is to try to enter 

into a debate which is supposedly conducted between people 

who have the faith of the people of Saskatchewan who elected 

them.  A contest of wits is what we had, and to me the pathetic 

thing was to be in that contest with an unarmed opponent.  So 

with all of the officials that you have, I'm hoping that today you 

will have armed yourself a little better. 

 

I did bring my calculator along, Minister, and while I haven't 

seen the figures yet, I've been punching some figures out for 

you.  And it's amazing how after we added up a few things, that 

we came up with an awful lot of expenditures that you never 

talked about in the question periods of both yesterday and the 

day before. 

 

We came up with figures of costs that were phenomenally high, 

as compared to what you even talked about yesterday when it 

takes an hour of my time to flush out of you the realistic fact 

that there aren't 1,500 brochures that have been printed and 

distributed, but in reality 3,000.  No, wrong, 300,000 you 

said -- 300,000 brochures, not 1,500. 

 

Now how do you suppose I'm supposed to conduct an 

intelligent conversation with a person that can't figure out the 

difference between 1,500 brochures printed or 300,000?  It's an 

absolute disgrace, sir, the way you've conducted yourself in this 

office.  I'd be ashamed of myself and resign today if I were 

you.  It's disgusting the way you've carried on.  It's also 

disgusting the way that you have portrayed this whole issue on 

a one-sided scale. 

 

Now I took the time to read through the papers that you 

delivered to me yesterday which you say are the amendments 

that you will be supplying to people who have inquiries of your 

office.  And yes, you do quote the Price Waterhouse impact 

study and you do quote the costs for each item down the sheet 

and you do come up with a total. 

 

I want to read this into the record because it's very significant 

the way you've drawn up this particular piece of political 

propaganda, which is what it is in bare truth.  It says here, and I 

quote: 

 

 Price Waterhouse concludes, based on the review of our 

estimated range of incremental costs, our best estimate of the 

total incremental cost to employers is $9,500,000.  That 

represents less than one-tenth of 1 per cent of the total of 

Saskatchewan payroll costs. 

 

Now, Minister, you haven't misquoted Price Waterhouse.  

What you've done once again though is only told half of what's 

in the report.  And with this one sentence taken out of context 

you deliberately lead to a subliminal message that it's all okay.  

Don't worry about it.  It isn't going to cost anybody very much.  

No problem. 

 

What you forgot, sir, was to mention the reality of the fact that 

this report starts out by having a disclaimer, a disclaimer saying 

that nobody can hold us responsible for this report.  That's what 

a disclaimer is.  In other words, the report is disclaimed before 

you even start 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

to read it. 

 

The second thing you don't point out is that in this report it 

states that there are some negative side-effects. And those 

negative side-effects are that students and disabled people, 

elderly people will not, will not prosper by this legislation but 

in fact will be hurt by this legislation and they will have a 

harder time getting jobs. 

 

I read to you a little excerpt that I took from a conversation 

with a business person on The Labour Standards Act, Bill 32:  

it may hurt the people it's intended to help.  If there is a 

negative cost impact, employers will not hire or they may stick 

to full-time workers rather than to hire extra students in the 

summer. 

 

This is a reality that comes home in a lot of our 

Saskatchewan-based industries because of our weather and 

climate, where we do a lot of our work in the summertime 

because that's the only time it's warm enough to work outside. 

 

I think specifically of machinery manufacturers or machinery 

salespeople who put up cultivators and hire students to do the 

work in the summertime.  Do you think those employers are 

going to bother if the numbers they hire put them over the 20 

numbers-of-employees and as a result they have to put together 

a whole bunch of extra bookwork and hire another accountant?  

Not likely. 

 

It goes on:  they may close a lot of their businesses and simply 

move out, or they may choose not to do some extra work and 

they may choose to contract it out to firms in Manitoba or 

Alberta.  For example, again our manufacturers of 

equipment -- and that would mostly be farm equipment in 

Saskatchewan, I suspect -- but suppose they had to hire 

somebody to assemble shanks with spring assemblies.  They 

might choose to phone over to Manitoba and say, send them 

over as an assembly now rather than as pieces that need to be 

assembled.  And there goes the summer jobs for all of our 

students. 

 

Now the other point that this individual made is that when 

work must be given to those with seniority, the employer has 

no flexibility on ability when they hire the person to do the job.  

So it's hard to match work to skill. 

 

Now, Minister, those are the real problems that people have 

seen, and it only touches the tip of the iceberg.  But no place in 

any of your propaganda have you mentioned or considered any 

of those side-effects.  You've done this totally without balance 

because it is a political propaganda machine, and nothing else 

but that.  This is pay-back time for the big union boys and 

you're starting slow but you're working up, and we see it 

coming in spades. 

 

You try to camouflage it with personal attacks on individuals to 

try to get the public to not notice what you're 

doing.  You make slurs against people like myself in the hope 

that folks won't notice what you're doing to the rest of the 

people in your legislation.  And that, sir, is not going to wash.  

Because, quite frankly, I don't care what you say about me; 

what I care about is the job base in this province that you are 

destroying. 

 

Because it has been my personal quest in life to get involved in 

politics for one main reason and one main reason only.  And 

that is to develop this province into a place where our children 

can stay at home to make a decent and respectable living.  And 

you are destroying that, so that makes me and you more than 

political adversaries. 

 

You are destroying the very thing, the very roots and 

fundamental objectives, to which I have gotten into this contest 

for.  You're destroying the ability of our young people to get a 

decent education in this province and then to apply it to a job, 

or some kind of standard of living or way of life within the 

province. 

 

And I say that with conviction, sir, because I have four children 

who are now old enough to be on their own in the world, and 

all four of them are out of Saskatchewan.  There's no room for 

them in this province at competitive lifestyle.  Not one of them 

could follow their chosen careers in this province and get 

anything close to the same kind of lifestyle and consideration 

of lifestyle.  Even in Alberta where one of them is located, 

where she has to pay for her own medical premium through her 

work, she makes more money and has a better lifestyle than she 

can have in Saskatchewan under our system. 

 

Our system is fundamentally flawed because we are out of 

synchronization with our neighbours.  Everything in this 

province that you do in this labour portfolio that you are the 

head of, has a very distinct effect on the direction that our 

province is going to go, and is going, and will continue to go.  

And you're going backwards, not because you're doing all 

wrong things, but because you're doing some good things with 

a lot of bad things built in that are outweighing the benefits.  

And you're out of sync with our neighbours. 

 

You've got to sit down, if you want this province to go ahead, 

with the people in Alberta and Manitoba and Montana and 

North Dakota and you've got to hammer out a plan of 

coexistence.  Because we don't live in an island, and was 

suggested earlier today in some of the commentary.  I was kind 

of shocked at that -- commentary by the minister of SGI 

suggesting that we're going to do our own thing in 

Saskatchewan no matter what they do in Alberta on the used 

car issue. 

 

Absolutely unacceptable approach to life, to consider that we 

are now a sovereign nation in Saskatchewan where we don't 

care about what our neighbours in not only the rest of this 

country do, but the neighbours of the other country beside us. 

 

And I suggest to you we cannot live in that kind of isolation 

and we cannot prosper in that kind of isolation.  And we will do 

nothing but lose our population and go downhill as an 

economic force.  And if you don't believe me, check the 

financial 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

figures of this province that you are directly contributing to 

with your labour legislation, because you are helping to destroy 

the tax base. 

 

The reality, sir, is this -- that when the numbers go down, the 

taxes get less.  As you get less people in this province, fewer 

and fewer people are paying for all of the services.  And the 

whole thing is like a dominoes that has to collapse. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder if the member has given any 

thought to returning to Labour estimates.  I would ask the 

chairman to rule whether or not the tax base in the province, a 

lengthy dissertation on the tax base in the province and a 

comparison with that of Manitoba and Alberta is indeed a 

proper part of Labour estimates. 

 

The Chair: -- I'm sure if the member relates it to the estimates; 

I'm sure he'll do that shortly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The reality is that 

the member is in charge of a huge amount of money that is 

going to be spent out of the taxes that people pay in this 

province -- $5 billion worth of taxes taken in in this province 

and being spent in large part by this department -- that is being 

used by the unions of this province to destroy the very tax base 

that brings in those dollars. 

 

And that is my point.  You're wasting the taxpayers' dollars 

buying something that is actually destroying the tax base.  And 

that is not the way the taxpayers intended to have their money 

spent. 

 

So I know that the minister will be anxious to return the 

comments on my observations, and while he's doing that I want 

to study through the papers that he sent over.  And then we will 

get into some more specific questions about how you are 

wasting the taxpayers' dollars in the actual estimates. 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well in that lengthy dissertation I 

only found one thing that remotely related to Labour estimates.  

It was the comment that we're spending a huge amount of 

money.  Let me respond to the member opposite by pointing 

out that this province's budget for Labour is less than any 

province west of the Maritimes, and virtually the smallest in 

Canada.  Just as the Labour tours are a shoestring operation, but 

a very effective one, so this department is a shoestring 

operation but a very effective one. 

 

I hope the member would compare the expenditures on a per 

capita basis in the Department of Labour in Saskatchewan, with 

that of any other province except Prince Edward Island.  I think 

you'll find taxpayers are very well served by the expenditures 

in this province. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, that's where we disagree.  

You see, I think if you were spending $5 on your Labour 

Standards Act to advertise it, that would be a waste.  When you 

get that up to millions, it's an absolute atrocity. 

 

But let's get into this thing.  Were the amendments currently 

proposed to The Labour Standards Act, Mr. Minister, factored 

into the 1994-95 budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- In that case, Minister, will any new 

inspectors, board members, or any other sort of new staff need 

to be hired to implement the new legislation?  Now could you 

estimate the cost of these. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we anticipate two more labour 

standards officers to administer this area. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Where would I find that in the estimates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is not necessarily an appropriate 

time to give the member instruction on how the estimate book 

is structured.  Let me point out if you open up the estimates of 

Labour, begin with the first section, you'll find that the total 

number of persons have increased to a little over two.  So that's 

where you find it, right on page 1.  It's not hard to find. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, Minister, what further education and 

training will be required in your department to implement the 

new legislation and at what cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There will be some training of this 

obviously.  The changes are not enormously complex but there 

will be some.  It will be mostly done internally, and the 

increased costs in training will also be minimal as a result.  But 

there will be some internal training. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I've got about 30 pages of 

questions on these issues and I know that because of the 

deadlines that you have set out earlier in this process today, that 

I'll never be able to get through so . . . And that doesn't even get 

me into the estimate book so it's going to take a while for us to 

get all this tracked down. 

 

I wanted to go back just a minute to a comment you made when 

you started in your political ramblings at the start of today's 

proceedings.  You alluded to the fact that people spent a lot of 

money on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program to sell it.  And I think you were trying to say to the 

people that you're justified to spend the money of the Labour 

department to advertise your new legislation, which of course 

the GRIP program also was legislated, and you're saying that 

there's a comparison there. 

 

I take particular offence at the comments you made that trucks 

were loaded up with alcohol at government expense and 

trucked around this province.  I suggest that that would be 

against the law.  I 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

suggest that if you would care to repeat those kinds of 

accusations outside of this House, the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) would be more than happy to check that out 

for you. 

 

And I suggest to you that if you are going to make accusations 

like that, prove them and put them on the table outside of this 

Assembly and let the proper authorities investigate them, and 

let's have this sort of thing properly taken care of.  Otherwise, 

don't make these kind of accusations. 

 

Because, quite simply, it's a very serious thing to accuse people 

of misappropriating government money.  And if I'm offended, 

how do you suppose the people that were involved would feel 

about that kind of comment?  So, Minister, I suggest you guard 

your thoughts and the way that you put together your 

arguments. 

 

As for the GRIP program, it had nothing to do with this kind of 

waste of money.  That program was explaining a program and 

how it works, and the negative sides were explained as well as 

the positive.  That's the difference between your program and 

the GRIP program and the way it was taken to the people, 

because the people could stand up and ask every question they 

want. 

 

I've got here a piece of paper that tells exactly how your 

meetings were conducted.  You said yesterday it would have 

been nice if I would have attended the meeting to find out what 

was going on.  So we took the time to check with some of the 

people.  They told me that you would stand up in the assembly 

of these meetings and give a 30- to 50-minute dissertation 

about the track record of trade unions in Britain and the United 

States of America, after which you would take one or two 

questions, and then you'd run out of time and run off to another 

meeting.  And you never gave people a chance even to talk or 

to ask questions about this program. 

 

That's what they think of you and the way you conducted your 

road show.  They never even got a chance to ask questions.  

And you try to compare that to a program like GRIP where 

hundreds of millions of dollars were given to people to survive 

in this province?  Shame on you.  I say no more about that 

subject, sir, because my colleague has a lot more that he needs 

to say. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I wonder if you could explain to me your definition of 

the word, consultation.  What does it mean to you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Consultation is a two-way flow of 

information. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When you 

consult, what kind of a time frame do you allow for people to 

access the information, digest the information, and consult with 

you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Anywhere from an hour to an  

hour and a . . . the member is right, my comments would last 

about half an hour.  Question period would last anywhere from 

an additional hour to an additional two and a half hours, 

depending on the context. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, would the people 

involved have any access to the information that you were 

bringing them prior to these consultative meetings, that hour to 

an hour and a half?  Or would you simply come in and, here is 

the information; you have an hour to tell me what you think 

about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In most cases we didn't have an 

advance list of who was coming.  On occasions where we did, 

we did send them information.  But on most occasions we did 

not have names and addresses of people who would be there 

beforehand.  We did pass out the information and we did 

receive learned questions.  I might say, if some of those 

question-and-answer periods were repeated in these estimates, 

it would be a considerable improvement. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you have an 

opportunity to bring forward the questions that were asked 

there, and why don't you do so -- and the answers, if you wish. 

 

Mr. Minister, part of consultation, you say, is a two-way flow 

of information.  Well I can give you information -- and we do 

this in the House all the time; I say something and you say 

something -- but the real question is, is anybody listening?  So 

when you have information flow, do both parties listen to what 

the other is saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh, indeed.  The legislative proposals 

with which we started before the Labour tours were very 

different than what we finished up with.  The legislation 

changed as time went on and as ideas were received. 

 

I can give the hon. member any number of examples of that, if 

you want it.  It was indeed a process by which they listened and 

understood; we listened and understood.  And that might be a 

model of how this place should function, instead of these 

baseless allegations about wild expenditures of money. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there's a number of 

organizations across this province who feel that consultation 

process dealing with the new Bills before the House -- and I 

know we can't discuss the Bills and I'm not interested in that 

today, but the process leading up to that -- who feel that the 

consultation process was very, very poor in their particular 

cases. 

 

I talked with the Minister of Education in her estimates about 

this.  And the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) only found out about the consultations being done 

dealing with the labour legislation by accident, because they 

happened to be involved in another meeting where it was 

mentioned that there was some consultation taking place about 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

labour legislation.  And they found out only shortly before the 

final drafts were made. 

 

Now I don't know . . . this is a group, the SSTA, that is 

probably the largest employer in the province outside of the 

provincial government and the Crown corporations.  They have 

approximately 18,000 employees -- an area with 18,000 

employees, with a number of part-time employees and they're 

not even notified that there is this consultation taking place.  

They don't receive the information that is being discussed.  I 

think you're consultation was being done with picked groups, 

groups that you thought would support whatever type of 

legislation you were bringing forward. 

 

So who did you consult with, Mr. Minister, in drafting this 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can give you a written list of the 

groups if you want.  There were several hundred, I mean, of 

which the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 

is one. 

 

To be fair to the member from Souris-Cannington, you 

accurately, I think, reflect the views expressed by the SSTA.  

I'm going to be meeting with them later on in the day to pursue 

those comments -- and I am going to pursue them, because I 

don't entirely understand the nature of their concern. 

 

Let me say that the meeting wasn't . . . Let me say, first of all, 

the fact that we're consulting on labour Bills couldn't have 

come as a surprise to anyone.  Everybody in the province knew 

these Bills were coming and everybody knew we were talking 

about them.  My telephone number is not hard to find.  All you 

do is pick up a phone and phone. 

 

We did not receive any requests for a meeting from SSTA.  We 

called them.  We set up the meeting.  The meeting lasted an 

hour with myself and then I had to come back to the House; it 

continued for another three hours with the officials.  That was a 

longer meeting than anyone else had. 

 

It was said by them to be insufficient so we're meeting again 

today.  So I will admit that the member reflects the views of the 

SSTA.  I've got to honestly say, I don't entirely understand 

them and really welcome the opportunity later on today to 

resume this matter. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when you were 

planning your consultations, what did you do to allow people to 

know that labour legislation was going to come forward at this 

time, how did you inform the various parties?  What did you do 

to encourage them to come forward and take part in meaningful 

consultations with you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We would contact the local chamber 

and arrange a date, provide them with information which we 

had by way of background -- the proposals and so on.  Since 

we rarely had a list of who was coming and who wasn't, it was 

left to the local group to circulate the information.  It was  

certainly made available to them in most cases. 

 

Some of the meetings were arranged with less notice, and 

sometimes that didn't happen.  But in most cases, the 

organization and the local chamber or the local trade union, as 

the case may be, arranged a meeting.  They got the hall.  And 

as a matter of interest, in most cases they paid for it, which we 

appreciated.  They sent out the invitations and we went and met 

the group which they had brought.  So the usual arrangement 

was we contacted a chamber or a trade union, as the case would 

be; they issued the invitation and made most of the 

arrangements.  So that was the usual. 

 

I may say that this is the first time that we . . . we heard a good 

deal of comments about the government, the department, the 

legislation, last year, and not all of it complimentary.  Some of 

it was critical, as will be the case in any democratic group. 

 

This, however, is the first time I've had it said that this 

consultation was not meaningful.  Almost everybody who came 

to the meetings found the meetings useful, whether they agreed 

or not.  They came away with a better understanding of the 

complexity of the problem and we came away with a better 

understanding of their particular needs.  I think both benefited 

from the discussion. 

 

But you are the first group to suggest that this consultation was 

nothing but a public relations exercise.  The people who 

actually attended the meetings didn't feel that way. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think you used 

kind of a slipshod method of disseminating this information in 

your consultative efforts.  You would contact a local chamber 

of commerce and say, can you put on a meeting for me next 

week and I'll come and talk to you for an hour about the 

changes to the labour legislation.  And as my colleague 

mentioned, they said you would speak for three-quarters of an 

hour or so and allow perhaps a few questions at the end.  I think 

that's not a lot of consultation. 

 

Did the government invite anyone to meet with them to consult 

on this issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, at last count it was about 200 

groups we invited to meet with us. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, would you provide us with 

that list, the dates, and who they were? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we can provide that in 

reasonably short order.  I don't think we physically have it here.  

But we'll provide it to you within a matter of 48 . . . two 

working days. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you 

provide the time frame prior . . . or the notification they 

received of such meetings?  You know, was it a one-day notice, 

was it a week? What 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

was it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can give you averages.  I don't know 

that we've always logged that with every group; in fact I don't 

think we did.  So I don't think I can give you that.  I don't think 

that information was logged.  All we can do is give you some 

general comments about how much notice they generally had.  

It would have been, under normal circumstances, a couple of 

weeks, sometimes a little longer.  But we'll try and provide as 

precise information as still exists. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you 

give us a broad example of the types of groups or organizations 

you met with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  Well let me take you through 

a typical day then.  I think I'm going to pick, out of the blue, 

Meadow Lake. 

 

We started in Meadow Lake with a . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . It wasn't a very warm day.  A breakfast which . . . Now this 

shows what a shoestring operation this was.  If we couldn't get 

the local chamber or some other group to pay our expenses, we 

tried to unload the problem on the MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly).  And in this case the member from 

Meadow Lake was more than generous. 

 

We met with the health workers.  Meadow Lake has a 

relatively, because it serves a large geographical area, they had 

a relatively large number of mental health workers.  We met 

with those people, had a very good discussion actually, and we 

learned a good deal about the needs of that particular clientele 

in the workforce. 

 

We then met with the hospital workers, and again a very good 

meeting in which we discussed not only labour law but the 

wellness as well.  We met with the highways people, that's 

right, and again had a useful discussion with them. 

 

Met with, one of whom -- I don't think I'm talking out of 

school -- one of whom, as I recall it, worked in a bank, which 

was the first time I had realized . . . I think it was the Royal 

Bank . . . the first time I had realized that many of the things 

which we're doing in The Labour Standards Act, the Royal 

Bank has already been doing, which kind of interested me.  

This is not where I usually look to for progressive labour 

legislation. 

 

The comment of the people at the Royal Bank was very 

interesting.  They said, and this is part-time workers, that 

part-time workers are increasing in the banks.  And the 

comment was sort of to this effect:  you people -- meaning you 

politicians -- think anyone can run a bank. 

 

Well it is a difficult operation.  The success of a bank depends 

entirely on the quality of the people.  We found with part-time 

workers, when we did not provide them with a reasonable 

degree of protection and so on, we found we lost our best 

people and kept our worst.  You can't run a bank doing that. 

So we set up a system whereby they get part-time benefits.  The 

part-time workers get benefits on a prorated basis.  We set up a 

system whereby they're given adequate notice of scheduling 

and the workers are involved as well in the scheduling, and 

we've done all three of those things.  And they said, thereafter 

we found we were keeping the best people which is what you 

need to run a bank. 

 

So that was a meeting where it was very useful.  We found out 

at that . . . I developed, if not a new understanding of the labour 

laws, I got from that meeting a very interesting perspective on 

it. 

 

We met as well with the rural development office; met with 

those people and got an understanding of how these things 

might impact in some of the much smaller communities. 

 

We met with the chamber of commerce during the afternoon 

and we met as well, with social service workers.  And all in all, 

I think there was -- if I'm correctly counting -- about eight 

meetings during the day, all of which were informative for us 

and I got the feeling the people who had been there also found 

them informative.  Whether or not they agreed with this, they 

did have a better understanding of the complexity of a problem. 

 

So that's a typical day.  Your colleague from Maple Creek 

described it as a vacation.  It's a very strange vacation.  The day 

started at 7:30 in the morning; we went top speed until about 10 

o'clock at night.  About three of those days and it'll drain the 

energy of the most dynamic person.  And all of the people who 

are with us were among the most dynamic.  But that is a typical 

day. 

 

And the member from Maple Creek wants . . . the member 

from Meadow Lake wants it known that he enjoyed the whole 

exercise as well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm glad 

somebody enjoyed the process. 

 

Mr. Minister, when I look over your list, I'm wondering how 

much time you spent with the groups.  You have the health care 

workers, the hospital workers, the Highways department, rural 

development, chamber of commerce, social service workers. 

What kind of time frame were each allocated?  And you 

mentioned the one person from the bank. I'm not sure just 

where they fit into the process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- A half an hour for my comments, an 

hour for the question and answer. 

 

The member from Maple Creek I know is dying for all this 

information so let me give you a little.  I talked about the booze 

which had been supplied to former ministers.  I'm just going to 

give you one example. And I don't know how much you want 

to get into this, but I'm going to give you one example. 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board reported that it paid expenses 

totalling $16,000 for ministers to attend Big Valley Jamborees.  

I want you to compare that with the sort of tours that we were 

on.  I just want you to make a fair comparison.  The former 

government lived and travelled like Persian kings.  They really 

did.  It could not have been more opulent. 

 

We ran this on a shoestring budget.  Not only did the member 

from Meadow Lake pick up our expenses at one point in time 

but, if I'm not mistaken, the member from Swift Current did as 

well when we were there.  These expenditures, you will find 

when you check that sheet, are absolute bare bones. 

 

I want you to make a comparison with the sort of expenditures 

which your government . . . which the government made when 

you were in office.  And I know what you're going to say.  

You're going to stand up and say, ah, but that wasn't me.  And 

you're going to move to the Reform Party or you're going to 

move to the Liberal Party and leave it all behind.  And that's the 

way old line parties work, I guess.  As soon as the stench gets 

to be too bad, you just pick up your stuff and go to a new party.  

And that's the way you do it. 

 

Well I just want to say here and now that this is not what the 

New Democratic Party does.  We have been a political party 

for over six decades.  We have a history that we are very proud 

of.  Not once in those six decades has any member of this 

political party every wanted to move away from any stench.  

We have built and we are proud of the way we have 

built -- unlike members opposite who create the most 

unbelievable stench and then they go Reform, or then they go 

Liberal.  I just want it known that that may be your style and 

you may think that's smart politics, but it's not our style. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't answer for 

the member from Maple Creek or for the Liberals in the House, 

but when we talk about a stench in this field, I think we saw 

one covered up last night downstairs in the Board of Internal 

Economy.  But if the member from Maple Creek wishes to rise 

and speak for himself, he can do so, or if . . . I'm even prepared 

to let the Liberals stand up and do that if they wish, and I'll do 

that right now for them. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I gather they don't wish to respond. 

 

Mr. Minister, your meetings in Meadow Lake that the member 

from Meadow Lake enjoyed so greatly, I notice that the 

majority of those people would have, in my mind . . . could be 

described as union members, when you look at the health care 

workers, the hospital workers, the Highways department, and 

Social Services.  You had one meeting with someone outside of 

either union or politics.  And I would classify politics as rural 

development because those people, in most cases, represent the 

rural RMs (rural municipality) and the smaller communities, 

the villages, etc. 

 

So you had one meeting, from your description, with the 

business community and that being an hour 

 meeting with the chamber of commerce.  Mr. Minister, when 

you look at the chamber of commerce and the other industries 

across this province, you're talking the people who hire, the 

people who create the jobs in this province, and that being 

small business.  And yet on your typical day, they got one 

meeting of about an hour. 

 

The people who create the jobs -- the real jobs in this 

province -- where something is made and there's a product at 

the end of the day that we sell and create all the other work in 

this province from.  And I think that is a very poor 

performance, Mr. Minister, that you would provide them with 

only one hour.  Because you have a broad range from A to Z of 

all the different kinds of jobs and industries there, and yet they 

received an hour. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, it's extremely important that not only 

do you talk to your union colleagues, but that you talk to the 

people who do create the jobs in this province, because they're 

affected by your decisions, by the legislation that you bring 

forward. 

 

And I would hope that your consultation would be a lot more 

in-depth than what you provided an example of today.  Because 

you're looking at the people who we, as a province and you as 

government, are going to rely on to create these 16,000 jobs 

that you've promised since coming into government.  Mind you 

the longer you stay in government the lower your expectations 

are of creating jobs.  Even the Minister of Finance, in this 

budget, didn't bring forward much of a job creation aspect.  

Certainly not compared to last year when I believe it was going 

to be 8,000 or 9,000 jobs. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, will you give the people of this province who 

create the jobs a greater opportunity to have consultation and 

input into this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think the member will find when 

you get the list of people we met with, that about 60 to 70 per 

cent of the groups we met with were employers and not 

employees.  The majority of the people we met with were 

employers, so I know the member will want to study that list 

with considerable care.  And in order that he may do so, and in 

accordance with the comments which I've made earlier, I'm 

changing, if I might, to my role as assistant House Leader. 

 

I move that we report progress in these estimates, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

(1200) 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the minister to 

please introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Chairman, to my left is Lynn 

Tulloch, acting director of finance 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

and administration; to my immediate left is Mr. Clare Kirkland, 

deputy minister; on my right is Bernie Churko, assistant deputy 

minister, policy and programs division; and behind me is Don 

Metz, assistant deputy minister, operations division. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

welcome, and welcome to your assistants from your 

department.  It will be an enjoyable task I'm sure for me to be 

able to find out where the money is being spent in the 

Department of Highways for this year.  And I'm sure that the 

people of Saskatchewan will be interested in hearing your 

answers, as we present the questions to you, to determine 

whether or not they're getting fair value for the dollars that they 

are spending in their taxes. 

 

Just off the top of my head to start with, Minister, we look at a 

budget of over $5 billion for this province and yet the . . . and it 

looks to me like about a half a billion increase over a couple of 

years ago.  Taxes people are complaining about are up all 

though the province on every front and in every sector, more 

and more money being squeezed out of fewer and fewer 

working people and going to pay yet an ever increasing amount 

for the government to spend. 

 

And yet in your department, the Department of Highways, one 

of the lower cost departments for the province, yet one of the 

more important and obviously seen departments in the province 

. . . The Department of Highways is something that provides 

the road structure for our province that everybody pretty well 

sees and uses on a daily basis.  So it's very critical to everyone 

that we have good roads. 

 

So while I said it's not a real big department in terms of Health 

and Education, as far as cost, it is one of the more important 

things in most people's lives.  After all, cars hurtling down the 

roads at 62 kilometres an hour hitting a broken piece of 

pavement can easily cost someone their life. 

 

So I'd like to have you explain to us, Minister, why in a 

province that has so many roads, as we have because of our 

geography and the large size of our province, why have you not 

been able to be successful in getting the Minister of Finance to 

allocate you more dollars to your department on a prorated 

proportional basis with the increase of the taxes taken in by this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm sure the 

member just has to sit back and analyse the 10 years of the 

Tory administration where they spent a billion dollars a year 

more than they were taking in, causing a debt in this province 

of over $12 billion, which means, Mr. Chairman, that we now 

have to spend over $800 million a year in interest. 

 

Well in spending $850 million a year in interest, we find that 

each department in government has to take a little bit out of 

their spending to pay interest to Hong Kong, Zürich, the United 

States, eastern Canada.  And certainly it disturbs us to have to 

do this, but we have 

 to play the hand that we were dealt with, Mr. Chairman. And 

that's what we are doing.  We didn't, like some members, fold 

our hand and run.  We're playing the hand that we were dealt 

with. 

 

Highways in this province is a priority to this government.  It's 

a priority to the people.  We have an infrastructure, a $6 billion 

infrastructure.  We have 25 per cent of all the highways in 

Canada.  And we intend to maintain them and protect them to 

the best of our ability within the financial constraints that we 

face because of the debt that your government caused. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, I 

asked you for an explanation and you were kind enough to give 

me one.  But I have some problems with your answer because it 

really just doesn't wash.  The reality of life is that you talk 

about playing with the deck you were dealt, or the hand you 

were dealt.  The reality is that you are playing with a deck that's 

missing a few cards.  And I'll go on to explain that. 

 

You talk about the interest you have to pay at a time when 

interest rates have fallen from about the 12 per cent range since 

you took power, have fallen now to about the 4 per cent range.  

A few years before that, they peaked at 22 to 24 per cent.  Now 

it seems to me in a world of diminishing costs your government 

is pretty inefficient at taking advantage of the real world around 

you and getting your costs in line with the kinds of interest 

rates that are available. 

 

Perhaps you better hire one of my colleagues here to help you 

to figure out how to get a loan at 4 or 5 or 6 per cent, the going 

rates that the banks are offering these days, and stop throwing 

away the taxpayers' money on high interest rates to Germany 

and Hong Kong when you could have borrowed the money 

from your own people right at home at a lot less. 

 

And my colleague mentions you could stop wasting a lot of 

taxpayers' money, and it's a good point. When you start 

throwing $20,000 bills at fly prevention for one of your 

colleagues who has a fly problem, that in itself tells you the 

direction that this government is going in the waste and 

mismanagement of money.  Not to mention that you are taking 

in a half a billion dollars more in taxes than you did before, and 

that proportional increase of tax money that you're taking in has 

not been reflected in the kind of dollars that have been 

allocated to your department. 

 

And while I have no objection with you paying off part of the 

interest from your department and taking a fair proportional hit 

on those things that need to be paid for . . . Everybody has to do 

that in our society; that's commonly accepted. 

 

It's being done in Alberta, it's being done in spades in Ontario 

where they've got a deficit that would make your head spin.  

But everybody is contributing -- everybody is 

contributing -- and that's fine.  But the reality has to be here 

that the monies that are left over after you've paid off the 

interest that you're worried about, those are the monies now 

that we allocate to 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

the different departments and spend through the province. 

 

And I'm saying that you must be a very weak minister if you 

haven't been able to convince the government to give you a 

proportion of that increase.  That increase in taxation that is 

being taken in is not being reflected in the road building and 

road construction and road maintenance program that we have 

in this province.  And I'm saying to you, what are you doing 

about that?  You have to lobby harder because we've got some 

serious problems. 

 

Now I want to get into the specifics of the way that the 

Department of Highways is running so that we can try to 

determine, Minister, if there is a way for you to provide better 

service to our community for the monies that you're spending, 

and to find out exactly where your priorities are and what your 

policies are. 

 

So I want to start by asking you, Minister, could you tell us in a 

kind of a review formula for road crew staff -- and I suppose 

you run your road crew staff under some kind of a 

formula -- could you tell us the number of crew members per 

kilometre in the highway?  Or how does that work where you 

determine the number of workers that you will have working in 

the field? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, 

the member opposite I guess does not realize what debt and 

deficit is all about.  When you borrow money, you lock it in 

normally.  So this is the situation of our debt.  So whatever the 

interest rate is today, Mr. Member, does not mean that we have 

a reduction in the interest that we have to pay because that debt 

is locked in. 

 

To your question, there are 128 crews working on asphalt 

highways, employing a total of 603 staff in summer and 450 in 

winter.  There is an average of 37 kilometres per employee, and 

in the winter there's an average of 40.  There are 19 crews 

working on gravel roads.  There are a total of 47 staff in the 

summer and 37 in the winter.  And that works out to 45 

kilometres per employee in the summer and 28 kilometres in 

the winter. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, for those direct figures.  

I want to assure you that I understand debt and deficit very 

well.  In my previous workload in life was a farmer, so I can 

assure you that I know all about debt and deficit. 

 

And I know something else about it, sir, that maybe you should 

pay attention to.  The reality is that your government is 

charging a 10 per cent surtax on everybody's income tax; not 

that there's very many people left in Saskatchewan that can 

make an income that's taxable.  But on those that do have to 

pay taxes, most of those who are on fixed incomes working for 

some level of government, you are charging them a 10 per cent 

surtax to pay off the debt in this province. 

 

And you say that the debt is locked in.  Then are you not telling 

these people that that money can't be 

applied to where you told them it was going to be applied?  Are 

you saying that no matter what you do you can't pay off the 

debt because it's locked in?  And if it isn't locked in and you 

can pay it off with that 10 per cent surtax that you're charging 

everybody, then in reality you can renegotiate your interest 

rates.  And I say to you that your government is doing a very 

bad job of that. 

 

But I want to get back to these estimates on the Department of 

Highways, because you're not performing your job in the 

Department of Highways the way you should be either and we 

want to help you to try and get that done. 

 

I've seen roads that are an absolute disgrace.  And we're going 

to get into this, and we're going to get specific about roads, 

individual ones even as we go along, because we cannot 

tolerate the way that the road system in this province is being 

handled and treated now.  So we're going to have to build on 

this a little bit at a time. 

 

And I want to know in this 45-kilometre formula that you have 

developed for the summer and 28 for the winter, have there 

been any changes to this formula in the past year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Well first of all I want to say that this 

government did look for all the expenses that it could trim from 

each department to meet the needs of the interest payments.  It 

had to increase taxes unfortunately.  And I'm sure you 

apologize to the people that you meet on the street.  And the 

Saskatchewan people are very supportive of this. 

 

In 1996-97 the balanced-budget plan is in place and it's on 

target.  This year's deficit will be the lowest since 1982 -- the 

lowest per capita deficit in the country.  So I believe that we are 

doing our job and with full support and full thanks has to go to 

the Saskatchewan people. 

 

In regards to the other portion of your question, there has been 

no major changes in the last year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I thought, Minister, that we had heard that 

there was going to be a reduction in the number of highway 

workers to correspond with certain cut-backs that were 

announced in the past while.  And I wonder if you'd just think 

about that for a minute, because it seems to me that there were 

a fair number of people that were laid off in different 

government departments and that Highways in fact was 

affected by that.  And I'd like to know where those jobs came 

from and who hasn't been replaced and how this is all working 

out. 

 

(1215) 

 

With regards to your balanced budget, sir, I'm quite happy to 

hear that you're going to have a balanced budget and that your 

yearly deficit will be down, even though you haven't allocated 

any money to pay off the debt and are jigging the figures on 

your balances within the Crowns in order to manipulate what it 

will 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

appear to be, a break-even point. 

 

But if you do accomplish that, at least we will know that you 

will have 5-billion-plus dollars to spend on actual needs of the 

province.  And that should indicate to you, Minister, that you 

should get a bigger proportion of that money to spend on 

highways in this province.  Because after all, then you will 

have that extra half a billion dollars of tax money to use for the 

government purposes.  And your share of that should come to a 

fair, tidy sum and we ought to be able to get the No. 1 Highway 

from Tompkins to Alberta double-laned, for example. 

 

Now it seems to me that if you're going in that direction, what 

you'll want to do is to make sure that you get your share of that 

money to spend on roads like that so that we can get some of 

these problems with our highways corrected. 

 

So with the changes that you've made and the reductions, I 

think maybe I want to get your answer about the people that 

were laid off first before I go into this next segment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- In the 1994-95 budget there are eight 

positions.  Seven are early retirement situations and one moved 

down to the crew, to the work crew, and that were the positions 

that will be affected this year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Could the minister 

estimate and describe any projects to be included within the 

Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you.  The Department of 

Highways have put some projects forward to the infrastructure 

committee, the provincial-federal infrastructure committee, and 

we have heard no word at this point in time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I'm glad that you're at 

least getting into the feel of this thing and starting to work 

towards getting some work done.  Does the minister intend to 

use this program as sort of a reverse offloading?  In other 

words, does his department intend to scale back its 

commitment to road building and maintenance in the province 

in proportion with the funding from this source? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- As you probably are aware, Mr. 

Member, that we do not know and we did not know if any of 

our suggested projects will be accepted under the infrastructure 

program, so there has been no scaling down of our budget 

because of the infrastructure program. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that leads me to wonder, when do you 

expect that you would get some kind of information or a 

commitment?  Have you, for example, received any 

commitments from the federal government regarding these 

projects, or have you just applied to the provincial arm of this 

project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Chairman, the infrastructure  

program works with a federal person on the committee, a 

provincial person on the committee.  It's a program that is 

generally funded by one-third federal government, one-third 

provincial government, and one-third municipal government.  

In the case of Highways of course, it would be one-third 

federal, two-thirds provincial. 

 

And so we have no word.  We do not know when we will 

receive word of our requested projects.  I can't answer any 

more clearly than that to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well in spite of the fact that you aren't sure if 

you're being clear, it does help because you've told me now that 

you're probably not involving any municipalities, urban or 

rural, in the projects that you are proposing; that you in fact 

then would be paying two-thirds of the cost of these suggested 

projects from government coffers -- one-third out of the 

Department of Highways, one-third from a different 

department of provincial government, and one-third federal.  Is 

that clear, or have I got it wrong? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Some of the projects will be funded of 

course one-third, one-third, one-third with 

Highways -- hopefully.  And that's if perhaps the private sector 

would find some funding.  Perhaps there's a special project in a 

municipality that doesn't fit in with their section of the 

infrastructure program that they would apply separately, with 

the Saskatchewan government and federal government as 

partners. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My understanding, Minister, was that these 

projects depend on municipal applications for projects.  Are 

you saying to us that there are some projects that can be done 

without municipal participation, that that rule can be waived?  

Just to follow that a little further while you're discussing this 

with your assistants there, does this not throw into disarray the 

strategy planning the department may have already done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- We in Highways have proposals.  They 

have been sent to the committee and we would hope to hear 

from the committee in the near future. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would there be any reason why you might 

not be able to share what those proposals are with us?  If there 

are no reasons, would you share with us what those proposals 

are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I would, through Mr. Chairman, that this 

might not be the best thing to do at this time because some of 

the communities that may be involved or some of the other 

municipalities or some of the private sector people have not 

maybe completed their work in regards to the projects.  So I 

would think it would be inappropriate at this time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Have these projects 

been put into the budgetary process for your department for this 

year?  And I know that you will also 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

want to tell us whether or not there are plans to consult with the 

municipalities, to coordinate their projects with whatever 

strategic plans the department may have drawn up, but also to 

allow them time to put these plans into their own budgetary 

processes. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- To introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman, sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to introduce 

you and the other members to some guests sitting in the west 

gallery there.  They are Debbie McDonald, who's my 

constituency assistant, and her daughter Alexis, who she 

brought in to see the workings of the legislature.  And I'd like 

you to join with me in welcoming them to this House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a separate section 

in Estimates under the Saskatchewan infrastructure program on 

page 109 of the Estimates book.  There is a fund set up for the 

infrastructure program, so it is not included in the Highways 

and Transportation budget. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay.  I want to know then, Minister, are you 

going to do some consulting with the municipalities to 

coordinate these projects, to lead you into the rest of the 

question that I'd asked.  Will you be consulting with them, 

meeting with them, giving them an opportunity to know where 

they can expect to go, so that they build these plans into their 

budgetary processes for the year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I know they'll appreciate hearing that.  At the 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

meeting last month, Minister, the province's civic officials 

expressed a number of concerns with the Department of 

Highways about the operations and the plans.  And particularly 

they wanted to know when the province would complete the 

twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway between the Alberta 

border and I think it's around some place on this side of 

Tompkins. 

 

Now can the Minister respond to these concerns which were 

expressed I guess in the Leader-Post on February 3, and 

obviously you probably followed the SUMA convention and 

are aware of those concerns,  

but we would like an answer to those concerns about that 

particular highway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   Our priority 

of course is to work on the twinning of all highways in 

Saskatchewan that should be twinned.  Gull Lake to the Alberta 

border is certainly one of those.  Under the SHIP (strategic 

highway improvement program) which was signed last year, 

we are spending $70 million on Highway No. 16 from 

Saskatoon to North Battleford.  The reason this highway was 

given priority is because of the traffic which was about $1,200 

more . . . 1,200 cars per day, and also the accident rate and the 

fatality rate.  We would hope that we would be able to work 

with the federal government to sign more deals like this, that 

would enable us to twin the Highway No. 1, not only from Gull 

Lake to the Alberta border, but from Indian Head to the 

Manitoba border and the remainder of 16 as well. 

 

It's interesting to note, Mr. Chairman, that the $855 million that 

we have to pay in interest this year, would have twinned the 

No. 1 from the Alberta border four and a half times.  We would 

have been able to twin Gull Lake to the Alberta border 

twenty-five times, Mr. Chairman.  So this is the effect that our 

interest payments have on this province. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, for that political 

analysis of the province's financial problems.  I have a little 

problem  with your argument though, Minister.  It seems that 

the Minister of Health said that $855 million was all coming 

out of her budget, that she could no longer provide health care 

services because of that interest. 

 

Then I heard the Minister of Education suggest that she 

couldn't provide education because of that.  Now that leaves 

about $5 billion that you have to spend over and above that, 

and it seems to me that you're all using the same scapegoat 

here.  And I suggest that you stop all trying to push one another 

off of that scapegoat and start talking about the $5 billion that 

you do have to spend and tell us where you're going to spend it 

and why the Department of Highways has taken the short end, 

quite frankly, of the budgetary money that is available, and 

why you're not spending it to improve the roads, when you 

make silly comments like $800 million could double-lane the 

whole Trans-Canada Highway, I obviously have to respond 

with something silly like, the deficit in Ontario is much higher 

than ours, billions of dollars more -- probably hundreds of 

millions of dollars more in interest being paid on their debt than 

on ours, then most likely we could double-lane the highway all 

clean across Canada. 

 

And what good would that do us?  What kind of help is that 

rhetoric going to provide to the Saskatchewan people who 

know very well that you have $5 billion of money that you can 

and do have available, to spend.  There's no comfort for people 

to listen to the rhetoric.  What they want to know is what you're 

going to do about the actual problems with the money that you 

do  



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

have to spend. 

 

And that leads me to the question, Minister, about the SUMA 

meeting again, taking you back to that, because at that same 

meeting the mayor of Gull Lake, Gerry Elmslie, expressed 

concerns that Highway No. 37 had become eroded by heavy 

commercial traffic.  Can the minister speak to the condition of 

No. 37 Highway and tell us if he intends any direct further 

funding to the upgrading of that particular road? 

 

And while you're talking about that road, because the No. 1 

Highway and the twinning of that road has become such a 

contentious issue and is in the same area, you may want to 

respond further to your direct plans of future beginning of the 

construction of that double-laning in that area, as well as some 

specific dates that you might consider working on the 37 

Highway problem that the mayor of Gull Lake expressed to 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly 

agree with the member opposite that we would all, each and 

every department, would like a little bit of the $855 million that 

we pay in interest, and I can understand that, in place of it 

going to bond agencies and financial institutions outside of this 

country. 

 

We are spending $62 million this year on our highways.  There 

is $22 million being spent in rural Saskatchewan.  With the 

addition of some infrastructure funding, we will be at a level 

that we were last year.  And I think that's remarkable, 

considering the debt that this province has. 

 

We have excellent maintenance crews in our province.  We 

have an excellent maintenance department that keep our 

highways as best they can.  And in regards to No. 37 Highway, 

I'm sure you're aware that it was your government that pulled 

the urban assistance program in 1990-91. 

 

We realize that communities would like to see some help in 

regards to highways running through their communities.  The 

Transportation Policy Council which is made up of department 

officials, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA, are looking at this issue.  But with 

our financial situation at this time, it's going to be very difficult 

to provide extra funding to urban municipalities in regards to 

highways running through their communities.  But we certainly 

intend to look at this problem, and in consultation with 

communities and SUMA and SARM people. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  Mr. Minister, 

welcome to you and your officials.  First of all, I'm going to 

start out by saying thank you.  That may be just a little unheard 

of at times, but I'm certain the people that travel No. 9 Highway 

south of Whitewood in the Kenosee park area really appreciate 

the fact that Highways finally took a serious look at that 

intersection going into the main . . . or the turn-off onto the 

Kenosee park access since it was right at the top of a hill.  For a 

long period of time 

the highway kind of converged right at the top where people 

were turning on and it made it very difficult. 

 

There was negotiations over a period of years with Highways 

to try and get Highways to extend that widening and 

lengthening it so that if traffic was proceeding up the hill and 

traffic was coming out of the main intersection, it would give 

room for the traffic that was moving right through to continue 

on. 

 

And so the fact that it's been completed and upgraded, I want to 

commend the Highway officials for having taken that 

consideration, as it certainly has alleviated not only congestion, 

but the fact that it was somewhat of a traffic hazard. 

 

Fortunately there weren't any major mishaps, but there were 

certainly some close calls.  And people really appreciate that.  

The village of Kenosee certainly appreciates it, and certainly 

the department officials . . . Parks officials as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, you made a comment about your budget being 

somewhat similar to where it was last year.  And if I'm not 

mistaken -- I just didn't quite catch the number -- I'm not sure if 

it was in the neighbourhood of 67 million.  I wonder if you 

could just give us an indication of what you're budgeting for 

highway expenditure and construction this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Highways budget in construction is 

$62.5 million this year. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- It's 62.5 million for this year.  Mr. Minister, what 

I'm wondering, and I'm just going over it, I notice . . . certainly 

No. 9, just a little north of where I happen to live south of 

Whitewood, it was resurfaced last year.  And I notice a fair 

sized hole developing in the road.  And that may have been 

patched already, because I don't think they could afford . . . the 

department, or the Highways personnel locally couldn't afford 

to let that hole continue to expand. 

 

Considering the difficult season that most contractors were 

working with last year, the weather conditions, I'm wondering 

if your department has been called or if there are a number of 

areas where you're finding that some of the construction last 

year is not standing up.  And I would think it would be based 

on the weather circumstances. 

 

Are there any construction projects that are going to have to be 

upgraded or be revisited this year, and if so, what kind of a cost 

will that be to the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly we have to 

revisit in some cases, or some repairs have to be done, but we 

don't see this more than usual. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, how many projects are being carried 

over from the 1993 construction year? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- With leave, Mr. Chairman, to 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1994 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- It's my pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 

to you and through you to other members of the Assembly, 39 

grade 7 and 8 students from Sister O'Brien School, which is 

located in my riding of Saskatoon River Heights in Saskatoon, 

on a visit to the legislature today and to Regina.  I expect to be 

meeting them later on to answer their questions about the 

nature of the inspirational dialogue that's happening here this 

morning. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 

Regina and to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sure the member did 

receive a copy of the projects this year.  There are about 25 

projects that are carry-overs and I would be more than happy to 

supply the member with the information as to the exact projects 

if he would like to request that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, regarding the 25 carry-overs, I 

would take it then that in the budget year 1993, these projects 

that due to the unfavourable weather conditions that were faced 

last year in the construction season, those budgeted amounts 

will be carried over into this year and that would be a budget 

. . . You've got 62.5 million for construction this year.  Is that 

including last year's carry-over or are we looking at this year's 

construction plus last year's carry-over and we'd be looking at 

say a figure in the neighbourhood of maybe $90 million of 

construction to take place this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- The carry-over in each year is projects 

only, and it comes then from this year's budget.  Am I clear to 

the hon. member?  And this is normal procedure from year to 

year that if there is a carry-over at the end of the year any 

projects are carried over . . . we're not using 1993 money any 

more but we're using this year's budget. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, if you 

had $62.5 million for construction last year and, just for rough 

figures, 10 projects didn't proceed because timing didn't allow 

it  . . . and I'm just, a rough guess -- maybe we've got about $25 

million.  The actual construction last year would have been . . . 

or dollars used for construction would have been more in the 42 

to 45 million versus the 62 million. 

 

You come into this year.  The project carry-overs then 

are part of this year's budget; we don't really add it on.  Is that 

what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you indicated that there was a 

pamphlet that came out from the department regarding projects; 

and yes, I remember seeing the pamphlet.  Where's most of the 

construction taking place?  Is it fairly . . . is it say in the 

northern half of the province, in the western side of the 

province?  Is my colleague from Maple Creek getting most of 

the money or are we . . . where is the money really being 

handled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- It's distributed by engineering 

requirements.  And it's spread out fairly equally, I believe, 

across the province but I haven't really taken a close look at it.  

But I can provide the member with a map if he wishes.  A lot of 

the work is in regards to the SHIP program, so we're looking at 

a cross-Canada network, like No. 16 again will have 

considerable amount of work. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, my colleagues have raised the 

twinning of Highway No. 1 west of Maple Creek I believe, 

certainly of course representing the eastern side of the 

province, and I believe Manitoba, the province of Manitoba, 

was within a few kilometres of twinning No. 1 to the 

Saskatchewan border. 

 

Is the province at the present time looking at further twinning 

of No. 1, Indian Head and east, towards the Manitoba border? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I say to the hon. member that No. 1 

remains a priority.  The reason the funding went into 16 last 

year was because of the traffic counts.  On the highway 

between Saskatoon and North Battleford the daily average 

traffic was 3,500 vehicles per day.  The Gull Lake to the 

Alberta border is 2,300, and that's approximate figures. 

 

The cost of the highway between North Battleford and 

Saskatoon is $35 million.  The cost of the highway between 

Gull Lake and the Alberta border is $32 million.  The section 

from Indian Head to the Manitoba border is $52 million. 

 

We will continue to work with the federal government on a 

national highway program.  Perhaps it's similar to SHIP or 

whatever it might be, but I'm thinking that they are interested in 

it, and we certainly are.  We haven't got enough money on our 

own to proceed with twinning of the No. 1 at this time.  It is a 

priority. 

 

It's interesting to note that the federal government in Canada 

provides about 6 per cent of the funding to the national 

highway structure.  It's the lowest in all the industrial countries.  

The next lowest is the United States, I believe, at about 38 per 

cent.  So we have to convince that the federal government has 

some responsibility in our national highway infrastructure. 



March 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That was my next 

question: how much does the federal government commit to the 

national highway program?  You're telling us today 6 per cent 

is what you can expect the federal government to put into the 

national highway program. 

 

Now when we're talking of national highway program, I take it 

that No. 1 would be a national highway.  And I'm wondering, is 

No. 16 as well considered part of the national program?  And if 

you're looking at 6 per cent, how many actual dollars are 

coming to the province of Saskatchewan regarding highway 

funding and highway construction?  And of the 62.5, how 

much is funding from the federal government or is there 

additional funding over and above the 62.5? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- At this time any federal program is ad 

hoc, sort of.  It's on agreements that the province can make with 

the federal government. 

 

All provinces are interested in developing a highway, a national 

highway program.  Under SHIP, the agreement that was signed, 

the cost-sharing is on a 50/50 split, so the $70 million that will 

be spent in Saskatchewan over the next five years will be 35 

provincial and 35 federal. 

 

Highway 16 is a consideration under the national transportation 

network.  And federal money to be used this year under the 

SHIP program will be $8 million and it will be matched by the 

province's $8 million. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I may have missed it.  I don't know 

if you indicated to my colleague how far . . . or west you're 

proceeding with twinning of Highway No. 16, where it is 

today, and where you hope to be at the end of this construction 

season? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Through Mr. Chairman, in 1994 there 

are 11.8 kilometres on Highway 16 east of Fielding to east of 

Maymont.  There are 12.03 kilometres east of Maymont to east 

of Ruddell.  There is 14.78 kilometres east of Ruddell to west 

of Denholm, and then west of Denholm to the existing 

four-lane which is another 14.5 kilometres, and there Radisson 

to east of Fielding 12.76 kilometres.  I could also provide the 

member with a map that may better explain that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:54 p.m. 

 


