




















































Hansard: February 23, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  363
 February 23, 1994 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, are a group of public servants.  We 
have a number of such tours every year, and it is my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to other members 
of the House, the tour that is taking place today.  These 
public servants are from the departments of Municipal 
Government, Finance, Social Services, the Public Service 
Commission, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation), and the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would members of the House please welcome 
these public servants to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy today 
to introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, to the 
members of the Assembly, a resident of the city of Regina, 
Mr. George Sharpe, who is seated in your gallery.  Mr. 
Sharpe is here today to observe the workings of the House 
and to see how democracy is served. 
 
So I would ask the members of the House to please help me 
to welcome Mr. Sharpe today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Effects of Federal Budget 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 
the Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, yesterday's 
federal budget contained a number of measures that will 
increase the amount of federal income tax paid by 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
As you know, since the amount of provincial income tax a 
person pays is based on a percentage of the federal tax, this 
increase will also mean an increase in the amount of 
provincial income tax paid by Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell the people of Saskatchewan 
how much more provincial income tax they can expect to 
pay this year as a result of yesterday's federal budget?  In 
particular, how much extra will be collected as a result of the 
changes in the business expense and how much will be 
collected as a result of the cancellation of the capital gains 
tax exemption? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not have the 
exact numbers except I can make this comment.  First of all, 
we do applaud the Liberal government for plugging some of 
the tax loopholes, but we also would point out that this 
government here made a commitment to not increase taxes 
and we lived up to that commitment.  No increase in income, 
sales, gas tax. 
 
You'll notice that the Liberals, the PM (Prime Minister) 
vows, no new taxes in this story.  In fact, what will happen in 
Saskatchewan is 27,000 senior citizens will pay more taxes.  
A senior citizen earning $35,000 a year will pay more than 
$200 more in taxes.  So I will get you the numbers that you 
asked for.  But my point is this.  This government said, no 
new taxes -- we delivered our promise.  No new taxes. 
 
When Liberals say no new taxes, they mean sort of, maybe, 
no new taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you pledged 
to Saskatchewan you would have no new taxes and no new 
tax increases in 1994 and now we see that you will have a tax 
increase of millions of taxpayers' dollars this year, courtesy 
of the federal tax charges.  And those changes will 
implement a tax paid to the Saskatchewan government on 
behalf of a tax roll that was initiated by the federal 
government.  Since this money was not budgeted for and is 
not necessary to meet your budget targets, what will you be 
doing to offset this increase and live up to your promise of 
no new taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, it would be a funny 
day in Regina if we actually were to make money on a 
federal budget.  I'd like to make a couple of points. 
 
Beyond the tax on senior citizens, most of the tax increases 
are plugging loopholes.  For example, let's look for a 
moment at the capital gains exemption.  The main users of 
the capital gains exemption, in Saskatchewan, are farmers 
and small business.  To this point they're exempted, although 
I would caution both farmers and small business -- the 
Liberals are committed to reviewing this exemption. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Reviewing everything. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, that's right.  They're 
reviewing almost everything.  So whatever gains there are 
will be very marginal.  There will also be an offset; 85 per 
cent of the people on unemployment insurance will have 
their benefits cut. 
 
What we know is that when Liberal and Tory governments -- 
and they both do the same here -- cut unemployment 
insurance benefits, more people end up on welfare, so our 
welfare costs unfortunately will be going up. 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, in your Delivering the 
Promise book, you said in here that you would have $26 
million as a part of a tax credit on tax credits for aged people 
. . . $30 million, excuse me.  The capital gains exemption 
was $26 million.  Are you in fact going to allow the people 
to get a benefit of that back to them?  That is a total of 30 . . . 
or 30 plus 26 is $56 million, Madam Minister.  Are you 
going to give that back to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan?  That's the question I'm asking you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite should not get into numbers. It's never been their 
strong suit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What I have said to the member 
opposite is that any benefit to the treasury of Saskatchewan 
will be minimal.  We don't have an exact number, and the 
moment I have an exact number, I'll give it to the member 
opposite. 
 
But what I have said as well is, sadly, there's going to be an 
offset here.  We know of one change -- the reduction in 
benefits to people on unemployment insurance; 85 per cent 
of them are going to be getting less.  So that will mean that 
we will have an offsetting expense.  Sadly, there are going to 
be more people on welfare in this province, and it's because 
of the Liberal government's changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, one area 
of particular concern is the reduction of seniors' tax credit, 
Madam Minister, and you touched on that.  But the seniors 
with $26,000 as an income are going to have an increase in 
their taxes.  Anybody over that is going to have an increase.  
A 30,000 will have $107 more in federal tax and $57 more in 
provincial tax.  A senior with a $40,000 income will have 
370 federal tax, 197 provincial tax.  A senior with 49,000 
will have 610 more federal tax and $326 more in provincial 
tax, Madam Minister.  Given your pledge of no tax increases, 
what are you going to do to offset this major provincial tax 
increase for seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I agree with the 
member opposite.  For a government that promised no new 
taxes, there are new taxes in this budget.  And they are taxes 
particularly on seniors although other people in 
Saskatchewan will also be paying more taxes. 
 
Unfortunately we can't control what the Liberal government 
does.  If we could we wouldn't have come out with a budget 
like this.  Again only the members of the previous 
administration would say that, maybe if 

you're getting a million dollars more it's a windfall and you 
should find out how to spend it.  Only that kind of thinking 
could have got us into this kind of mess. 
 
What we're saying is there is no windfall here.  It doesn't 
exist.  There are going to be other costs imposed upon the 
province by the same budget.  But let me say this:  if we ever 
did have a windfall we wouldn't go out and spend it, we'd use 
it to reduce the deficit to get this problem behind us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, 
yesterday I believe I heard the Premier criticize this massive 
tax hike on seniors.  Now that seems to be a little bit 
hypocritical coming from a government that has undertaken 
the single most brutal attack on seniors in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The government has cancelled seniors' heritage fund, gutted 
the pension plan, closed hospitals, long-term bed funding, 
increased costs in insulin, oxygen, chiropractic, optometric 
care.  The government hiked utility bills, taxes, and has made 
it extremely difficult for thousands of seniors on fixed 
incomes to live from month to month. 
 
And it seems to be even more hypocritical now that you 
stand here, and you will say to us, that your $30 million in 
seniors' tax credits are going to be taken away from them.  If 
you are so confident of your budget targets, and if you are 
really committed to no tax increases, why is it necessary for 
the province to exploit the federal government's massive tax 
increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make clear 
to the member opposite what I'm saying about the increased 
taxes on senior citizens.  It's an issue of credibility.  It's an 
issue of who does practise the new politics?  Who actually 
says to the people of Saskatchewan this is the way it is?  You 
may not like everything you're hearing but this is the way it 
is.  We tell you the way it is.  We tell you what our plan is to 
fix it -- because we do have a plan -- and then we make a 
promise to you which we live up to. 
 
The other issue is what happens with the Liberals?  They say 
no new taxes but they don't deliver on that promise.  We 
believe on delivering on our promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Co-generation Projects 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on 
the same day that we heard the Premier of the province 
roundly criticize the federal government for maintaining the 
Moose Jaw air base under a cloud of suspicion, the minister 
responsible for SaskPower announces that a possible 
co-generation plant for Moose Jaw is gone.  Nine other 
communities in the 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

province, Mr. Speaker -- a lot of them in rural Saskatchewan 
-- had their hopes dashed and they're still wondering out 
there what happened to them. 
 
The government opposite, Mr. Speaker, touted co-generation 
as a wonderful economic development project -- especially 
for rural Saskatchewan.  I would quote from the throne 
speech of '92: 
 

 My government will also use Crown corporations to help 
stimulate economic development.  SaskPower is currently 
evaluating . . . proposals from private industry (to develop) 
co-generation power projects. 

 
These are an important economic development. 
 
My question to the Minister of Economic Development: Mr. 
Minister, now that another job creation project is down the 
tubes, I'm wondering what wonderful things you have in 
store for wealth creation in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite I want to say that jobs -- as indicated in the budget 
by the Minister of Finance -- are a top priority for this 
government.  And I'd like to say very clearly that we were 
disappointed in fact in the numbers that were portrayed in the 
federal budget that indicate that unemployment in Canada 
will stay very high, by their own admission.  They're looking 
at an 11 per cent unemployment rate in Canada for the next 
year or two.  And for a federal government that made jobs 
the fundamental issue during the federal campaign, I think 
many unemployed Canadians are concerned about the lack of 
a job creation program in the federal budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Leader of the 
Conservative Party, that to have him criticize us for not 
building Rafferty dams, for example, not doing things like 
GigaText or Supercart or all those wonderful megaprojects 
that they took on as government, that they would stand today 
and ask us to do more of them, simply flies in the face of the 
reality, that in spending billions of dollars on these kind of 
projects, the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan under their 
administration went up.  And I want to say to them that the 
megaprojects that they did are part of the problem, not a 
solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 
same minister.  Mr. Minister, yesterday the minister from 
North Battleford killed a bunch of jobs in this province, jobs 
that you promised over two years ago.  The project 
proponents were taking all of the risks, Mr. Minister.  They 
were putting up the capital, not SaskPower.  So you can't say 
that these projects were a great risk to the taxpayer.  Your 
commitment to the people of this province and the media to 
co-generation, I think, was one that people believed. 

Mr. Minister, you knew long before you started this process 
that the limiting of co-gen to 25 megawatts was going to 
make cheap electricity a difficult one to do.  You knew that 
all along.  You brushed that off by saying that SaskPower 
has learned a lot from this experience.  Well, Mr. Minister, I 
can tell you that Saskatchewan businesses and communities 
have learned a lot from the process as well. 
 
Will you table the project proposals and will you table a 
report from the engineering firm that your government hired?  
And will you tell us today about the 25-megawatt 
co-generation projects. Will you tell us today what you didn't 
know two years ago when you sucked all of these people in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'd be happy to address the 
numerous questions that the hon. member has placed to us 
here this afternoon.  I'd have to assume that you're getting 
from somebody in the industry that 25 megawatts are not 
viable.  I don't necessarily accept that, although there are 
some economies of scale.  These companies, the 10 
proposals that were put forward into SaskPower, I would 
have to assume that if 25 megawatts was not viable, they'd 
not have put in their proposal. 
 
So I don't know why you're being critical of those 
companies.  In term of what you're saying, you're saying they 
don't know what they're doing.  We learned a great deal 
about this. 
 
The other thing that I have concerns about is the hon. 
member is doom and gloom over non-utility generation.  
We've stated very clearly in the statement yesterday that 
there is a bright spot for non-utility generation in the future 
of Saskatchewan.  By repeating my statement: 
 

 In the final analysis, the provincial government cannot 
justify spending the additional dollars, during these times 
of fiscal restraint, to enter into a contract to purchase 
electricity that is not needed in our system.  We simply 
cannot ask the electrical consumer to carry this additional 
burden. 

 
In terms of the experts who validated the evaluation process, 
that it was fair and that it was reliable and it was above-board 
and it was fair to all the proponents, I'd be happy to do that.  
This is the methodology verification by Hagler Bailly Inc., 
which is an internationally renowned company. 
 
So that we're not just looking at SaskPower doing the 
evaluation.  The evaluation was done expertly, 
confidentially, and stands all tests that you can put before it. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, next question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, there is a great number of 
people in communities across this province today 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

who felt like they were led down the garden path.  Mr. 
Minister, you're saying that all of the reasons are there.  
What I asked you was: is there anything there that you didn't 
already know two years ago when you made this grandiose 
announcement? 
 
Mr. Minister, you even charged $10,000 -- $10,000 per 
proponent -- a non-refundable $10,000 to do this evaluation.  
Well, Mr. Minister, now that you've shot the whole process 
down, are you going to refund that money to the proponents?  
Or are you simply going to throw it into your Crown 
corporation as another tax on the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The member does not listen very well, 
Mr. Speaker.  It's not being shot down.  The timing is not 
correct for this to fit into the system in Saskatchewan at this 
time and we have paid due diligence to it.  It's not our 
intention to make a refund to the proponents.  As far as I 
know, no one has contacted my office, out of the eight 
proponents who put in the ten projects, asking for a refund.  
No one has asked for that. 
 
You stated yourself in your statement here in leading up to 
your question, it was a non-refundable deposit.  And that's 
exactly what it was. 
 
The bottom line is that the system can use components of 
non-utility generation in the future when the demand is there.  
And we expect that demand to grow because the private 
sector does have confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Therefore, that will help grow our economy 
more than any other factor. 
 
I want to say to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with the Rural Health Coalition 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 
today is for the Health minister.  After completely destroying 
the goodwill in rural Saskatchewan, the Rural Health 
Coalition took you to the bargaining table under the threat of 
a lawsuit.  It was because of the district health boards -- the 
people directly affected were given no real power.  Madam 
Minister, will you admit there was a lack of real consultation 
and a lack of empowerment of local health boards that forced 
you, forced you to deal with a possible lawsuit? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I find the question rather 
absurd when the member opposite knows that we have been 
through a very extensive consultation process with members 
of the Rural Health Coalition and with the public in general 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have had ongoing discussions and a lot of give and take 
with respect to information.  It is a process that has been very 
cooperative.  It has been very 

successful and it is an indication of the goodwill that exists 
in Saskatchewan to resolve many of the problems that are 
perceived to be out there, unlike the member opposite who 
has more concern about creating problems rather than 
solving them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, had you 
not had a charade with your consultative process you 
wouldn't be in the problem you're in today, and we both 
know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the points of the agreement 
include, among other things, replacing services that rural 
Saskatchewan needs for its very existence.  Many of the 
services are exactly what these facilities were providing 
before the minister and her department decided to 
unilaterally eliminate them.  Services like 24-hour nursing, 
emergency service, lab services, and care for the elderly.  
Services that you, Madam Minister, take for granted. 
 
Can you tell us today what the total cost will be to implement 
all the aspects of this agreement? 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the minister answers the 
question, will the other members please settle down and give 
each member an opportunity to ask the question so we can 
all hear it.  Members may not like it, but I think every 
member has an opportunity and the right to ask questions in 
this House, and then give them the respect. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It's question period.  That's all this is. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I will simply not take that from any 
member in this House. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- This is question period. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'll call the Premier one more time. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
The Speaker: -- This is question period and every member 
has a right to ask a question in this House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
The member opposite, as is the wont of the members of the 
Liberal Party in this House, is here once again with incorrect 
information, false information, fearmongering. 
 
The member opposite knows full well that lab services were 
never taken away, that emergency services were never taken 
away nor intended to be taken away, that services for elderly 
were never taken away nor intended to be taken away.  The 
member opposite knows full well that when the hospitals 
were converted, lab and X-ray services stayed, nursing 
services stayed.  In integrated facilities we were working 
with 24-hour nurses, or where there was a long-term care 
facility, and so on. 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

He knows full well but he chooses to distort the information 
because he thinks that's the secret to his success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, is Madam Minister saying 
to us in the Legislative Assembly that the people in rural 
Saskatchewan were not telling the truth? Is that what I hear?  
Those people that said they only had eight hours of service 
instead of the 24 hours that they were . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, to implement all aspects of 
the agreement reached with the Rural Health Coalition will 
cost a substantial amount of money.  We can only guess, 
because she didn't answer the last question. 
 
To the minister:  where will the money come from and is this 
money allocated in the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the money is allocated in 
the budget and was in this year's budget.  The member 
opposite knows full well that we have been talking about the 
need to work towards transition services, and this obviously 
is why the Rural Health Coalition kicked him out of one of 
their meetings.  Because his purpose here is to try and justify 
his actions and his own desire to distort what's taken place. 
 
The fact is, I have said on numerous occasions that we are 
looking at what is needed in each community.  We were 
looking at the issue of what sort of nursing services were 
needed; what sort of respite care was needed; what sort of 
palliative care.  And that is an ongoing process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What allowed this to happen when we sat and talked to the 
Rural Health coalition, is we were able to share with them a 
lot of the plans that were in process, which cleared up a lot of 
the misinformation and fearmongering that was taking place 
by the Liberals in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If the minister 
has done such a shiny job, why do we still have "Hospital 
fight not over" showing up? 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I think the 
member knows full well that that was out of order, and I ask 
him to refrain from so doing. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- I apologize for quoting from the 
Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government has been negotiating with Rural Health 
Coalition for months -- since last fall. 

Madam Minister, if this money was available all along, why 
did it take so long for you to arrive at a deal?  And why did 
you choose to put rural families under such stress and worry 
at the meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I answered that question 
in my previous answer. 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, a question from George 
Sharpe of Regina.  The question, and I will quote: Mr. 
Premier, I want to know how is it, that over two years now 
your government has promised economic development and 
jobs, yet companies like Bird Construction have left and 
thousands of skilled jobs disappear every year.  What is it 
that you could have done to cause so much work to disappear 
that all of the engineers, the consulting firms that I have 
approached, tell me that they have had their worst year in 
1993. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. 
member for the question that he provides to us.  I think it's 
the obvious message of this government that job creation is 
obviously the top priority, together with the question of 
bringing the fiscal house in order.  I think we've done a 
pretty good job on both of these under very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
The fiscal circumstances that we inherited, as the hon. 
member himself opposite will know, were rather difficult, to 
put it mildly.  In fact we have the largest per capita debt in 
Canada still today, although in handling the deficit, we have 
the lowest per capita deficit in Canada today because we 
have a plan. 
 
And part of this also is a plan for job creation, a job creation 
plan which, I might say to the hon. member, on a per capita 
basis in our budget amounts to $90 per capita in 
Saskatchewan compared to yesterday's federal budget of 
only $64 per capita, if you take into account what the federal 
Liberal administration said was job creation. 
 
Now if the member says that we have not completed the task, 
I agree with them.  There is much more yet ahead of us.  We 
are committed to continue pursuing it. We have put as much 
money as we can give in strained resources, and I think 
there's growing optimism and growing confidence in the 
people of Saskatchewan about our job prospects and our 
economic opportunities.  And I wish that the Conservatives 
and the Liberals would catch the wave and join that growing 
optimism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11-- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act (Free Votes) 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Free 
Votes) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
I move that a Bill to amend The Ombudsman Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Assistance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Saskatchewan Assistance Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask leave before 
orders of the day to report on the 1994 Saskatchewan Indian 
Winter Games. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
questions nos. 27 to 30 put by members opposite, I would 
request they be converted to motions for return (debatable).  
And further, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the answer to 
question 31, I would like to table the response at this time. 
 
The Speaker: -- Did I understand the minister correctly? 
That 27, 28, 29, and 30 motions for return debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, that they be 
converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- For return debate and 31 has been tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that this 
Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure today to enter into this budget debate, 
particularly after the events of yesterday when we saw the 
federal government also bring down its budget.  And I would 
have to say, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the federal budget 
yesterday, and to the provincial budget last week, that neither 
one of those two governments were listening to the wishes of 
people both in this province and the country of Canada. 
 
And as I said in my remarks in the throne speech debate, Mr. 
Speaker, I think both governments needed to clearly ask a 
simple question and they needed to answer that question.  
Have they been listening to the people that they are charged 
with serving?  And I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that either 
one fits the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm primarily going to deal with the provincial 
budget today because that's the topic that we're debating 
here, of whether that particular budget is worthwhile carrying 
forward in this Assembly as the game plan of the people of 
Saskatchewan, the game plan that all of us as taxpayers will 
feel comfortable with being a part of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say in both circumstances that I think 
they missed the mood of the public which says today that 
government must cut itself, that government must stop 
spending the taxpayers money in the volumes that they have 
in the past.  Mr. Speaker, governments of all stripes have 
been guilty of that for a goodly long time, both in this 
province and in this country.  Clearly today the wishes and 
the views of people in this province are that government 
must cut back and that services must be delivered for less. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the federal government did nothing 
to assist our provincial government in that endeavour and 
certainly the provincial government last week I believe only 
partially answered some of those concerns. Because I look at 
the level of taxation, Mr. Speaker, in this province both as a 
direct result of federal and provincial taxation and all I see is 
an ever-growing list of tax burdens upon the public. 
 
My colleague, the member from Morse, in question period 
today raised the fact that senior citizens in this province are 
going to have a total tax bill of over $80 million extra 
because of what has transpired.  And it is irresponsible of the 
Minister of Finance in this province, who brought down a 
budget last week saying no new taxes, to stand in her place 
and deny that has taken place, and then to make flimsy 
excuses about how that money would be spent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that that windfall occurred 
yesterday for this government and they should give clear 
indications to the most over-taxed population in our country 
what they are going to do with that windfall to lessen the 
burden, the tax burden, that has been placed upon the people 
of this province by this administration since it took office in 
October of 1991. 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

Because, Mr. Speaker, most of us well remember the 
promises that were made in that election campaign in 1991 
about a government that would reduce taxes, not increase 
them, about a government that would not stand in the way of 
job creation through increased taxes and fees; that we would 
have an administration that would see our population grow 
because the climate in Saskatchewan was going to change, 
that the waste and the mismanagement was going to be 
removed; that people would come back to this province 
because the tax level was going to be one that people would 
appreciate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that simply hasn't occurred.  The promise 
was not kept then and the promise was not kept last week in 
the minister's budget address. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suppose we're going to hear a great 
many speeches in this debate about what the federal 
government have done in the way of making this provincial 
government of ours act the way that they do.  And there will 
be some legitimacy, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that the 
promises made in the recent federal election campaign by the 
federal Liberal Party are also going to be broken very 
quickly. 
 
But the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that employment in this 
province today, employment in this province today is 12,000 
less than when these people took office a little over two years 
ago.  The out-migration which they promised to stop because 
of the new environment in this province continues to this 
day.  The total number of people working in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, is at a 10-year low, a 10-year low. 
 
The welfare numbers in this province are at an all-time high: 
77,000 citizens in the province of Saskatchewan are on 
public assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if out-migration continues at the pace that it 
has, if the job numbers continue to drop, Mr. Speaker, we are 
getting dangerously close to double digits in the number of 
people that are on social assistance in this province. 
 
Now I would think if I were a part of a government that was 
truly listening, Mr. Speaker, truly listening to what people 
want, those numbers would be of a deep source of 
embarrassment for me, not only because I'd broken all of my 
promises of two short years ago . . . that's bad enough in 
what it does to the credibility of the political system in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Besides the fact that they broke all of those promises, and to 
get themselves elected, the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 
those numbers are a tragedy.  They are a human tragedy 
because people in this province, Mr. Speaker, still like to 
work, believe it or not.  And I say to the members of the 
government, Saskatchewan's work ethic is as strong today as 
it has ever been.  People in this province want to work.  They 
want to know that they have a government that will work 
with them in creating an environment and a market-place that 
allows job creation to be a fact, not a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you think of the fact that the 

average family of four -- and the government uses some 
numbers about what an average family's income is in this 
province; the Minister of Finance had it in her budget -- that 
that average family of four has had an increase, an increase, 
Mr. Speaker, of over $2,300 in tax load since this 
government was elected a little over two years ago -- $2,300 
for the average family of four. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what $2,300 means to you, 
but I know to families that I represent, some of whom have 
had a minus net income many years during the 1980s and the 
1990s because of international commodity prices, who have 
had family incomes that would be below what is considered 
the poverty line in this province for nearly a decade, that 
$2,300 is a tremendous burden to bear.  It is a burden that 
hits them in their everyday life, 365 days of the year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you stack that up against a Minister 
of Finance that has the gall to come into this Assembly and 
say, no new taxes, when the repercussions of her budget last 
year are only now rippling through our entire society, I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, that we have a problem.  Because 
that is not delivering on a promise -- that is not delivering on 
a promise.  That is abusing a privilege. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan have been very 
forgiving because they understand the question of debt and 
deficit.  They understand that this province is under extreme 
pressure to bring its financial house in order.  And I do give 
the government some credit, Mr. Speaker, for doing things 
that are helping that process.  It is absolutely fundamental. 
 
As my colleague from Moosomin pointed out in his speech 
the other day, that process had begun with the Hon. Lorne 
Hepworth back in 1989.  Members of the media have 
commented on it, that this province has been on a deficit 
reduction track for at least the last five years. 
 
And I think the average taxpayer in this province supports 
that 100 per cent, and that is why, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has had the benefit of the doubt.  That is why 
over the last two years Saskatchewan voters and taxpayers 
and families have said: I give you the benefit of the doubt; 
you haven't kept your promises to me but I'm going to allow 
you to proceed down this path. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear now as we go down that 
path that this government has no intention of keeping that 
promise, no intention at all, because if they did, if they did, 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers wouldn't be before us today.  
They wouldn't be before us because the climate that is 
absolutely necessary to generate more tax dollars in this 
province, i.e., more taxpayers, would have occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is lagging behind, lagging behind 
other jurisdictions in North America who are withdrawing 
themselves from the recession by the combination of cutting 
back on government spending 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

and encouraging the private sector to produce the jobs that 
are so necessary in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance stood in the House last 
week and delivered a budget that doesn't account for 40 per 
cent of the expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan 
-- 40 per cent of what we do in this province was not 
accounted for in the budget. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is one reason, one reason that the 
economic climate that is so absolutely necessary to generate 
jobs in this province has not occurred, because that entire 
Crown sector is not open, it is not visible, and it does not 
play a constructive role in revitalizing the economy in this 
province.  And we had a demonstration of that yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, like we haven't had before in this province and 
under this government's administration in the last two years. 
 
After leading on, after leading on community after 
community and company after company, holding out the 
prospect of co-generation, of cooperation -- that favourite 
word of members opposite, of cooperation -- to develop new 
industry and new industrial base and new jobs, yesterday the 
government jerked the rug out from underneath him.  They 
asked him to go out and spend tens of thousands, and in 
some cases hundreds of thousands of dollars, spend their 
own money to generate economic potential in this province. 
And what happens?  After two years' time they jerk the rug 
out from under them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that is cooperation, if that is the cooperation 
that the Partnership for Renewal speaks about, then I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, that that entire program should be 
trashed and we're going to have to start over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's a number of examples, I think, that 
reinforce the point that I'm trying to make today to our 
provincial government.  And I would suspect that you can go 
through the provincial economy sector by sector and you will 
find the same results, Mr. Speaker.  Ours still is an economy 
that is based upon the utilization of our raw resources, the 
farm land, of which our province has more than half of the 
entire area of Canada, and the basic manufacturing that we 
do in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, this has also been 
referred to in the Assembly. 
 
I take the fact sheet that the mining association sent around 
the other day.  Mining is a very important sector in our 
province, Mr. Speaker.  We all see it. It's very visible -- 
direct employment, both in this city and the city of Moose 
Jaw. Certainly in northern Saskatchewan it is one of the 
main, primary industries.  It supports the potash business 
which is run out of Saskatoon.  It is a fundamental employer 
and part of our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that fact sheet shows us that since this 
government came into being that there has been an increased 
burden of over $53 million in taxation and 

Crown charges. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how many more people would have been 
employed in this sector if this government truly was trying to 
cooperate on new ventures; was truly trying to encourage the 
maximum amount of employment possible in the 
exploitation of our raw resources?  Because, Mr. Speaker, in 
almost every case in the mining industry, those are 
well-paying jobs.  Those are jobs that are highly sought after 
because of the level of remuneration and because 
Saskatchewan is a good place to mine. 
 
If you take the average industrial wage in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we are talking about thousands of potential 
employees. 
 
What does that say to people in the North of our province?  
What does that say to aboriginal people who are looking for 
that first job opportunity when you see that the level of 
taxation is denying them the opportunity to enter the 
workforce? 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is an absolute truth.  
That because the way this government is managing our 
economy through an ever-increasing tax load, that these 
people are denied that opportunity to enter the workforce in 
this province. 
 
The numbers are there.  Over $12 million extra in two years, 
Mr. Speaker, in electrical and other utility charges to the 
mining industry -- $12 million.  And you know what?  There 
is absolutely no transparency in that entire Crown sector for 
those people to look at. 
 
The people in the mining industry don't know if that should 
be 12 or 10 or 14.  They have no way of gauging, Mr. 
Speaker.  They don't know if there's cross-subsidization 
there.  All they know is that it is a cost of doing business.  
And because of the way they are charged, it might as well be 
a tax.  We might as well call it what it is, Mr. Speaker; it is a 
tax. 
 
And I remember well the member from Riversdale saying in 
an earlier day that taxes were the biggest killer of jobs that 
we have in our society.  The member from Riversdale stood 
and campaigned and said that taxes are the biggest killer of 
jobs that we have in our society today. 
 
That's when he was talking about lowering the provincial 
sales tax.  That was when he was talking about the changes 
that must come to the GST (goods and services tax).  That's 
when he was saying that harmonization was fundamentally 
wrong for growth in our province's economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if you ask the mining industry 
today about those $12 million in taxes in the form of utility 
charges, they would agree with the member from Riversdale 
that that is the biggest killer of jobs in our society today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move to another area, another promise made 
to the business community of this province.  A promise made 
because also the member from 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

Riversdale said that the tendering policies in this province 
much change, that low tenders must become the rule because 
the taxpayer must get the maximum bang for his buck; that 
you can't be playing jiggery-pokery with the tendering 
system. 
 
And what do we see today?  What do we see today in this 
province, Mr. Speaker?  We see the members of executive 
government cherry-picking their way through contracts all 
over this province.  And as they cherry-pick those contracts, 
they determine that yes, this one is going to be union 
preference and this one isn't going to be union preference. 
 
And now the chickens are coming home to roost, Mr. 
Speaker.  Now we see the Melfort pipeline -- half low-bid 
tender, half we're-not-sure-what tender.  The half low-bid 
tender is in place, pressure checked, and ready to deliver 
water to the community of Melfort and surrounding area, and 
the other one is full of leaks. 
 
It's not finished yet.  It has left hundreds of thousands of 
dollars around the community of Melfort not paid for, and 
it's still not finished, Mr. Speaker.  And we don't know when 
it will be finished, because that's what happens, Mr. Speaker, 
when people do not adhere to the principles that they talked 
about when they sought election in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have asked time after time, what are the 
rules?  What are the rules?  The SaskTel tender in Moose 
Jaw I believe is supposed to close today or tomorrow.  A 
million-dollar tender, Mr. Speaker, with union-only 
preferences attached to the tender, when the minister 
responsible for SaskTel said that that policy, if you can call it 
that, would only exist in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina.  
Over $15 million . . . or $15,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does that say to anyone who is interested 
in creating jobs in this province?  How do you bid a tender 
that says maybe this, maybe that, union preference, and the 
amount of subtrades that I use, no percentages.  Mr. Speaker, 
it is absolutely impossible. 
 
You talk to people in the construction industry today in this 
province, they say, I don't know what to do.  I don't know if I 
bid it union, non-union.  I mean it is absolutely bizarre, Mr. 
Speaker, when one of the subtrades ends up as the general 
contractor on a project because of the way this government 
opens tenders. 
 
And the minister of SaskTel stands in the House on budget 
day and says, no it wasn't this way. And you call him to 
account a few days later and he says, oh I guess I didn't hear 
right.  Well he heard right, Mr. Speaker.  He was just too 
darned embarrassed in front of all of the folks here that day 
to tell it like it was.  He knew exactly what the numbers 
were.  And he knew with all the folks that were gathered here 
on that day that they would find that absolutely appalling, 
Mr. Speaker, that $145,000 of taxpayers' money had been 
wasted, had been absolutely wasted. 

Now how are you going to do that in question period before 
the budget's delivered, Mr. Speaker?  How can you stand up 
and say the promise is being made, that we are spending 
taxpayers' money responsibly, and in question period before 
that you'd have to stand up and admit that $145,000 had been 
blown away?  You couldn't do that, Mr. Speaker.  So the 
minister had to apologize to the House for giving us the 
wrong number.  At least he had the courage to do it.  At least 
he had the courage to do it. 
 
But the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that you cannot have 
multiple sets of rules.  And I think the member from 
Riversdale understands that because he campaigned on it.  
He said, I am seeking election as Premier of this province 
because I believe that you must go to the low-tender system, 
given where our economy is.  And the expectations of 
taxpayers are that we have to go to that system. 
 
And that is not the case, Mr. Speaker.  And there is no clear 
rules, and now we have million-dollar tenders out there that 
are diametrically opposed to the stated policy of the 
Government of Saskatchewan.  And they expect the business 
community to cooperate?  They expect the business 
community to put their dollars on the line?  No, sir, Mr. 
Speaker.  No, sir. 
 
And that is why you have a deficit today -- a deficit today of 
12,000 jobs less than when these people took office.  That's 
why, Mr. Speaker.  It's credibility and it is not fair. 
 
A recent example, Mr. Speaker.  I, like many other members 
in this House, attended the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) convention.  That's our cities and 
our towns and our villages who gather together each year, 
discuss mutual concerns.  All of them, Mr. Speaker, waiting 
with bated breath for the delivery of the federal-provincial 
infrastructure program.  Because in last fall's election 
campaign we saw the Liberal Party say that job creation and 
the resurrection of our infrastructure is absolutely 
fundamental to urban areas in our country.  Well I think they 
took them at their word, Mr. Speaker, and they lined up and 
they said: are we ready to go?  We're going to put some 
people to work; let's do this infrastructure program; you put 
some money up and I'll put some money up and we'll go to 
work. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what happened?  I can tell you what 
happened at SUMA.   SUMA roundly castigated this 
government for breaking a promise.  That's what happened.  
And then the minister responsible, a few days later, had to 
write the chairman of SUMA a nasty little letter saying: gee, 
are we ever disappointed in the way that you presented the 
facts at your convention. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the government had been upfront with 
these people, if they had been upfront and truthful from day 
one, none of that would have occurred.  You wouldn't have 
all of urban government in this province angry.  You 
wouldn't have had broken promises.  But no, this government 
says I've got to 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

back-door my way through some of the capital projects in 
this province, and to do that I'm going to take my share and 
part of yours.  I'm going to take mine and part of yours, and 
I'm going to put it into some of my capital projects and 
there's not a darn thing you can do about it. 
 
So now we have urban government, Mr. Speaker, urban 
government who expected so much . . . And I do believe they 
didn't expect the federal Liberal government to let them 
down in negotiations.  I mean they are learning to expect this 
kind of treatment from this NDP government here, but I 
didn't think for a minute that they thought that this 
newly-elected Liberal government was going to let them 
down.  But they did. 
 
(1500) 
 
So what do we do now, Mr. Speaker?  We have all of these 
urban governments all over Saskatchewan catching the 
second wave of the Minister of Finance's broken promises, 
catching this wave of hikes in school mill rates, utility rate 
increases, increases across the board to the way that they do 
business because they are all on balanced-budget legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, in effect.  Catching this second wave, the 
repercussions of last year's budget, ready to go to work, to 
put people to work on infrastructure, and the money isn't 
there.  The money isn't there. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder, is there 
any wonder that all of those people are saying, when the 
Finance minister stands up and says keeping their promise, 
they say, what promise?  Keeping what?  Keeping my money 
is what they're saying.  That's what the provincial 
government's doing, is keeping my money -- money that was 
promised.  And that is the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the ministers don't like to hear it, but I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that if there is very much done on infrastructure in 
this province, it will be done because people in our towns 
and our cities and our villages have got the courage to do 
what the provincial government has reneged upon.  And that 
is keep that commitment to those job numbers that are so 
fundamental to the well-being of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we don't know what all of the 
repercussions are going to be here yet because of the federal 
budget.  But my guess is if the Liberals in Ottawa act like 
Liberals in Ottawa have always done, then western Canada 
had better beware.  And I would like to give the Minister of 
Finance some credit for standing in this Assembly and 
saying that the two NDP governments and the two 
Conservative governments in western Canada are going to 
stand four-square against what has gone on with tobacco 
taxes in this country. 
 
Once again we have seen the pandering to Quebec begin, and 
it's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because it doesn't do our 
country any good.  But almost immediately upon taking 
office, this federal Liberal government starts to pander to 
eastern Canada.  And 

now the battle line has to be drawn at the Manitoba border 
and the government of Mr. Filmon is squarely on the firing 
line. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this Minister of Finance and 
this government back up their words that they are going to be 
part of standing four-square against what has gone on in 
Ottawa.  Because, Mr. Speaker, it simply is not right that 
they can cancel a tax that will take millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars out of the economy that will put other 
pressures on people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you only have to ask senior citizens today what those 
pressures are.  Because senior citizens in our province today, 
Mr. Speaker, are feeling the full impact.  Seniors don't create 
a lot of jobs, Mr. Speaker, seniors don't create a lot of jobs.  
But I can tell you that the support that they give to other 
members of their families determines in many cases whether 
people stay in this province and work and raise their families 
and then raise the grandchildren of those seniors, or they 
don't; or they move somewhere else. 
 
And today the seniors in this province took a big hit, Mr. 
Speaker. And I hope that the Minister of Finance, in 
delivering the promise that she made to them last week, 
understands very clearly how important they are to our 
economy, to many of the jobs that we have in this economy. 
And I think particularly of health care and some of the things 
that this government has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance in this province didn't 
even have the courage to put a job forecast in place this year.  
Last year she forecast 2,000 new jobs, and at the end of two 
years there would be 5,000.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that account 
is in a deficit right now, so we've got a long way to go. 
 
The 30,000 jobs that were promised by the member from 
Riversdale in the fall of 1991 that he would deliver in this 
province by the end of the decade are in a deficit position.  
It's no longer 30, Mr. Speaker, it's 42,000 and growing - 
_ 42,000 and growing. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the optimistic projections 
that the Minister of Finance made on personal income tax to 
balance her budget, right now are nothing but a pipedream 
because it is going to take a lot of taxpayers paying a lot 
more income tax than what the average is in this province to 
come up with that number.  It's going to take many thousands 
of taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, making nearly double what the 
average income in this province is to come up with what 
she's projected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's optimism, considering that everything 
else that the government has done to the present simply 
erodes the job base.  The biggest killer of jobs is taxes.  And 
I quote once more what the member from Riversdale said. 
 
So we are in a deficit position, and I for the life of me, Mr. 
Speaker, don't understand how those kind of projections of 
$40 million more in personal income tax can come true if we 
aren't having any new 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

taxpayers.  I don't think you or I or anyone else is expecting 
to get a major bump in income this year.  Matter of fact the 
last numbers that I saw on average farm income in this 
province were going the other way. 
 
I had a meeting yesterday with some of the members of the 
Sask Pool board of directors.  They have a tremendous 
concern that what they see over the next few years is farm 
income that is, at best, flat. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is still one of the major components 
of our society.  The mining industry, which is another one 
which I've quoted numbers from, aren't expecting any large 
bumps.  In fact, if they keep paying more taxes, it goes the 
other way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would suspect that oil and gas manufacturing, other areas, 
would tell you the same story, Mr. Speaker.  Where in the 
world is this extra $40 million in personal income tax going 
to come from? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it can come.  But it requires some 
fundamental changes in the way that the New Democratic 
government in this province operates. 
 
First of all, before they bring a new Trade Union Act into 
this legislature, a new Labour Standards Act, they'd better 
change the way that they do consultation with the people that 
pay the bills.  Because everything I'm being told, Mr. 
Speaker, would lead me to believe that that isn't being done. 
 
Oh the minister says that he consults and usually it turns into 
a 45-minute diatribe about labour legislation that's 60 years 
old.  Now if that's consultation, Mr. Speaker, I can see why 
people aren't buying into it.  It simply doesn't work that way.  
That before you bring in those types of Bills, you assess 
where you sit in the western Canadian market-place, where 
you sit with the 80 per cent of the goods that are produced in 
this province and must be exported for a sale. 
 
I would think before you would bring that kind of legislation 
in, Mr. Speaker, you would want to make sure that the 
playing-field was fairly level and that you were on par with 
your competitors. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen that.  I haven't seen that.  
And the threat hangs out there that this government, simply 
to please a selected few in the trade union movement, will 
come in and change the rules that will remove us from a 
competitive position; that we'll simply not have a level 
playing-field for the people in this province that manufacture 
and process and produce goods that they have to export in 
competition with others around the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if that happens then those job numbers 
that I have talked about and those projections that the 
Minister of Finance is making will ring ever more hollow 
than they do today because they simply, at the end of the 
day, cannot possibly add up. 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government has definitely got to be 
more consultative.  We have gone through the process of 
health care in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we know that 
it takes the threat of court action to bring this government to 
heel.  We went through a process of destroying farm income 
support mechanisms in this province, Mr. Speaker, and even 
the threat of court action did not bring this government to 
heel; they simply pressed onward and destroyed a goodly 
part of the back-up systems that rural families relied upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we march ahead in this province and 
destroy more, then this government must become more open 
and more consultative before they destroy the very economic 
foundations that most jobs in this province are built upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a crying need for legislative reform of 
this Assembly and the way that government interacts with 
the people, because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, people do not 
feel comfortable with the way that their legislative agenda is 
delivered.  They will not have the confidence to use it as a 
building block in their lives. 
 
And I refer you specifically to an example which we think 
will help people in this province feel more comfortable with 
the way that government interacts.  And I refer to the private 
member's Bill delivered in this Legislative Assembly which 
calls for an all-party committee to govern utility rates. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that there'll be ample opportunity 
to debate that particular Bill, and I don't want to get into any 
details.  But if 40 per cent of the expenditures of government 
are outside of the budget speech and are in the realm of 
Crown corporations, then I think it reasonable, Mr. Speaker, 
that members of the public would want to know that their 
members of the legislature deal with those matters before the 
fact rather than after. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have no problems with the Crown 
Corporations Committee, but the fact is that it deals with 
things that are a year and a half old in most cases.  And that's 
just a fact of life, and it has ever been thus.  But that does not 
mean, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot improve. 
 
And I think a piece of legislation that demonstrates all-party 
commitment to how that 40 per cent of government is 
delivered to people would send a pretty strong signal out 
there.  And I think it would say to the people today in our 
province who are feeling very rejected . . . I know in my 
community in Moose Jaw they're not feeling very good about 
themselves today because of what happened with 
co-generation. 
 
The Wascana Energy project for our asphalt plant was 
looked upon by many as being a prime mover in the 
rebuilding of our infrastructure in the city of Moose Jaw.  
We were going to have a supply of steam that could be put 
into Providence Place, that could be used for greenhouses, 
that could form the basis of an 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

industrial component that we've never had access before to, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I know in talking to members of city 
council and others that people are feeling that they don't have 
the proper input into that 40 per cent of government that is 
denied to them today. 
 
And I think it would behove members of this Assembly, and 
particularly people that don't sit in cabinet, to have the ability 
to sit and review, and indeed if necessary, say no to the 
Crown corporations if they are taxing rather than simply 
looking after their needs.  I think that would be a tremendous 
step, Mr. Speaker, and I don't think there's a person in this 
province that would criticize it.  I don't know of anyone 
perhaps except the folks that sit in the benches across from 
me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a strange circumstance, a very strange 
circumstance.  As a matter of fact, I would invite the 
members of the government to find me people in John Q. 
Public out there, the average taxpayer, who would object to 
that process.  I challenge them to do that.  Find me 
reasonable taxpayers out there who would say that is a bad 
thing, that members who are already paid a salary would sit 
and review a proposed utility rate increase. 
 
(1515) 
 
I don't think, Mr. Speaker, you'd find too many because those 
are the people out there right now that are fearful about their 
jobs; that are saying, where is the security that I hoped to 
have in my life. 
 
I see jobs disappearing all around me.  I see taxes going up.  
I see the inability of this government to turn around trends 
that are absolutely necessary so that my children after their 
education will stay here and work.  That's what they say, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I think a move like that might just put back a 
little bit of the respect that we would hope people have for 
the democratic process.  And rightly so, Mr. Speaker.  The 
government should have the majority in any effort like that 
because that is the duly elected government and they should 
have the majority say on any such committee.  And I think 
the public would agree with that also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of initiatives that we can do 
in this Legislative Assembly to put back the confidence in 
the taxpayers of this province so that they will create the jobs 
that we need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, co-generation is a symptom of what people are 
looking for in the 1990s and beyond.  The people in this 
province have always been very forward-looking.  In fact 
day by day I hear members in this Assembly stand up and 
quote, quote from the writings of Tommy Douglas, quote 
from the speeches of Tommy Douglas, quote just about 
anything at all from Tommy Douglas, because of how 
forward-looking he was, how he grabbed this province up by 
its bootstraps and drug it ahead.  And we are just deluged 
with it, Mr. Speaker, even though most of them aren't old 
enough to remember Tommy Douglas. 

So all I'm saying to them, Mr. Speaker, because we've 
always moved ahead, why not get on with doing some things 
like co-generation that, number one, provide more 
opportunities, they provide more educational opportunities, 
and they are a different way of doing things, Mr. Speaker, 
and they don't cost the taxpayer money because the 
proponents build the plant. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is symptomatic of what people want 
for the future of our province.  They want to use their 
educational talents, which are some of the highest in this 
country -- and I see a number of people over there with one 
or two degrees from university.  We are a very highly skilled, 
highly educated society, and they want to put those needs 
and skills to use, Mr. Speaker, but instead we seem to be 
blinded.  We seem to be blinded by ideology, we seem to be 
blinded by the fact that maybe somebody else talked about it 
in the past, and we are incapable of mustering the courage to 
do it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why we have a 42,000 
job deficit.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, the average family in 
this province is paying $2,300 in taxes more than they did 
last year.  Because it is far simpler to simply tax, and levy, 
and add to the already burdensome costs of living in this 
province than it is to use your imagination, and your 
education, and your God-given abilities, to strike out in a 
new direction.  It is simply much easier to tax, Mr. Speaker, 
and cover up -- and cover up -- for the promises that have 
been broke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day one of my colleagues stood in this 
House and went through a list of the increased costs that the 
average family bears.  Mr. Speaker, it was dozens and dozens 
of pages.  If the member from Riversdale was right that taxes 
are the biggest killer of jobs in our provincial economy -- if 
he was right and I think he is, Mr. Speaker -- I think I've 
presented enough evidence today to say that he's right on the 
money.  And I think that you've heard many members in this 
Assembly prove it.  Matter of fact, I've even heard the 
Minister of Finance stand in her place and already castigate 
the new Liberal government -- as she did today -- for tax 
increases which are going to be killers of jobs in our 
economy. 
 
If that is a proven and known fact and accepted by all -- and I 
only have to take the word of the member from Westmount 
that it is, because she said it today -- then I say to this 
government: start listening to the people that you are charged 
with representing.  Don't forge ahead in some of these ill 
thought-out ventures as you have in the past simply because 
you have a large majority and you think you can steamroller 
over the folk.  But stand back and think twice and three times 
if they need to.  Because this session, I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, this session of the legislature will be the last one 
when this government would attempt to do that.  They 
simply are getting too close to an election call after that, Mr. 
Speaker, to trod on people as they have in the past. 
 
And I say to them, honestly look at the way that we can 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

change as a political society and a way that we deliver 
government to the people that elected us.  And think about 
how we, as an Assembly, can cooperate in putting through 
meaningful change.  Because it is on their agenda, Mr. 
Speaker, and no one denies it. 
 
It was on the agenda when Meech was defeated and most of 
us sitting in this House, the elected people, subscribe to that.  
It was on the agenda last year in the federal election.  It was 
on the agenda in 1991, Mr. Speaker.  People are tired of the 
way that the political system uses and abuses them. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because my party when in 
government did that.  Allan Blakeney's government before 
that did it and Ross Thatcher's government before him did it. 
 
And there are some opportunities open to us as they have 
never been open before to change the way that we deliver to 
the taxpayers of this province.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
if the commitments to new jobs, if the commitment to 
growth, if the commitment to the preservation of the social 
safety net in this province is going to be achieved, it can only 
be done one way.  That is more taxpayers paying more taxes 
because they have better incomes and better job 
opportunities than they've ever had before. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there will not be 77,000 people on 
social assistance in this province.  There will not be people 
leaving our province each and every day for other 
jurisdictions.  And there will not be a whole bunch of people 
in the province of Saskatchewan that are too scared to invest 
their hard-earned dollars in viable projects.  Because they are 
afraid of government policy and they are afraid that the 
political system means more than the delivery of sound 
goods and services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a tragedy.  And, Mr. Speaker, that 
is why this budget that claims it is fulfilling the promise is 
simply claiming nothing but hollow rhetoric.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is why I will not support the budget as 
delivered by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
also thank you to my colleagues.  It gives me a great deal of 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to join in the debate on the budget.  I, 
first of all of course, want to compliment the Minister of 
Finance for the fine job that she done . . . that she has done, I 
should say. 
 
And I note with apologies to our Minister of Finance that 
there's a striking similarity between her budget and that of 
the previous Conservative budgets -- that is that she 
miscalculated just like Gary Lane and Lorne Hepworth did.  
But that's where the similarity ends.  The Tory's 
miscalculation ended up being nearly $800 million over 
budget while our minister's miscalculation ended up being $2 
million under 

budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- So, Madam Minister, as long as you remain 
under budget you can carry on with your miscalculations. 
 
I also want to join with the minister and all of my colleagues 
on this side of the House in thanking the real heroes of this 
drama of financial recovery and that is the people of 
Saskatchewan.  And to the men and women who sit on the 
school boards, RM (rural municipality) councils, town 
councils and health boards, I applaud you for the responsible 
manner in which you assisted us. 
 
There has been much good news in this budget and also, Mr. 
Speaker, from my constituency.  And as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to 
speak briefly about the 1994 Saskatchewan Indian Winter 
Games to be held this weekend in Meadow Lake and in 
Beauval. 
 
The games this year are being hosted by the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council.  These games will bring athletes from around 
the entire province and will prove, I am sure, to be very, 
very, exciting. 
 
One of the main themes of the games is wellness.  This has 
long been a concept that I argue has been far more traditional 
to the healing process within first nations people than it has 
to the rest of our society.  This will be an exciting time with 
Grand Chief Ovide Mercredi and Chief Roland Crowe 
participating in the opening ceremonies. 
 
Also present from CBC's (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) North of 60 will be Errol Kinistino, Tina 
Louise Bomberry, Michael Obey, Jimmy Herman and 
Dakota House. The Meadow Lake Tribal Council represents 
nine different first nation bands from the constituencies of 
Meadow Lake and Athabasca.  There will be present also 
representatives from the Cree, Dene, Assiniboine, Dakota 
and Saulteaux linguistic groups.  They will be there, Mr. 
Speaker, to support the athletes and to participate in 
workshops and to assist the participants of the games. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, the 
member from Athabasca, and the member from Cumberland 
House, who will both be involved in the weekend's activities, 
I want to wish the hosts, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 
the athletes, visitors and friends, a very successful 1994 
Indian Winter Games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- To the third party, Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberals, I have a few words.  How interesting it is to sit here 
and listen to the bobsled team over there natter about the new 
politics they are going to bring to this legislature.  There are 
few things, Mr. Speaker, that irritate me more than unbridled 
self-righteousness.  And I certainly witnessed a display of 
this in the reply 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

to the budget speech from the member from Greystone. 
 
I warn all members that self-righteousness has a way of 
coming back to haunt you.  How is it that the member from 
Greystone is able to entirely misrepresent the facts regarding 
ministerial assistants, get a 37 per cent salary increase 
herself, and yet imply somehow that everyone else is doing 
wrong. 
 
This is the new politics, Mr. Speaker?  I doubt it.  In her 
reply to the budget speech she suggests that the budget is 
fine but somehow we are hiding things in our Crown 
corporations.  Some of you will remember back to just over a 
year ago, Mr. Speaker, and I want to read verbatim from 
Public Accounts, February 5 of 1993.  I want to read this into 
the records for the members of the Assembly and to the 
people of Saskatchewan who will be watching today. 
 
This discussion takes place as a result of her accusations in 
the press where she also suggested that we were hiding 
things in the Crown.  And I quote from the verbatim of 
February 5, 1993.  Mr. Kujawa, and this question is to the 
auditor: 
 

 I have a question for the auditor.  If the Liquor Board of 
Saskatchewan in the next three years makes $7 billion 
profit, can that be hidden?  And if so, how? 

 
 Mr. Strelioff: -- Mr. Chair, members, as far as I know, it 

wouldn't be hidden under the practices of the government.  
I don't know how it would be hidden unless you change 
your practices. 

 
 Mr. Kujawa: -- Did you say it can be hidden? 
 
 Mr. Strelioff: -- Well under your current practices, it 

would not be hidden, so I don't think it would be. 
 
 Mr. Kujawa: -- So you're saying they couldn't hide it. 
 
 Mr. Strelioff: -- Mr. Chair, members, you wouldn't be able 

to hide it if you continue to follow the current practices that 
you've implemented.  Yes. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- And may I say parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, 
the only changes made since that statement was made by the 
auditor have been to improve the accountability of the 
Crowns. 
 
There you have it, Mr. Speaker, unbridled self-righteousness; 
it comes back to haunt you every time, Mr. Speaker.  And 
this is the new politics of the Liberal Party. 
 
Let me just say a few more . . . let me make a few more 
comparisons.  Here is what Ted Carmichael, a senior 
economist from Burns Fry, says about our budget.  He 

 says that: 
 

 The Romanow government is developing an excellent track 
record in reducing the enormous deficit that it inherited.  
The province continues to have the highest per capita debt 
levels in the country, but the key debt-to-GDP ratios are 
expected to stabilize this year and then begin to decline.  
We expect the government to continue to hit its targets and 
therefore view the provincial credit rating outlook as 
positive. 

 
(1530) 
 
Now let us compare this to what the Liberal Party did in 
yesterday's federal budget.  They are taxing many of the 
seniors in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, seniors who are on 
fixed incomes over $26,000.  Yet they are going to cater to 
their rich friends by maintaining the family trust which is, I 
argue, part of their new politics, Mr. Speaker.  I say same old 
chicken, Mr. Speaker, same old chicken. 
 
The Liberal Party is going to significantly lower the 
unemployment insurance benefits, which in my area will 
simply put more people on social assistance, Mr. Speaker.  I 
see this as a blatant attack on many of the people that I 
represent.  All of this to reduce the deficit, Mr. Speaker, to 
$39.5 billion.  Incredible, Mr. Speaker -- $39.5 billion. 
 
If I could, tongue-in-cheek, quote the member from 
Greystone, Mr. Speaker, I'd probably say this:  I'd say that I 
agree with the direction of the federal budget but I disagree 
with the process.  So based on that I guess I will simply have 
to disagree with the entire budget and reject it in its entirety. 
 
I want members to know also that a senior economist from 
the same Burns Fry who, by the way, spoke well of our 
budget and I just quoted it a few minutes ago -- yesterday in 
her preliminary remarks with respect to the Liberal's federal 
budget was very, very reserved with her remarks regarding 
the federal budget.  I believe she said that the federal Finance 
minister barely clung to credibility in the federal budget 
presentation -- a $39.5 billion budget.  I say, same old 
chicken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are different.  And I want to list for you just 
a few of the differences that we have.  We are the only 
jurisdiction with the lowest per capita deficit in Canada.  The 
1994 provincial budget is on target with the government's 
plan to balance the budget by the 1996-97 fiscal year.  The 
provincial budget contains no new taxes and no major 
program cuts.  The provincial deficit is forecast to be $189 
million.  This is the lowest budget deficit since 1982.  In just 
three short years, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government 
has reduced the deficit from a projected $1.3 billion to just 
$189 million.  This is a reduction or a turnaround of $1 
billion on an annual basis. 
 
Meeting our financial targets means freedom -- the freedom 
to invest in more jobs; the freedom to better 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

health care, agriculture, education, and social programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be in attendance for the vote on the 
budget on Thursday evening because I will be involved in 
the Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games which I referred to 
earlier.  But I do want all members to know that I 
wholeheartedly endorse the minister's budget, as presented 
by the Minister of Finance, and I encourage all members of 
this Assembly to do so as well. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to support the budget for the 
1994-1995 fiscal year.  Before I get into my main remarks I 
would however like to thank the people of Saskatoon 
Broadway, who are my constituents, for their ongoing 
support. 
 
Our government can be justly proud of this budget because it 
represents an important turnaround in Saskatchewan's 
economic and social fortunes -- a turnaround that our 
government has provided leadership for and, as noted in the 
budget speech, an economic recovery that was achieved by 
the people of our province. 
 
The words bear repeating and I quote: 
 

 Our success rests with the people of this Province who 
understood the need, knew that difficult choices were 
required and were determined to make the sacrifices 
necessary to secure this Province's financial future. 

 
As Minister of Education, Training and Employment, I want 
to say thank you -- thank you to the thousands of partners in 
education for their effective stewardship and prudent 
financial management during tough economic times.  It is 
our school boards, our post-secondary institutions, our 
teachers in the classroom, our administrators, and our other 
educational officials and leaders, parents and taxpayers, who 
deserve the credit for making this positive provincial budget 
possible.  Faced with difficult decisions and hard choices 
because of the deficit situation and the provincial economy, 
these are the people on the front lines who managed 
effectively when faced with funding reductions. 
 
There has been some pain but we now have the opportunity 
to gain.  Today through this budget we can invest more in 
jobs, the number one concern of Saskatchewan people. 
 
From the government's perspective we had to make some 
very difficult choices in education in order to do our part in 
rebuilding the Saskatchewan economy.  We were able to let 
our education partners plan effectively by letting them know 
in advance the amounts of funding that would be available.  
Again this year we have given these partners advance notice 

on the funding they could expect for 1995-1996 so that they 
can plan again for the next two years. 
 
Today it's a great pleasure for me to be able to confirm what 
the Finance minister indicated on February 17, and that is 
that barring unforeseen circumstances such as major federal 
offloading there will be no further funding reductions for our 
educational partners in 1995-96.  Saskatchewan has indeed 
turned the corner financially.  Saskatchewan people deserve 
the credit for this turnaround and they can now begin to reap 
the long-term benefits of these tough, difficult choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education remains a top priority of our 
government.  Education continues to be the second-largest 
spending item in the provincial budget, almost $889 million 
in 1994-1995.  We recognize the importance of education 
and the fact that it is the single best investment for the future 
that we can make.  Education makes a key contribution to the 
social and economic well-being and development of our 
province. 
 
Today I am reminded of the words of the late Woodrow 
Lloyd, former premier of our province and one of our most 
distinguished educators.  Mr. Lloyd was the minister of 
education for Saskatchewan from 1944 to 1960, and he 
earned a reputation for integrity, principle, and achievement 
in education that is, in my view, unparalleled in our history.  
In 1959 he commented: to eliminate thinking about 
economic means from any sincere discussion of educational 
ends is to place a blind eye to the telescope. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think our neighbouring province of 
Alberta is a case in point.  Where the Saskatchewan 
government has been prudent and cautious in the difficult 
process of trimming education spending, Alberta is currently 
eviscerating the education system in that province in the 
name of deficit reduction.  We have not and we will not 
sacrifice the quality of our education at the altar of deficit 
and budget reductions in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real deficit in our neighbouring province, 
Alberta, is a deficit in common sense and compassion.  In 
Saskatchewan the needs of our students come first.  All of 
our education partners share this belief and support this 
approach.  About 97 per cent of the total dollars spent by the 
Department of Education, Training and Employment go to 
our education partners -- our K to 12 schools, post-secondary 
educational institutions, and individuals in the form of 
third-party grants.  Less than 3 per cent is spent on the 
internal operations and requirements of the Department of 
Education, Training and Employment. 
 
All members will recall that jobs are the number one priority 
of this budget.  About a year ago, a new Department of 
Education, Training and Employment was created as part of 
a government-wide restructuring.  As the name suggests, we 
have focused on improving the linkages between the skills 
that education develops and the job market.  We have made 
significant progress in a number of areas since 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

then, and today I wish to spend some time reporting to the 
Assembly on the important framework and strategic 
directions for education that we've developed. 
 
Prominent among the strategic direction is a comprehensive 
training and employment strategy.  Our people, our citizens, 
require the skills that education and training develop in a 
rapidly changing, technological, and global labour market.  
We are all aware of the federal Canada infrastructure works 
program which was recently announced, and Saskatchewan 
is one of the few provinces that is targeting some of this 
funding for education.  The task of training Canadians for 
work is a central focus of our training strategy and a central 
theme in the current national review of social policy. 
 
Earlier this month my colleague, the Minister of Social 
Services, and myself met with the Hon. Lloyd Axworthy, 
federal Human Resources minister in Ottawa.  And I'm 
pleased to report that at that meeting there was agreement 
that the review process which Saskatchewan suggested for 
getting on with the job of reforming Canada's social 
programs . . . And while the review of social policy will take 
several months, Mr. Axworthy has agreed to work with us to 
further our training strategy.  We will be pursuing these 
strategies with his department, namely, post-secondary 
education, training and employment services, K to 12 
education, Indian and Metis education, and of course 
distance education. 
 
We are seeking to expand opportunities for our youth to 
make the transition from school to work.  Every young 
person in our province deserves the chance to develop his or 
her skills and contribute to our community. 
 
The multi-party training plan announced in December, in 
partnership with the federal government and the 
Saskatchewan mineral resource sector, will train Northerners 
for 60 per cent of the permanent jobs expected to be created 
by expanded mining operations in northern Saskatchewan.  
This is a $10.5 million plan that commits us to jobs for 
northern Saskatchewan people, particularly aboriginal 
people. 
 
As part of the government's restructuring, including the 
Department of Education, Training and Employment, we are 
now responsible for the New Careers Corporation.  This 
allows us to expand and enhance training and employment 
opportunities for those most in need during these difficult 
economic times.  The New Careers Corporation offers 
employable people a real chance to become independent of 
income support programs and as a key part of the overall 
strategy for training and employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again the wise words of Woodrow Lloyd 
set the tone for my discussion of the vision for education that 
we are developing, and the strategic directions for education 
that will guide us into the next century. 

Speaking to teachers in 1956, Mr. Lloyd noted: 
 

 No teacher can be adequate without a reasonable 
understanding of the problems which face the homes from 
which his students come. 

 
 This understanding is not obtained by osmosis alone.  It is 

acquired through study and above all participation.  My 
plea then is for integration with the community and 
identification with its struggles. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are building and expanding upon Mr. 
Lloyd's idea today in our commitment to the integrated 
school-linked services strategy.  This approach means 
breaking down the barriers of education that are presented 
when children have unmet needs and confronting difficulties 
such as hunger, poverty, family violence, and illiteracy. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have initiated a number of projects 
across the province that emphasize integrated services in 
communities.  And in the coming year we are moving 
beyond these successful pilots and building on these 
community-based models. 
 
We intend to expand these integrated approaches and 
develop province-wide guidelines for service delivery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this innovative approach is rooted in a deep 
commitment by our government to two principles, the 
principles of cooperation and community.  You could not 
disassociate the work of the school from the life of the 
community around it, and recent polls indicate that over 70 
per cent of Saskatchewan people believe that our problems in 
our school system can be traced to the problems in students' 
homes or society in general. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are devoting $300,000 this year in support 
of the school-linked services strategy.  In addition, members 
should be aware of preschool pilot projects in La Loche and 
Prince Albert which were started last year.  We are providing 
$98,000 to these preschools this year alone.  They are an 
outstanding example of community-based prevention 
services and integrated services. 
 
They are representative of education's strong support for the 
Saskatchewan action plan for children, an interdepartmental 
and government-wide approach to serving vulnerable 
families.  This is an important and tangible commitment to 
the principles that led the United Nations to proclaim this 
year International Year of the Family, and which we are 
proud to participate in. 
 
In support of these two guiding principles of cooperation and 
community, I also call the attention of members to our recent 
response to the 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association task force report 
on school governance.  We have announced a limited 
number of voluntary school division amalgamation pilot 
projects for those ready school boards that choose to 
amalgamate. 
 
Clear criteria for these voluntary amalgamations are to be 
drawn up by a committee which includes representatives of 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the 
STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), and other 
educational partners. 
 
These criteria will include such things as full community and 
staff involvement in the process, local control and decision 
making, and the need to integrate interdepartmental services 
to better serve our children and their families.  We have to 
find more out about whether or not amalgamations will affect 
the quality of education, especially the quality of education 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proceeding deliberately in changing 
Saskatchewan's education system to reflect changing 
realities.  We are proceeding on the basis of a commitment to 
quality and equity in education, and perhaps most important 
of all, we are proceeding in partnership with the people, with 
our stakeholders.  Consultation and collaboration and 
cooperation are the ways that our department does business. 
 
An important part of this partnership approach was the 
creation of the Saskatchewan Education Council last year.  
The council is an advisory body representing most education 
partners.  The council has developed a vision statement and a 
set of principles to guide future directions in education and 
training in our province.  The Education Council will be 
advising our government on major issues in education and 
training over time. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, important reviews have taken place 
in both the post-secondary and K to 12 education systems, 
reviews and recommendations that are informing and 
guiding the process of change.  We have the report of the 
university program review panel, the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) review, 
reviews of regional colleges and private vocational schools, 
and a report on distance education on the post-secondary 
side.  We've also just released the high school review, a 
report on home-based education, and our response to the 
SSTA governance and school finance recommendations. 
 
We have begun working with our post-secondary partners in 
education to develop system-wide objectives as part of our 
overall commitment to develop an integrated post-secondary 
system that responds effectively to the changing needs of 
Saskatchewan people.  We seek to enhance the role of 
post-secondary institutions in supporting economic and 
social renewal, such as through new partnerships with 
industry to do basic and applied research, or with 
communities to support local development.  We want to 
improve program delivery in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan by working with post-secondary institutions to 
expand opportunities for our students and better respond to 
employment needs. 
 
Taken all together, this represents a significant process at 
work.  I want to underline and emphasize the fundamental 
importance of this process to the decisions that are being 
taken in education.  There has never been, in the history of 
education in this province, such an extensive and grass roots 
consultation as the discussions held over Saskatchewan in 
the course of these comprehensive reviews.  Parents, 
teachers, business people, labour people, and representatives 
of many, many communities and community organizations 
with a stake in education and training have been active 
participants in the process. 
 
First and foremost, we believe it's critical that we look at the 
big picture.  We must integrate all education reviews and 
recommendations as a whole, and in the context of real 
people in real Saskatchewan communities and schools.  In 
turn, we place this information in the context of the 
importance which this government has placed in education as 
a key element of our overall strategy for economic and social 
renewal -- a strategy for which we submit there is abundant 
evidence of success in this year's budget. 
 
Education and training is an integral part of the Partnership 
for Renewal, our economic strategy.  It is a crucial part of 
the Saskatchewan action plan for children.  And it is a key 
player in forming aboriginal policy, and in supporting the 
wellness health initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to briefly address the perception that we 
in Saskatchewan are somehow or other deficient, or not 
doing a good job as in other provinces, when it comes to 
education and training.  This is not a new issue or concern 
and it's certainly not restricted to Saskatchewan or Canada.  
About 30 years ago, Mr. Lloyd reported to a group of 
Minnesota educators that, and I quote: 
 

 . . . it is fair to say that a considerable segment of the public 
is not convinced of either our sincerity or our achievement 
in regard to the basic skills subjects.  Let us admit that this 
is at least as much our fault as theirs.  The responsibility to 
produce convincing evidence is ours. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our government has accepted this 
challenge.  While I understand the perception and the valid 
concerns it represents, it can be refuted in our province.  And 
I welcome the opportunity to stand here today and say that 
Saskatchewan's quality of education is second to none in 
Canada. 
 
And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the best example of this reality is 
in our core curriculum.  Wherever I go in Canada and 
whenever I meet with educators, I hear about the excellence 
of our curriculum.  We are the envy of other jurisdictions. 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

At the same time I doubt if there are many parents in 
Saskatchewan who could tell you very much about core.  
This is a serious problem, because the core curriculum 
continues to be the guiding philosophy and framework for 
reform of our school programs.  The curriculum has again 
been given a ringing endorsation by the just-completed high 
school review committee.  And I share the concern of our 
education partners with the need to do a better job of 
communicating with parents and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I release the first report on behalf of our 
government of the Saskatchewan education indicators 
program.  The indicators program is a comprehensive 
evaluation of the health of our education system.  It is much 
more than a testing of school achievements . . . or student 
achievement levels.  It takes a look at a wide range of 
factors.  The indicator report tells us, among other things, 
that our education system and our students compare 
favourably with their national and international counterparts. 
 
In 1989 the Education Indicators Advisory Committee was 
formed, with representation from key organizations.  These 
organizations included teachers, trustees, administrators, the 
universities, business organizations, aboriginal 
representatives, and members of the Department of 
Education, Training and Employment.  The Saskatchewan 
education indicators program is a comprehensive and 
systematic way of collecting and reporting information about 
the effectiveness of our school system, based on the 
provincial goals of education. 
 
The Saskatchewan indicators program will provide more 
information on a wide range of factors in the education 
system including, in addition to test results, such things as 
drop-out rates, expenditures, teacher/student ratios, teacher 
qualifications, to name a few. 
 
This program is much more comprehensive than the school 
achievement indicators program, which is strictly a national 
testing program in mathematics, reading, and writing.  The 
SAIP (school achievement indicators program) is not a true 
and comprehensive indicators program.  Saskatchewan's 
indicators program includes indicators such as demographic, 
social, and economic trends; drop-out and graduation rates; 
course utilization; expenditures; teacher supply and demand; 
and the system's effectiveness in meeting the diverse needs 
of all our our students, to name a few. 
 
And here are the key results.  Saskatchewan shares with 
British Columbia the second-lowest drop-out rate in Canada.  
At 16 per cent, this drop-out rate is second only to Alberta.  
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, more work is required to keep 
Indian and Metis students in our schools. 
 
In the international assessment of educational progress, 
Saskatchewan students compared well internationally and 
nationally in mathematics, science, and geography.  We were 
above the average. 

On the Canadian Test Centre's Canadian achievement test, 
Saskatchewan students consistently outperformed their 
counterparts in terms of grade-equivalent scores. 
 
In the Statistics Canada survey of literacy skills, 
Saskatchewan had the highest proportion of 16- to 
60-year-olds reading at level 4, the highest level in the 
survey.  Our people are the most literate in the country. 
 
Saskatchewan student/educator ratio of 16.6 to 1 is slightly 
higher than the Canadian average of 15.7 to 1.  On a national 
comparison, Saskatchewan's per capita expenditure for 
1989-90 of $1,086 was virtually the same as the national 
expenditure of $1,087.  Saskatchewan's cost per pupil, 
$4,981, compared favourably with the national average of 
5,617. 
 
And the cost of education per student varied according to 
where our students live.  In rural Saskatchewan the cost was 
$5,624; in urban Saskatchewan it was $4,668; and in 
northern Saskatchewan, $7,541. 
 
What we have learned from the indicators program is that 
Saskatchewan people can have confidence and pride in their 
education system.  Our students can hold their own against 
their national and international counterparts and we will 
continue this process of evaluation.  Next year we'll produce 
another report and the year after we'll produce another report 
so that the citizens of our province will know how our 
system is doing. 
 
As we implement the core curriculum, it's important to know 
how Saskatchewan students are doing, and to assess this 
learning we are testing Saskatchewan students in grades 5, 8, 
and 11 this spring under the Saskatchewan provincial 
learning assessment program.  Testing in reading and writing 
-- language arts -- commences in May, and a public report 
will follow.  Within three years the development of new 
curricula for all of the required areas of study in the core 
curriculum will be developed and completed. 
 
There is other evidence about how well we are doing and 
public perceptions when it comes to education and training.  
A recent poll reveals that 59 per cent of Saskatchewan 
people believe that the quality of K to 12 education in the 
province is excellent and good. 
 
At the national level only 42 per cent of the people surveyed 
rate the quality of education in their province as excellent or 
good; 54 per cent of respondents here rate the quality of our 
post-secondary education system in Saskatchewan as 
excellent or good, compared to only 42 per cent nationally; 
62 per cent of our respondents in the province believe that 
universities are doing a good job in preparing students for the 
work world.  This compared to 54 per cent nationally. 
 
Saskatchewan people have confidence in their classroom 
teachers, their school principals, students and parent groups 
as sources of information about 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

education issues -- well ahead of business groups or 
newspapers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building on traditions of excellence in 
education and training.  At the same time, we recognize that 
things have changed dramatically in our province in the last 
10 years.  Innovative approaches and a firm belief in 
cooperation and community will see us through as they have 
in the past. 
 
A bright spot in this budget, Mr. Speaker, and for the future 
is in the area of distance education.  We will work to 
improve access to educational opportunities through 
expanded program and technology options, better learning 
needs assessment, and support for the integration of 
technology and instructional design. 
 
What I'm particularly pleased about and what I'm pleased to 
confirm today, that there is a substantial increase in the 
funding for the Saskatchewan Communications Network, or 
SCN.  This funding will offset federal funding cuts and 
reflects the importance our government places in distance 
education as a key educational strategy.  SCN builds 
partnerships with many organizations in our province 
including educational institutions -- especially regional 
colleges -- government departments, professional 
associations, NGOs (non-governmental organizations), and 
the province's film and video industry. 
 
SCN and our government, Mr. Speaker, our government is 
committed to the development of the film and video industry 
in Saskatchewan.  And that commitment is shown at a time 
of tight fiscal restraint by the fact that we have replaced that 
federal money that runs out at the end of March with new 
provincial money in order to support distance education in 
our province and in order to support our film and video 
industry.  And for this I'm proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Our government has recognized that 
the film and video industry generates direct economic 
benefits for our province in the form of jobs and financial 
investment.  This is an investment in an environmentally 
friendly industry. 
 
SCN's training network helps adult learners learn in their 
home community.  It helps them acquire skills training, 
professional upgrading, or even start a university degree.  
The continuing success of the SCN training network is the 
result of SCN's effective partnerships. 
 
In 1993-94 SCN will deliver 47 university, SIAST, and high 
school credit courses to more than 100 classes in the 
province.  Anticipated enrolment will be approximately 
3,300 individuals province wide. 
 
With respect to another strategic direction, I want to stress 
the importance of working with Indian and 

Metis people to resolve education and training issues through 
more effective processes.  In particular we will be exploring 
ways of having Indian and Metis people have greater 
involvement over programs and services. 
 
We are now working on a bilateral process with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations on education and 
training.  A similar tripartite agreement that includes the 
Metis people and the federal government is also being 
planned.  The development of a dynamic northern education 
and training strategy is one of our government's priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to quality is at the heart of the 
government's strategy for education and training.  Our 
budget reflects values and principles that go beyond strictly 
economic circumstances and considerations.  And it helps us 
to make the right decisions and do the right things. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to carry on the tradition of 
excellence in education and good government that 
Saskatchewan people deserve and that our budget enhances. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today it is 
my privilege to rise in support of the Minister of Finance and 
congratulate her on her budget and also to congratulate the 
people of Saskatchewan for being part of the solution instead 
of part of the problem, and undertaking this journey of 
renewal with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Monday was Heritage Day in Saskatchewan, a 
day designated to celebrate the culture and the contributions 
of all the people who have been part of this province's proud 
history.  We celebrate the ingenuity, generosity, spirituality, 
and proud traditions of the people of the first nations who 
lived on these plains for 6,000 years.  And our government 
acknowledges and supports their desire for self-government 
and self-sufficiency. 
 
We are grateful also for the wealth of culture and knowledge 
that our pioneers from Europe and Asia brought to our 
province.  Our economic energy and social philosophy was 
drawn from the vision and industry of our pioneers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Melfort represents a 
cross-section of all those ethnic groups, many of them 
building homes and establishing trading posts in the late 
1890s.  They worked hard to build a kind of province that 
would provide the economic independence and social 
security that they lacked in the old country. 
 
They cleared the land, built the roads, schools, hospitals, and 
utilities.  They believed in paying their debts as they went, 
and during times of crisis or need, they always were there to 
lend a helping hand to a neighbour.  They were thrifty and 
industrious and they left for us a legacy we can be proud of. 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

Today in my constituency you will find some of the most 
advanced and successful industries in our province.  In St. 
Brieux, Bourgault Industries is world renowned for its farm 
equipment.  In Beatty, we have Industrial Automated 
Services Incorporated making automated mining robots for 
large, international mining companies.  We have Thomson 
Meats selling processed meats around the world.  We have 
seed cleaning plants, berry farms, bee-keepers, specialty crop 
growers, and intensive livestock operations. 
 
Melfort is a constituency where the people know the 
meaning of diversification and cooperation.  It is a 
constituency filled with people I am proud to call my friends 
and neighbours.  They are people who understand that 
continuous deficits are the trade mark of a fiscally 
irresponsible and lazy government.  And they understand 
that provincial debts are a deadly burden that we pass on to 
our children. 
 
The people in my constituency look forward with 
anticipation and appreciation to the day our government can 
once again after 10 long years, have a balanced budget, 
something our pioneers took for granted.  Our ancestors 
would be horrified if after all their hard work and diligence 
they were to learn that any government in the space of nine 
years could rack up $11 billion of debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm an ordinary person, a person who loves this 
province and is proud of its people.  I'm a mother, a 
grandmother, a wife, and a teacher.  I ran for elected office 
because I wanted this province to be governed by a party that 
could give my children's future back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my grandparents game to Saskatchewan from 
Norway in the early 1900s because they believed this to be a 
land of opportunity and great natural wealth.  My father 
came to Saskatchewan from Germany in 1927 because he 
wanted freedom from political instability and social injustice. 
 
My ancestors saw Saskatchewan as a land that could deliver 
that promise, the promise of economic opportunity, social 
equality, and political renewal.  Delivery of that promise 
once again rings loud and clear in our throne speech and our 
budget speech this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my parents and my grandparents worked hard 
to make their dreams a reality for their children. And under 
the last administration that dream nearly turned into a 
nightmare -- a nightmare of debt, opportunities lost, and 
scorn for democratic principles. 
 
My aspiration is to pass on to my children, Paul and Les and 
Mark and Shannon and Glen, economic opportunities, fiscal 
integrity, and respect for democratic institutions. 
 
So here we are, Mr. Speaker, at the midpoint of our first 
term. And what have I learned?  I have learned that 
Saskatchewan people are strong and resilient.  I have 

learned that delivering the promise means restoring honesty 
and integrity to our legislature.  I have learned that delivering 
the promise means passing laws that bring social and 
economic equality to all people.  I have learned to appreciate 
this legislature and support the purpose that it serves in our 
democratic society.  I have learned what it takes to provide 
good government in tough economic times. 
 
And I am proud of our Premier and thank him for his 
foresight and his perseverance, his sense of fairness, and his 
resolve to restore a democratic and fiscal integrity to our 
province.  I am proud of our caucus that places the lives and 
the future of our children as their number one priority -- a 
caucus that critically examines all options, makes tough 
decisions, and stands by them. 
 
I am proud of our Finance minister and her spirit and her 
determination and her marvellous ability to maintain a 
compassionate face on a very difficult balanced budget plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I am proud, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of 
my staff and all the ministerial assistants who work long 
hours dealing with complex and controversial issues and who 
receive very little recognition from the public, and certainly 
none from the Leader of the Third Party, who made a 
mockery of their salary and qualification grid in order to gain 
political advantage in a by-election. 
 
I am proud of the people who work in my department.  They 
are excellent people who work hard to serve the people in 
this province.  And they too are subject to unjustified 
criticism from opposition politicians, simply because it's 
vogue to denigrate the civil service.  And in doing so, Mr. 
Speaker, these politicians undermine and denigrate our 
democratic institutions and their ability to serve the public. 
 
I have learned that the Tory opposition still cannot admit that 
they sunk this province into debt to the brink of bankruptcy.  
I have learned that not one of them has the courage to stand 
up and to say to the public of Saskatchewan, I'm sorry -- 
sorry that they gambled away this province's resources and 
finances, sorry that you gambled away our children's future.  
Only one Tory had the courage and the honesty to do that, 
and he was the former member from Melfort, Grant Hodgins.  
Do you remember him? 
 
Instead we hear denials about the debt and criticisms about 
tax increases and expenditure cuts.  After all this misery they 
created and all these years, they still don't understand why 
we have to make an interest payment of $843 million.  This 
is their legacy to our children  -- $843 million in interest on 
their public debt. 
 
The opposition members have developed a severe case of 
amnesia.  They can't comprehend why we have an annual 
expenditure in our budget of $843 million.  Do they believe 
some buzzard circling overhead dropped it on us out of the 
blue?  Or perhaps 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

for some perverse and illogical reason, we made it up, just so 
we can cut programs and transfers and raise taxes?  I have 
learned, Mr. Speaker, that if I had 10 per cent of that $843 
million in my budget this year I could fund all of SAMA's 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 
requirements and add 20 per cent to the revenue-sharing 
pools for municipal governments. 
 
What unmitigated gall for the members from Morse and 
Thunder Creek to stand in this House and demand that we 
reduce taxes and increase expenditures.  They were on the 
Treasury Board during their administration, and they know 
deficits can't disappear by magic, but they do know how to 
make them appear. 
 
And we will all recall the enlightening comment by the 
member from Estevan when he said some years ago, deficits 
are just deferred taxes.  Well they had deficits all right and 
now the people of Saskatchewan have to pay -- pay by tax 
increases and program cuts. 
 
Perhaps they will remember these words spoken by one of 
their own back in June of 1987 when the man announced the 
final reconciliation of the 1986-87 fiscal year.  He said and I 
quote: 
 

 As a result, the deficit for the 1986-87 fiscal year will be 
$1.235 billion. 

 
Yes, $1.235 billion annual deficit.  Compare that with our 
deficit this year of 189 million.  Mr. Speaker, we had the 
courage to take action to change that dangerous course that 
was a trademark of the last administration.  We set our goals 
and we deliver the promise. 
 
I can understand the Leader of the Third Party's nai pvety.  
She doesn't understand the complexity and the operations of 
government.  She's like the Queen of Hearts in Alice in 
Wonderland -- out of touch, living in an illusionary world.  
She lectures using bogus numbers and incoherent economic 
theories that have no application to actual fiscal realities in 
our province. 
 
She is every bit as misguided and perverse as her Tory 
friends across the aisle.  They know the truth but they can't 
speak it.  She lives in a fantasy world and speaks in riddles.  
She supports a Liberal plan to reduce taxes on cigarettes and 
rejects export taxes for large tobacco companies.  She 
supports bingos and horse racing but rejects VLTs (video 
lottery terminal). 
 
She wants a balanced budget but rejects expenditure cuts and 
tax increases.  She lectures about integrity in politicians but 
uses fraudulent information about ministerial salaries in 
order to gain votes.  She criticizes the cost and the size of 
government but she received a raise of 37 per cent and an 
increase in her staff in 1993-94.  She criticizes our 
government as an old boys' club but welcomes all the old, 
recycled, discredited Tories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in Municipal Government 

support balanced budgets.  They have helped us restore this 
province's finances and I thank them for their cooperation.  
They too are making the difficult choices.  They are seeking 
ways of working together to provide better services and we 
are encouraging and helping them in that process. 
 
This year, through a $500,000 allocation to the ICC (inter 
community cooperation), the communities that have projects 
funded through the ICCs are leading the way to a new 
generation of municipal service delivery.  And I want to 
congratulate them for their ingenuity and resourcefulness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, in my department, the 
Department of Municipal Government, some difficult 
choices had to be made and managed.  And they were. 
 
But it's important to note that changes were made with 
careful thought.  Reductions in revenue sharing with 
municipal governments have been implemented, but the 
overall financial position of local governments has not been 
seriously affected by these reductions. 
 
Revenue-sharing grants form a relatively small share of total 
municipal revenues, between 5 and 15 per cent in 1992, and 
municipalities have leadership and good management in 
keeping increases in property taxes to a minimum, below the 
rate of inflation.  As a result of the reductions in transfers, 
the impact on the mill rate for rural and urban municipalities 
will only be 1.8 per cent.  Reductions in revenue sharing 
should not be reflected by increases in property taxes.  We 
believe this 1.8 per cent can be absorbed. 
 
I think it's important to note that municipalities in this 
province are in good financial shape.  In fact, while their debt 
load continues to decline, they have more and more money in 
the bank.  The total reserves, which is cash in the bank, for 
RMs (rural municipality) sits at $42 million while their debt 
load is 3 million.  Villages have $30 million in the bank with 
a debt load of only 2.6 million.  And towns have $60 million 
in reserves with a $19 million debt load.  In total, Mr. 
Speaker, municipalities in Saskatchewan have $132 million 
in reserves with a total debt of 24 million. 
 
Furthermore, health reform has reduced the amount of 
funding required from the property tax.  Removing the union 
hospital requisition and replacing it with a flat 2 mill levy 
will save municipalities $4.2 million in this year. 
 
This government's compassionate approach to deficit control 
stands in stark contrast to that of our nearest neighbour to the 
west.  We say reduction, while in Alberta they say 
elimination. 
 
A new funding arrangement has been established for 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency.  Core 
funding has been set at $4 million with 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

additional assistance from the province, of $2 million.  The 
new funding arrangement reflects the role of SAMA as 
primarily serving municipalities' interests.  Municipalities 
also have assumed a more significant role in the governance 
of the agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan deserves special 
attention for jobs and economic development, and my 
department will provide increased resources in support of 
community development in the North.  This budget redirects 
over $4 million to a strategy for economic renewal in the 
North.  Funding will be made available to continue assisting 
northern municipalities in the construction and upgrading of 
water and sewer systems.  Details of that program will be 
announced in the near future. 
 
As well, to provide service to northern municipalities more 
efficiently, we have reorganized service delivery in the North 
under one branch of my department, northern affairs and 
municipal services.  We look forward to the many projects 
that promise new jobs in community infrastructure in 
Saskatchewan through the Canada-Saskatchewan 
infrastructure works program.  A total of $173 million will 
be spent on projects across the province over the next two 
years and that will provide a significant boost to both the 
local economies and to local community infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sports and recreation play an important role in 
contributing to individual well-being, strong families, 
economic and social renewal of communities, and to the 
overall quality of life.  My department has worked closely 
with key players in sports and recreation to develop a 
framework for coordinated planning and resource allocation 
amongst delivery system partners. 
 
This includes a development and implementation of a 
two-year project intended to show how this sector can be 
used to address the needs of youth at risk; a development of 
an equity check-list tool designed to raise a level of 
awareness about the program needs for women, aboriginal 
people, the disabled, and visible minorities; and an ongoing 
work with key voluntary stakeholders to ensure that lottery 
funded programs are accessible to all groups regardless of 
age, race, sex, economic or social circumstance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social housing delivery continues to be a 
concern for us.  This new federal Liberal government has 
continued on the same course of action that the last Tory 
government in Ottawa did -- no new social housing delivery, 
no commitment to assist those people in our province with 
the greatest need, low income families and seniors. 
 
Contrary to what is going on in provinces with Liberal and 
Tory administrations, we are maintaining our support for 
people in social housing.  While these provinces have moved 
their subsidy to 30 per cent of rent geared to income, we will 
maintain our subsidy at 25 per cent of rent geared to income.  
And we have increased our maintenance program by 
$300,000.  This not only preserves our current housing stock, 
it 

provides much-needed jobs for contractors, especially those 
in the North. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to look for innovative 
ways to provide housing for needy families.  We search out 
partners in community-based organizations.  Habitat for 
Humanity is an excellent example.  We thank these people 
for their hard work and hope that they will continue their 
work across our communities.  Affordable and accessible 
housing for low-income families continues to challenge us, 
especially with no federal help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take a moment to speak briefly about 
the lotteries.  In the beginning it was volunteers -- volunteer 
board members from Saskatchewan Sport Inc. who signed 
personal promissory notes of $100,000 as Saskatchewan's 
share in the Western Canada Lottery Corporation.  This 
initial commitment by volunteers had been nurtured by 
government, and funds through lottery sales have been raised 
to support sport, recreation, and culture programs in our 
province. 
 
There has been substantial growth.  In the beginning there 
was less than a hundred beneficiary organizations.  Today 
there are more than 1,200 organizations and municipalities 
receiving grants from lottery proceeds.  They in turn 
distribute grants to more than 12,000 affiliated volunteer 
organizations. 
 
Some of the recipients of lottery monies include the nine 
tribal councils, 23 regional recreation associations, eight 
zone sports councils, the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 
Councils, the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, Circle 
Vision Artists Inc., Youth Unlimited, Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism, and many, many more -- all empowering local 
people to enjoy life and to enhance their community. 
 
This approach enables residents of all parts of the province to 
participate in a wide variety of activities, whether they live in 
Rosetown or Shell Lake.  You have access to such things as 
volunteer leadership training, opportunities, coaching 
certification, touring visual and performing arts shows, and 
many, many more. 
 
Saskatchewan's arm's-length approach to the marketing and 
distribution of lottery products and profits is unique.  It has 
fostered the healthy development of a large group of 
volunteers and viable organizations which provide programs 
and services to all of Saskatchewan people.  Our vision is to 
ensure that all Saskatchewan residents, regardless of age, 
race, geography, economic or social circumstance, realize the 
benefits that the sector provides.  All residents should have 
reasonable access to sport, culture and recreation 
opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to speak briefly about the economic 
impact of culture and the arts in Saskatchewan.  Arts and 
culture industries are labour intensive, environmentally 
friendly, dependent on a renewable resource of human talent, 
and have a major global export potential. 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

In 1991, there were twice as many people employed in 
Saskatchewan arts and cultural industries as in the province's 
oilfields or the combined industries of uranium and potash.  
Over the last five years, film and video production in 
Saskatchewan increased by 82 per cent in value to more than 
$11 million.  And by 1996-97, employment in the provincial 
film and video industries is expected to double to the point 
where its economic contribution will be nearly $30 million. 
 
You will be interested in knowing that $8 million a year in 
film and video production activity triggers $13 million in 
spin-off benefits to the provincial economy.  And this year 
again, we will provide $1.5 million to SaskFilm.  For each 
dollar invested, cultural activities have three and a half times 
the job creation capacity as other industries. 
 
Using air travel, fax, telephone, courier, video, film, and 
other electronic communication, an artist can successfully 
pursue an international career in both rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the past few years there have been many social and 
economic demands on the cultural sector in Saskatchewan.  
There have been many reports submitted to my department 
from different cultural sectors over the past few years.  These 
reports inform government on the challenges facing arts, 
heritage, multiculturalism, book publishing, and film 
production. 
 
With Saskatchewan cultural diversity, aboriginal and rural 
strength, unique regional artistic expression, highly 
developed education and library systems, pioneer history and 
rich heritage, the province is ready for a new and creative 
structure to emerge to ensure future health for the cultural 
sector. 
 
There is a White Paper being drafted at this time which 
integrates the recommendations of all these reports from the 
cultural community.  This will be used as a basis for 
discussion and input from the various cultural sectors upon 
its release later this year. 
 
The work that has been done to date is leading the province 
towards a new cultural strategy which will see Saskatchewan 
culture positioned in a new economic and social framework.  
There is a need to show how our cultural agenda can 
contribute to the future prosperity of this province. 
 
I am proud to be involved in the creation of this White Paper 
and feel strongly that it will provide guidance for our 
government's role in cultural policy development, legislation, 
funding, advocacy, and regulatory functions; and I'm certain 
that the White Paper will take into account the desire of the 
cultural community for sectorial self-determination and 
autonomy and the pressing need to make the best possible 
use of limited resources. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, our government is prepared to 
do what we said we would do -- make 

jobs a top priority, restructure health and agriculture, make 
government more open and accessible, make a future for our 
children and grandchildren.  In short, Mr. Speaker, we stand 
ready to deliver the promise.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
Certainly it gives me a great pleasure to rise in this House 
and Assembly and to speak in support of the budget. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity, as 
others have, to congratulate the Liberal member from Regina 
North West on her recent by-election win.  To have survived 
a long federal campaign, to follow only with a provincial 
campaign shortly thereafter, I believe indicates her 
commitment to her party and to public life. 
 
I want also, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate two colleagues of 
mine -- the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, who was recently 
promoted to cabinet as Minister of Highways and 
Transportation; also I'd like to congratulate the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain, who recently became the 
Minister of Social Services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I am sure that both will do an excellent job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I want, lest I forget, to congratulate the 
Minister of Finance for the outstanding job that she had done 
in bringing in this budget and the previous budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I've done on more than one occasion and 
alluded to, is the fact that I've had the privilege of 
representing an area of Quill Lakes for a considerable length 
of time.  And I want to say that I believe that the people that 
I represent there collectively are the most innovative people 
in Saskatchewan.  And long before diversification became 
the key word of economic development, spread across the 
area that I represent are the living demonstrations of 
innovative and entrepreneurial spirit of the people of that 
area. 
 
I give you the examples of Schulte Industries in Englefeld, 
Dyna-Fab just north of Watson, Doeptker Industries at 
Annaheim, Michels Tarps, Western Industries, Hogemann 
Transport at St. Gregor; a potassium sulphate plant at 
Kandahar, Pound-Maker Ethanol plant at Lanigan, 
processing some, up to 16,000 head of cattle; Plains Poultry 
at Wynyard, Bergen Industries at Drake, meat processing 
plant also at Drake. 
 
And most recently just out of Leroy, Brian Stomp Farms 
opened a 1,200 hog operation and in future expect to expand 
to 10,000 hogs per year.  It's a great accomplishment for the 
area. 
 
(1630) 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

And I want to mention that in Wynyard there are two 
companies, Vis-Vis, a bottling plant, and also Quill Springs 
water.  Both plants are modern plants, both have great 
opportunity to be successful as contracts have been worked 
out with companies prepared to purchase the water. 
 
The major problem has been insufficient capital to operate 
these plants.  These plants represent some $8 million in 
investment -- some of it Japanese investment -- and was 
developed essentially by a local businessman, Randy Martin 
in Wynyard. 
 
And I believe that the government, although strapped for 
money, should make an effort to be instrumental in helping 
to put together a business plan to help get these plants 
operative.  It would be good for employment and certainly 
good for the community of Wynyard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is really a budget of economic 
renewal of our province, and as with any family or business, 
to be successful, the province must get its financial house in 
order.  This government inherited a situation financially 
which could only be described as a financial crisis, the verge 
of bankruptcy. 
 
And to his credit the Premier of the province at an early date 
on assuming office realized what had to be done; he initiated 
the plan from the outset to deal with the financial crisis and 
several steps were within that plan.  He promised that he 
would open the books and the books were opened to advise 
the people of this province of the magnitude of the problem. 
 
He set in motion a budgetary process to balance the budget 
by the year 1996-97 and he set the standard of how fiscal 
management would be achieved.  It would be orderly, all 
would contribute fairly, and above all compassion for the 
least fortunate in society would be an inherent part of the 
plan. 
 
And fourth, this government renegotiated many of the 
previous deals saving the taxpayers of this province in excess 
of $400 million in either previous investment or guarantees.  
And finally the government introduced planned efficiencies 
in government saving million of dollars for the taxpayers. 
 
But not only is it necessary to get the finances in order, the 
second component of economic renewal was required, and 
that was increased creation of wealth.  This government 
realizes that if we are to provide the people with many of the 
benefits which they want and have become accustomed to, 
there must be the creation of wealth to support the cost of 
those programs. 
 
With limited resources at its disposal, the government has set 
the stage for greater economic development.  First, they 
established a climate to work with small business with its 
economic development plan, Partnership for Renewal.  
Secondly, it reduced corporate income tax on small business 
by 20 per cent over four years, recognizing that small 
business is the 

greatest creator of jobs -- 80 per cent of them.  Third, it 
revised the royalty rates structure for oil and gas, to 
encourage development.  And we've seen significant gains in 
that regard.  Third, it proceeded with a deal for nuclear 
research in Saskatoon -- an improved deal, I may say.  Fifth, 
it proceeded with the development of uranium mines in 
northern Saskatchewan.  Sixth, Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation has been developed to replace SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) -- $6 
million to provide equity financing, loans, and guarantees to 
Saskatchewan businesses geared to export market. 
 
In agriculture, they have established $20 million over four 
years, which will be invested in value added projects.  A 
program to promote the beef industry . . . The beef industry 
development fund will be established to improve products 
and also markets. 
 
And crop insurance is being improved.  Spot loss hail 
coverage is being reinstated, which will be a great benefit to 
farmers.  Farmers will be able to purchase whole farm crop 
insurance on all of their crop and save on premiums.  And 
special diversification options added for minor crops 
currently not covered will be an added feature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are some of the positive steps being taken 
by our government to ensure further economic development 
in this province, for only through greater economic 
development can our people prosper, obtain jobs, and have a 
decent quality of life.  Mr. Speaker, this government is on the 
right track both in financial management and economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making progress, but there is an old 
saying that progress is a nice word but progress has its 
enemies, and each of us can make up our own list of enemies 
as to what is being achieved here in Saskatchewan.  However 
I believe that our government can be successful if it 
continues to communicate well with the public; if the public 
are to be taken into its confidence by this government, share 
in the evolution of change, and become a part of the program 
development; if the people understand why government is 
taking a particular direction.  In short, we must respect and 
trust the people of this province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we can have the best government 
in Canada.  And I can allude to that by the pre-1982 
government of former premier, Allan Blakeney.  But I say if 
we fail to communicate with the people, that which is right 
may in fact be wasted.  Too often politicians become 
occupied with the implementation of plan and become a 
mere arm of the bureaucracy rather than true representatives 
of the people. 
 
Our party has a great tradition established by Mr. Douglas, 
Lloyd, and Blakeney.  Their success was to develop in the 
minds of the people of the province a basic trust.  That trust 
had to be earned by their actions and it was.  So to it is with 
our government.  Its success or failure will depend on 
whether it can obtain the trust of the people of Saskatchewan. 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this budget 
demonstrates this government's commitment to earn the 
respect of the people of Saskatchewan.  It made a 
commitment to manage the financial affairs of this province 
and indeed it has delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, in talking about 
communications I have a short press statement here from a 
Wynyard Advance, February 14 edition.  And I think it 
demonstrates what good communication is.  And it's just a 
short article that . . . two paragraphs that I want to read.  It 
makes the point.  And this article says: 
 

 Following the pre budget meeting in Wynyard, Janice 
MacKinnon, Minister of Finance, and her assistant 
promised they would direct . . . the Ministry of Health 
some specific concerns that we who live in rural 
Saskatchewan are having about new hospital policies in 
Saskatoon.  In my editorial (Jan. 31) I did promise to keep 
everyone posted on (the) results. 

 
 A huge Valentine bouquet to Janice MacKinnon.  I have 

had a call from the Ministry of Health.  The staff person to 
whom I talked at length listened carefully . . . agreed we 
indeed have a valid and common sense (approach) . . . She 
said she would direct that concern to (the) health boards in 
Saskatoon and Regina and she game me specific directions 
for backing her up with letters of my own. 

 
 A second huge Valentine bouquet to Debbie McEwan from 

the office of the Ministry of Health for destroying all 
manner of stereotypes regarding bureaucrats by doing 
some active, sensitive, (and) sympathetic listening. 

 
 Could we be seeing the beginnings of a trend? 
 

And I agree.  We are seeing the beginning of a trend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, too often we have heard the 
false accusation by the press that the NDP governments are 
good at creating social programs but they don't have an 
economic plan.  I want to say, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 
further from the truth.  To the contrary.  To the contrary, Mr. 
Speaker.  Tory governments across this country have been a 
disaster both provincially and federally. 
 
This government, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, has a plan.  A 
plan for fiscal management, the creation of wealth and jobs, 
and also to provide a quality of life for its citizens.  And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, this government will succeed and will 
succeed with the outstanding cooperation of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan people are too proud, Mr. Speaker, to continue 
to be regarded as a have-not province.  They will, in 
conjunction and in cooperation with this 

government, lift this province from the ashes of near 
bankruptcy to take its proud place among the provinces of 
Canada.  Saskatchewan people deserve no less; 
Saskatchewan people will get no less.  This budget leads to 
the road of rebuilding Saskatchewan and I say, Mr. Speaker, 
we shall succeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 
Finance of the newly elected Liberal government in Ottawa 
delivered its first budget.  And I want to say that to be fair, 
four months to travel across this broad country and to 
converse with the various provinces, business community, 
labour, is a mammoth task.  And in fairness, I think the new 
Minister of Finance made a valiant attempt to converse with 
the provinces and with the interested parties across the 
country. 
 
And so from that standpoint, I want to say that I recognize 
that it's a mammoth job.  I can also say that I think that the 
climate of discussion has improved with the newly elected 
Liberal government.  I think that the guarantee that transfer 
payments over the next five years will not be cut further is of 
assistance to the provinces.  I think there has been some 
effort to address the deficit, although the long-term is not 
defined. 
 
I want to say that the air base in Moose is intact for at least 
another year, which was good news to Moose Jaw and 
Saskatchewan.  I think there was some sensitivity and no 
major, major tax increases.  Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I 
still think that the federal government has to get its act 
together and order that the provinces can better plan for the 
future. 
 
Specifically, I was concerned in respect to their decision to 
cut back on the UI (Unemployment Insurance) payments.  I 
say that because over five years, the UI payments will be cut 
by $5.5 billion.  And that is not incorporated with the overall 
restructuring of social programs, including UI.  As a 
consequence, many of the workers will get less benefits, 
have to work more hours and more weeks to qualify, and as a 
consequence less return. 
 
Also in respect to the seniors, they have cut the income age 
tax credit and put it on to a means test.  They reduced . . . 
starting at approximately $26,000 when it starts to be cut and 
it's indicated that seniors will be hit quite substantially with 
the new income tax credit being changed. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, we've seen the face of the 
Liberal government in Ottawa, but I think we've only seen 
part of the face.  Because lacking in the federal budget is any 
apparent overall plan for deficit reduction.  Lacking in the 
federal budget is an over . . . lacking is the overhaul of the 
taxation system.  Lacking in the budget, which they 
promised would be high priority, is an overall job creation 
program or plan.  And lacking in this budget is any mention 
regarding agriculture, our primary industry. 
 
(1645) 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the biggest problem with the 
federal budget is the uncertainty that it creates in this country 
and to the citizens.  How can the provinces plan properly 
unless they know exactly what the federal government is 
going to do.  Too much of what the federal government has 
to do has been left to be decided in the future, which can 
impact on the provinces substantially. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, what is needed is a national . . . a 
national plan is what is needed, a plan similar to what we 
have adopted here in Saskatchewan, a concrete four- or 
five-year plan to address both deficit and economic growth.  
That, Mr. Speaker, was lacking in the federal budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the budget that was presented here in 
Saskatchewan, it has shown the way for the rest of Canada, 
and what I urge the federal government to follow our 
leadership and let's not only rebuild Saskatchewan, but 
rebuild Canada. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The topic I want 
to pursue today is largely trust and accountability and how it 
relates to the budget.  When I was looking at newspaper 
articles on the budget, I wasn't so interested in what the 
pundits had to say, because I'm getting pretty good at 
predicting that, but what I was most interested in was the 
people-in-the-street interviews where people, who for the 
most part go about their daily lives, had an opinion on our 
budget. 
 
What disturbed me most about their comments was a lack of 
trust in the budgeting process of government.  And because 
I'm a member of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts and estimates and previously on Crown 
Corporations Committee, I want to talk about how this 
legislature works to ensure accountability, because 
accountability isn't left just to trust.  There are a number of 
mechanisms in a properly functioning legislature that makes 
sure it happens. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee, which is one of the main 
committees, is open to the public and the media, and if 
there's a good story, we can be sure that the media are going 
to report on it.  During the last meeting of Public Accounts in 
January, we were reviewing the public auditor's report.  His 
assessment of many of the departments and Crown 
corporations of government is published annually. 
 
During that week the media were in and out, but there was 
very little coverage.  Why?  Because for one thing no one 
bothers reporting when things are going well.  But also 
because there was no scandals.  The media doesn't miss a 
scandal because they have a paper to fill.  So no scandals 
equals no story.  You don't have to believe us, the media will 
let you know. 
 
And why should there be a lack of trust when the 

auditor in his '91-92 annual report stated: 
 

 The Government moved from providing what the Financial 
Management (Review) Commission viewed as the weakest 
and least useful financial statements in Canada to 
providing one of the most useful financial statements 
issued by a senior government in Canada. 

 
Can we trust the public auditor?  I believe we can.  The 
auditor was not appointed by our government, he's 
independent in his actions, he has his own staff, he has the 
authority to review the books of the province and pass 
judgement. 
 
His job is to let us know whether the books are fair and 
honest and to give you, the taxpayer, peace of mind.  And 
where there are issues and problems, he raises them.  And if 
he doesn't mind me making light of him just for a moment, 
he sometimes reminds me a little of the count on Sesame 
Street because he likes to count everything.  If he's not able 
to, he's the first to let both us and the media know about it.  
He is very, very thorough. 
 
So who else is at these meetings when the auditor reports?  
Not only the public and the media as mentioned before.  The 
committee on Public Accounts is chaired by the opposition.  
Members of the opposition are there, and the Liberal leader 
sits on this committee.  The government does its part by 
providing full and timely reports; written responses to 
questions; ministers, officials, and whoever is needed to 
provide the answers. 
 
So when the opposition or the Liberal leader suggest there is 
not ample opportunity for public scrutiny, I have to wonder 
why they would mislead people taking time to watch us at 
work. 
 
A similar accountability committee exists for Crown 
corporations because the auditor also comments on Crown 
corporations.  This is an all-party committee.  These 
committees meet regularly.  The public can come; any of you 
who are watching today can come, and the media are there.  
Any questions can be asked and witnesses are called.  
There's no attempt to hide any information. 
 
So again, anybody who might try to suggest that there's no 
accountability is trying to mislead you, and I might even 
suspect them of having a political agenda. 
 
And the final area of accountability is estimates, and we'll be 
coming up to that very shortly.  This is a committee of the 
entire legislature that is televised.  People can sit in the 
galleries or they can sit at home and watch on TV, as many 
good folks are doing today.  In estimates, every department 
has to answer for its current-year budget.  They answer 
questions from any member of the legislature.  I don't know 
how you could be much more accountable than this. 
 
And there are of course still issues to discuss: should 



February 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

we record pension liabilities in the Consolidated Fund; are 
there better ways of valuing public assets.  But all in all, we 
are quantum leaps ahead of two years ago when all systems 
were in shambles.  We promised open, accountable 
government and we are delivering open and accountable 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- When budgeting we always have choices to 
make, and in this context I want to talk for a moment about 
the federal budget.  The Saskatchewan Liberal leader 
pronounced that the federal budget was a good budget.  Why 
would that be?  Well CFB (Canadian forces base) Moose 
Jaw is still there.  That's good -- so far.  Taxes didn't go up 
except for seniors over 35,000.  She says that's good.  I'll 
give a little more information after; that's not quite the whole 
story.  Whacking away at the poor and unemployed through 
UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) changes that 
will force them onto public assistance.  She says that's good. 
 
I wouldn't say that.  You have to ask yourself, what value 
base whacks away at the poor and unemployed.  In all of our 
budget changes we have had to act in such a way to protect 
the most vulnerable -- not those who asked the most or spoke 
the loudest, but the most vulnerable. 
 
She criticizes our government because we haven't cut 
enough, and this makes our budget a bad budget.  We 
reduced spending two years in a row, and you all know how 
painful this has been -- it was and it is.  There was tax 
increases; there was cuts.  She said it was bad that we didn't 
make enough cuts.  I just want to quote from an article here, 
"The Year in Review", January 3, '93 Leader-Post: 
 

 If you are looking at the final numbers, they did not do the 
kind of expenditure cuts they could have done in my view. 

 
So more cutting asked for.  Using her own yardstick, Mr. 
Speaker, if our budget didn't cut enough, how does that jibe 
with Mr. Martin having a good budget?  Where also does this 
fall in all the calls for balanced-budget legislation? 
 
The financial houses say our government has been very 
effective in bringing down our deficit and meeting our 
financial plans.  So we have calls for legislation, but no calls 
for reality.  We are doing what she only talks about, and we 
are achieving our plan and delivering it. 
 
And I think that I will recognize some new politics when 
people can bring themself to give credit where credit is due. 
 
When pressed, solutions fall within the realm of the 
mythical, magical wealth creation.  And I seem to remember 
another leader that was like that.  Well it didn't work, and 
we're still asking the same questions while our government 
works diligently getting us back out of the hole they dug us 
into. 

What about the federal election promise of jobs, jobs, jobs?  
Right now there's uncertainty about funding for SED 
Systems in Saskatoon, a future-oriented, high-tech industry.  
There is uncertainty about the Saskatoon air base. 
 
On February 21 in the legislature the Liberal leader here 
expressed concern about jobs.  But as announced in the 
Liberal budget, federal Liberal budget, after two years of 
their job creation efforts they are projecting a drop of .3 per 
cent in the unemployment rate.  That's a change from the 
current rate of 11.8 per cent, dropping to 10.8 per cent over 
two years. 
 
And what about agriculture -- still the key sector in 
Saskatchewan's economy.  No mention in the federal budget, 
Mr. Speaker, except for a $500,000 capital gains exemption 
that's under review and that farmers can only retrieve when 
they sell their farms. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What does Lynda say about that? 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- I don't remember the Liberal leader saying 
anything about that point.  Guess we'll have to wait to hear 
what happens there. 
 
And finally, taxation. I want to revisit it because Chre ptien 
vowed, no new taxes.  Well this is one promise already 
broken.  Seniors and workers will be paying more.  Partially 
exempt is . . . It used to be partially exempt.  Employer-paid 
life insurance premiums are now fully taxed.  A senior 
earning 35,000 a year will pay 370 more in income tax.  The 
$100,000 capital gains exemption has been eliminated.  Meal 
and entertainment tax deduction has gone from 80 per cent to 
50 per cent.  And Canadian companies with capital of more 
than 50 million can no longer claim small-business 
deduction.  Total extra taxes -- 1.44 billion a year. 
 
Now we can argue that some of these are good taxes.  I think 
some of them are and some of them are bad taxes.  But at the 
end of the day, they are taxes.  So unless the Liberals have a 
different meaning to no new taxes, I would have to call this a 
promise broken. 
 
So as usual we have the old routine of saying one thing and 
doing another.  And if the Liberal leader will forgive me one 
little, friendly dig, I'm sure she'll be on the phone offering 
Paul Martin and Jean Chre ptien one idea a week that she 
never got around to sharing with us. 
 
I just wanted to add at the end some of my own ideas on the 
debate of how to solve Canada's and the province's financial 
problems.  First of all is the issue of third-party funding.  
Two-thirds of government's total budget goes to third parties 
-- municipalities, schools, hospitals, universities, payments to 
individuals and farmers.  This means that no matter how 
efficient we get or how much we cut, government only 
spends one-third of its budget directly. 
 
And even if we were so efficient that we eliminated 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard February 23, 1994 

the entire one-third, it wouldn't even pay off one year interest 
on the debt.  So this is why third parties have to do their part.  
We can only achieve these savings in partnership.  The 
community itself has direct control over two-thirds of the 
provincial budget.  And it isn't just third parties that have to 
be part of this process. 
 
I have some ideas for the new federal government but I'm not 
going to give them to them one a week, I'll just give them to 
them all at once and then they can use them right away. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, rather than get into this finishing 
topic, I'd like to move adjournment of debate and finish off 
my remarks tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 


