




















































Hansard: May 12, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2271 

 May 12, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to present a petition on behalf of 4,800 individuals who are 

concerned about the effects of certain changes to the health 

care delivery system that have been proposed by the Saskatoon 

District Health Board. 

 

The preamble of the petition reads: 

 

That the decisions made by the Saskatoon Health Board to 

close the emergency . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The member should 

know that he can only read the prayer, and not the preamble.  

The member may proceed in reading the prayer. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister of Health to 

examine the proposal to close the emergency and cardiac care 

at the City Hospital and to involve the medical staff at City 

Hospital in an open review process before any decision is 

finalized; examine all proposals for alternative approaches 

with a view to seeking a solution to keep the emergency 

cardiac care unit open at City Hospital; to delay any 

renovations at Royal University Hospital needed to 

accommodate the decision to close emergency and cardiac 

care at the City Hospital until a full consultation with City 

Hospital nursing staff, medical staff, has taken place and their 

alternative proposals have been examined; to respect the 

voices of the thousands of taxpayers who have signed this 

petition to ask that the new City Hospital financed by their 

tax dollars will provide safe and efficient health care 

including the components of emergency care and cardiac care 

which it was designed to deliver; to report to the petitioner 

within three days of the presentation of this petition the 

decision of the minister with respect to the requests outlined 

in this petition. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on 

day 72 I shall ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the reservoir Sask Water was to construct on the 

Battle Creek south of Cypress 

Hills through money set aside by the PFRA: (1) have all the 

environmental assessments or studies been completed on this 

project; (2) is the project proceeding; if not, why not; (3) 

could you supply a brief chronology on the events from 

inception date; and (4) when is the estimated date of 

completion for this project? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

constituency of Kindersley being as far from the capital as it is, 

we seldom have visitors.  But today, however, this historic day 

in the legislature, I indeed do have visitors. 

 

I'd like you, Mr. Speaker, through you and to you to members 

of the Assembly, to welcome 38 grade 7 students from 

Westberry School in Kindersley.  They are accompanied by 

their teachers, John Yellowlees and Doug Klassen, and 14 other 

parents, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to please join with me in welcoming them to the 

legislature this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask that 

the members of the Legislative Assembly welcome with me 

today and to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, John and 

Mildred Egnatoff.  John was an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) from 1948 to 1952 in the constituency 

of Melfort. 

 

John is the past president of Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, Canadian school trustees association, the 

Canadian Education Association, and a member of the Order of 

Canada.  Would you please welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you today to members of the Assembly, 

Dwayne Hartle, who was the administrative vice-president at 

the University of Saskatchewan Students' Union last year.  I'd 

like all members to welcome Dwayne. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

my colleague from Shaunavon in welcoming Dr. John Egnatoff 

here.  I haven't seen Dr. Egnatoff for a long time, and I had the 

privilege of shaking his hands on the steps.  Dr. Egnatoff and I 

go along together a long, long way, not necessarily in politics, 

but there was a time, back in 1958, that I was attending 

teachers' college, and my English instructor in teachers' college 

was none other than Dr. John Egnatoff.  And my perfect 

English these days is totally his responsibility. 

 

So, Dr. Egnatoff, welcome here, and good to see you again. 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

privilege to introduce two special guests who are here with us 

today from the United Kingdom, which is even further away 

than the member from Kindersley.  And they were here and 

able to witness the ceremony that took place outside.  They're 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I'll ask them to rise as I 

introduce them.  Lieutenant Colonel Sean O'Dwyer, private 

secretary to His Royal Highness, the Prince Edward, and 

Inspector Stephen Rogers, police officer for His Royal 

Highness, the Prince Edward.  Both of these gentlemen are here 

to prepare for the working visit of His Royal Highness, the 

Prince Edward, to Saskatchewan in August. 

 

I would like to ask all members of the House to join me in 

extending a warm welcome to Saskatchewan and to this 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the House a pair of special 

guests.  I would ask them to rise as I introduce Darlene Clarke, 

who is with the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, involved in 

education, and she has with her a guest.  And talking about 

being far-out, I'd like to say that this is even further out.  The 

special guest is Larissa Ponomarenko from Ukraine. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- She is interested in educational psychology, 

has been working on that here.  And the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton and myself hope to be guests of hers in the 

Ukraine in July of this year. 

 

Welcome our guests, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a very special group 

of individuals to introduce to the House today on behalf of both 

the Minister of Health and myself, and I want to assure 

members that none of them are far-out. 

 

They are, Mr. Speaker, representatives of a variety of health 

and caring and concerned organizations in our province.  I was 

privileged to have them join with me this morning as we 

released publicly a consultation on health and safety issues that 

we have done with young people in the province. 

 

We have representatives in the House today from the 

Saskatchewan Heart Health Coalition, Regina Heart Healthy 

Partners, the Saskatchewan Interagency Council on Smoking 

and Health, the Provincial Health Council, the Saskatchewan 

Public Health Association, the Saskatchewan Cancer Society, 

the Saskatchewan Lung Association, the Heart and Stroke 

Foundation of Saskatchewan, Driving Without Impairment 

advocates, the Saskatchewan Safety 

Council, the Students Against Drinking and Driving, the 

Canadian Automobile Association of Saskatchewan, and the 

Regina Health Board. I would appreciate it if all members 

would welcome these very special guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join 

with the Deputy Premier today in welcoming our two 

distinguished guests from the United Kingdom here today to 

our Assembly and to the ceremonies which are taking place 

today. 

 

We are all looking forward in this province to the royal visit 

this fall.  They are always very special events to us in this 

province and, as a member of this Assembly, I've had the 

privilege to be part of many of them and we very much look 

forward . . . So I hope that you do your work in a fantastic way 

and that everything will be well prepared for the Prince's visit 

and I'd ask all members to help me welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatoon Multicultural Council 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, 30 years ago the Saskatoon 

Multicultural Council was formed to celebrate the rich variety 

of cultures that have come together in Canada, to encourage 

recognition of our differences while promoting unity, and to 

combat systemic racism in our society. 

 

On Saturday I will be attending the anniversary celebrations of 

the Multicultural Council in the Centennial Auditorium in 

Saskatoon.  One obvious and effective way to eliminate racism 

is to promote understanding amongst ourselves.  Celebrating 

the arts and entertainment heritages of our different cultures is 

one way of promoting such understanding. 

 

The show is called "Magic Carpet Ride:  Celebrating our 

Roots".  It will be a multi-media presentation of song and 

dance.  At least 14 dance and music groups representing our 

rich mix of cultures will take part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evening is dedicated to entertainment and I 

know we will be entertained, but we will also be reminded in 

almost a subliminal way that what makes our society unique 

and vibrant is its multiple roots.  In recognition of our variety 

lies our unity; in recognition of our unity lies the means to 

eliminate racism, or as the Saskatchewan motto says: from 

many peoples, strength.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Saskatchewan Express 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

announce to the Assembly that the Saskatchewan Express is 

engaging on its 13th season.  Saskatchewan Express offers 

Saskatchewan singers, 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

dancers, and musicians performance opportunities as well as 

special training for production in arts administration personnel. 

 

Over the years they have fostered an outstanding reputation 

across Saskatchewan and Canada.  Saskatchewan Express 

brings a special kind of dynamic, home-grown entertainment 

wherever they perform. 

 

The cast was selected after intense auditions which were held 

in March.  The turnout for this year's auditions was 

tremendous, as 86 performers who represented 35 different 

cities and towns across Saskatchewan hoped to be a part of 

Saskatchewan Express.  I would like like to congratulate the 14 

performers who were selected, and I would especially like to 

commend Devra Straker, a vocalist from the town of Saltcoats 

in my constituency. 

 

Saskatchewan Express will be performing throughout 

Saskatchewan this summer including extended runs at the 

Saskatoon Prairieland and Buffalo Days exhibitions.  They will 

also be touring to St. John, New Brunswick in August to 

perform at the 10th anniversary of the Festival by the Sea. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I would like to congratulate the 

performers who were selected to this year's Saskatchewan 

Express.  And I would also like to urge everyone to go to see a 

performance by these talented artists.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Seed Potato Sale to Idaho 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

bring to the attention of the Assembly more good news from 

the Rosetown-Elrose constituency.  Yesterday the Hon. Andy 

Renaud and I were privileged to attend the unveiling of an 

exciting new venture for Saskatchewan, a venture which is a 

natural outgrowth of the energy of the people of the Lucky 

Lake area. 

 

Yesterday in Lucky Lake, the Coteau Hills Potato Corporation, 

a company of about 25 people from the area, announced its 

agreement to work with two potato seed producers from Idaho, 

Randy Bauscher and George Grant, through their new 

company, Sask-Ida Farms Incorporated, to begin a new 

agricultural diversification project. 

 

These partners in this first phase of their development will 

grow approximately 600 acres of potatoes for sale as seed.  

Idaho farmers experience 20 per cent higher yields with seed 

potatoes from Saskatchewan than with seed potatoes produced 

in their own state.  This provides a special market for our 

product in Idaho, and also results in opportunities to market 

internationally with special emphasis on Mexico and the Far 

East. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm excited by the special opportunities for 

farmers and agricultural businesses in my 

constituency which will result from the expansion of this 

project to include more potatoes, local processing, and the 

development of other new crops and agricultural diversification 

products. 

 

I wish to congratulate my constituents on their initiative in this 

project.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fire on Neudorf Farm 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, last Friday the Neudorf farm came within a whisker of 

having the largest pork roast in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2,500 round bales and seven of our barns at our 

hog operation fell victim to a fire which started Friday at noon.  

Mr. Speaker, we consider ourselves very fortunate in that only 

a few animals were lost and most importantly no one was 

injured in fighting the blaze. 

 

On behalf of my entire family, I would like to take this 

opportunity to sincerely thank the Hague, Osler, and RM (rural 

municipality) fire departments who did a tremendous job, the 

men and women of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police), and Duncan Campbell and his water bomber crew of 

the forestry fire management branch.  And I would particularly 

like to thank the nearly 200 people from the Hague area who 

joined in rounding up the many animals which had scattered 

throughout the countryside, many working through the night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was certainly heartening to see that kind of 

generous support which was so quickly and unselfishly given 

in our time of need.  The spirit and cooperation and goodwill, 

which Saskatchewan people are famous for, was certainly 

evidenced last Friday. 

 

While material loss was sustained, it is nothing compared to the 

God-given health and family we still enjoy.  What could have 

been a tragedy was instead a reaffirmation of my belief that we 

have the greatest province with the greatest people in the 

country.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Summer Tourist Attractions 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make what should be 

at least five statements in one. 

 

This summer, as every summer, Saskatoon is the place to be if 

you're looking for cultural events, musical events, sports events 

or if you just want a tall, cold drink in a congenial setting. 

 

For instance, from June 24 to July 3 the Saskatchewan Jazz 

Festival will be presenting 350 artists in 120 performances, 

many of them free.  Two headliners are the Jay McShann Trio 

and the Mighty Clouds of Joy Gospel Choir. 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

Once more we have Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan -- 

Shakespeare in a tent, performed by very talented people.  

Headlining this summer is Hamlet, a play about a politician 

who couldn't make up his mind. 

 

For the absurdly inclined, the play Rozencrantz and 

Guildenstern are Dead is also on the agenda.  For those who 

like their drama a bit more experimental, the Fringe Festival on 

Broadway is their cup of expresso.  The Fringe features street 

theatre, buskers, challenging new plays, and good times. 

 

We have the All Arabian Horse Show, the Saskatoon 

Exhibition, the Wanuskewin Heritage Park and our own 

Folkfest; and in August, Les Misérables. 

 

Something for everyone announced in 90 seconds -- pleasure 

for the whole summer. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

other guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- It's unusual because we're still in statements 

by members, but the member may proceed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll make a short statement 

by this member and ask all members present through you, sir, 

to welcome a group of students in the grade 4 class at William 

Grayson School in Moose Jaw, who I didn't realize earlier were 

. . . I'm happy to say, are seated in the east gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are here accompanied by their 

teacher, Pat Barbier.  I would ask all members to welcome the 

students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gambling Help Line 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the minister of gambling. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday it was revealed that the people at your 

gambling hot line have been referring the calls they receive to 

members of gambling anonymous without their consent.  And 

that's a total violation of the confidentiality that organizations 

like Gamblers Anonymous operate under and shows a real lack 

of understanding of the problem of gambling addiction by your 

government.  And I quote: 

 

 This is a flagrant violation of confidentiality, the 

sacrosanct traditions of Gamblers Anonymous, and the 

integrity of Saskatchewan citizens by a minister and a 

government which has obfuscated, insulted, and misled 

Saskatchewan people on this whole issue.  These actions 

demonstrate total ignorance of the problem of compulsive 

gambling, the government's total inability to deal with it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you now:  will you, under 

the circumstances, issue a formal apology to the persons whose 

confidentiality you violated?.  And will you give us assurance 

that this deplorable method will stop immediately? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to explain to the 

member and all members present precisely the system that is in 

place surrounding the 1-800 phone-in line for those who will 

feel they have a problem with gambling. 

 

On a 24-hour basis, Mr. Speaker, that line is available to 

residents of our province if someone dials the number. That is, 

the phone is answered in one of our mobile crisis centres by 

trained crisis counsellors.  In conversation with that trained 

crisis counsellor, the counsellor may determine that a referral to 

a group like Gamblers Anonymous or some other community 

group is the appropriate referral. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as early as last November, when we were working 

then with the existing alcohol and drug 800 line, we contacted a 

number of individuals who have been involved with Gamblers 

Anonymous, including those who are indicated in the media 

yesterday.  Mr. Speaker, each of those indicated their 

willingness, in fact their enthusiasm, to assist in this regard. 

 

As of yesterday when it came to our attention that some may 

now feel that their role here is inappropriate, I asked officials of 

the department to follow through, contact again each of those 

individuals.  Four of the individuals remain enthusiastic in 

offering their services in this regard; two have said they would 

no longer prefer to do that.  And we are thanking them for the 

work they have done and will look for others to fill their place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Further to that topic, Mr. Speaker, obviously 

someone is not telling the truth.  And yours comes from the 

very same minister who held a big news conference last week 

and said the 800 number line is up and running and it's working 

well.  Five seconds later we phoned it and it said it was out of 

service; that it was not operating, Mr. Minister.  I remind you 

of that. 

 

We phoned Mr. Gribbon this morning, Mr. Minister, and he 

told us that these people never gave any sort of consent to have 

their names and phone numbers given out in this manner.  And 

he told us that these 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

people agreed to become Gamblers' Anonymous contact 

persons for their areas, but did not expect to be receiving calls 

in the middle of the night.  And because your government has 

basically abused their trust, three of these people have already 

told Mr. Gribbon that they have no intention of working with 

your government any more. 

 

And I quote again from that news conference, Mr. Minister. 

 

 This government in general, and this minister in particular, 

demonstrate complete disrespect and contempt for 

Saskatchewan people.  There's no better illustration than the 

way it has handled this particular situation. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, what were you thinking?  Where did you 

come off passing out the phone numbers of people who are 

neither trained, nor willing now, to provide this kind of 

counselling service in this particular fashion, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat, and I repeat again 

for the record, each of those individuals had been contacted as 

early as last November and asked if they would be willing to 

allow their names and numbers to be used as referral points to 

Gamblers' Anonymous, along with a wide variety of other 

community-based organizations which are being referred to. 

 

Only if appropriate, through the mobile crisis centre, will 

names . . . will phoners be invited to call these people.  All six 

were contacted; all six agreed.  In our phone calls yesterday 

four of the six have reconfirmed -- in fact with enthusiasm -- 

their willingness to serve in this capacity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the member refers to the situation of 

about a week ago, when the 1-800 line first came on stream and 

failed to produce in those first two hours, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to remind the member we learned about that at 20 past 2 and 

the line was functioning again at 20 past 3. 

 

Now that compares with a situation of four years and $6 

million and members opposite still couldn't get GigaText to 

work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

can joke all you want but I don't think Mr. Gribbon and the 

people of Saskatchewan are laughing along with you at that 

kind of grim humour that you're trying to express here this 

afternoon. 

 

What you've got basically here, Mr. Speaker, is a glorified 

answer servicing -- that's what your line is all about.  And you 

aren't providing the counselling yourself.  You are simply 

referring calls to volunteers, and this is exactly what Mr. 

Gribbon and his group has to say as well.  And I quote: 

Some might rather compare your situation to solicitation, 

Mr. Gribbon said. But it's rape.  The government doesn't pay 

for Gamblers Anonymous and it hasn't obtained consent to 

use members' names as a resource. 

 

Unquote, Mr. Minister. 

 

So what that begs the question then:  if you're not doing any of 

these things, what are you doing with the $550,000 you're 

supposed to be using handling your hot line?  If you aren't 

providing any direct counselling services, where is the money 

going. Mr. Minister? 

 

Your gambling hot line, would you please admit, is a disaster.  

And this money is obviously not being used effectively.  So, 

Mr. Minister, will you seek some real, meaningful input with 

Gamblers Anonymous?  Will you talk to these people about 

how to run your hot line so that you actually will be helping the 

people whose problems you are helping to multiply? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, let us be clear about one 

thing.  Mr. Gribbon is not speaking on behalf of Gamblers 

Anonymous; he is speaking on his own behalf and on behalf of 

his own organization.  Let us be clear about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm glad for this opportunity to answer these 

questions, because apparently the member has neither not read 

nor understands the program that we put in place to prevent and 

treat gaming addictions, Mr. Speaker.  The 1-800 line is one 

small part of that program. 

 

I repeat again: on a 24-hour, 7 day-a-week basis, in this 

province, those who feel they may have a difficulty or may 

wish information or may wish information to help someone 

who they know has a difficulty, they may phone that line.  The 

line is answered in the mobile crisis centres by skilled, 

experienced crisis counsellors who, in the phone conversation, 

will with the caller assess the need and the appropriate 

direction to follow.  It may mean immediate crisis counselling.  

It may mean referral to one of our very highly trained 

counsellors in the Department of Health.  It may mean referral 

to a community organization like Gamblers Anonymous. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why don't you get out of gambling and 

you don't need this hot line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Now, Mr. Member, if you would listen, 

the situation is this: we had six people . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I want to remind the 

member from Rosthern that I just gave him ample time to ask 

his question and the minister is trying to answer his question 

for him.  So I would please ask him not to interrupt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- To complete, for the member's interest, if 

it is felt appropriate by the crisis counsellor 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

at the mobile crisis centre that a referral should be made to a 

community organization like Gamblers Anonymous, that then 

is done at an appropriate time of day or night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the six individuals who had indicated their 

willingness to serve as these referral points for Gamblers 

Anonymous were again each contacted yesterday.  The contact 

in Prince Albert, the contact in Lloydminster, the contact here 

in Regina, and the contact in Saskatoon have all agreed 

enthusiastically to continue the work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency 

Requisitions 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the minister responsible for Municipal Government.  

Madam Minister, a number of RMs in the Prince Albert area 

have had enough of your government downloading in its 

responsibilities onto municipalities and property taxpayers. 

 

In fact, the nine RMs of the North Central RM Association, Mr. 

Speaker, have decided to withhold their entire SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) levy this 

year in protest of your government's actions.  They're 

encouraging other RMs to take similar action and so far they 

tell us that many of the RMs they have talked to are seriously 

considering this option. 

 

Madam Minister, before you have a full-scale tax revolt on 

your hands, what actions are you going to take to lower the 

SAMA requisition and lower the tax burden on municipalities 

and property owners in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- On behalf of the minister, I would 

advise the Leader of the Opposition that there is in fact a Bill 

before the legislature which will be up for discussion, if not 

today, tomorrow, where these questions, I think, could be more 

appropriately addressed. 

 

The legislation, we believe, does address a number of the 

concerns which have been outstanding for some time and, I 

might add, predate the time that this government took office.  

These problems arose under the administration of which you 

were a prominent member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

the legislation is a great deal of the problem.  The increases in 

the SAMA requisition since your government have taken office 

are astronomical, sir.  Let me give you a few examples of 

what's going on out there. 

 

The RM of Buckland, the SAMA requisition increased 

from $6,700 last year to 18,000; the RM of Prince Albert, 

5,900 to 15,400; the RM of Lakeland, 2,000 to 5,000.  This is 

at the same time that you've cut revenue sharing by 8 per cent 

and continue to download more and more responsibilities onto 

the property tax base. 

 

Mr. Minister, when is this attack on rural municipalities and 

rural people going to end?  How many more municipalities will 

have to withhold their levies before you start to listen to the 

people in this province, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The reduction in funding to 

municipal governments in the macro, in the average, is about 

on par with the average reduction in spending in this 

government.  That comes about as a direct result of the years in 

which the Conservative government was in office, of which 

you were a member, and which mismanaged the finances of 

this province so badly. 

 

When you seek to find the author of this problem, you need 

look no further than yourself, the member sitting beside you, 

the member to the right of that, and in particular the member 

who sits three seats to your right.  There's the author of the 

problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

author of the problem is a government that doesn't listen.  It's 

interesting, Mr. Minister, that your colleague, the Minister of 

Justice, has set an example, and more and more people in this 

province are starting to follow the example of the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Minister, these RMs are legally required to pay 

their levy, but as your colleague is wont to say, there is the law, 

Mr. Minister, and then there is justice.  And municipalities in 

this province haven't received much justice from your 

government, Mr. Minister, in the past three years.  So now 

they've taken the appropriate action. 

 

Mr. Minister, where is the money supposed to come from?  The 

RMs have already seen their taxes go up, their services cut, the 

property values in many cases continue to decline.  Will you 

withdraw that SAMA Bill which is the irritant, Mr. Minister, 

and go back to the negotiating table and tell these RMs when 

you are going to stop downloading on them and increasing the 

property taxes of the people of this province?  When are you 

going to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, by and large, the 

municipalities have been supportive of this government's 

attempt to deal with the legacy of debt which your 

administration left.  And they're particularly relieved that 

they're not in the province of Alberta, which still has a 

Conservative government. 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

You might, for instance, take the municipality of Lloydminster, 

which the member represents.  On the Saskatchewan side, they 

get a grant of several hundred thousand dollars from this 

province, $350,000.  From the Alberta government, what do 

they get as of this year?  Zero. 

 

So among the things the municipalities are thankful for, one of 

them is that they no longer have a Conservative government in 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is directed to the Minister of Health.  I recently received 

a call from a constituent who had to travel to Saskatoon in 

order to have surgery at University Hospital. 

 

The day she arrived tests were done and she was told that 

surgery would take place the next day.  She was informed that 

there were no beds available and that she would have to find 

another form of accommodation for the night. 

 

Madam Minister, this is becoming all too common.  Madam 

Minister, I want to know today what actions you are going to 

take to ensure fairness and affordability of health care for rural 

residents. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

individual case that the member refers to, I of course cannot 

comment on that individual case. 

 

I can say however that it is not uncommon, and hasn't been for 

years, for surgery to be rescheduled for one reason or another, 

particularly if hospitals get a number of emergencies that come 

in.  If the surgery is not priorized as number one, the 

emergency, the more serious situation will be dealt with first.  

So this happens and has happened in the past.  And every 

health system is subject to these kind of occurrences, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

With respect to providing health care to rural residents, rural 

residents in Saskatchewan enjoy a very high quality of health 

care.  And as we move to develop more community-based 

services, which we have been doing over the last two and a half 

years and will continue to do on into the future, we will be able 

to provide an even higher quality of health care services for 

rural residents. 

 

Rural residents enjoy access to acute care when it is needed.  

They enjoy access to physicians, to other health care 

professionals, and we actually have a very good health care 

system in Saskatchewan for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 52 hospitals 

that were closed by that minister would be very interested in 

hearing that they still have that access she talks of. 

Madam Minister, rural people have no option but to have their 

surgery performed in larger centres.  They pay the expense of 

travelling to the city, and now are being told that they must pay 

the additional expense of hotels.  Madam Minister, this is a 

form of discrimination against rural people and what are you 

prepared to do about it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

knows that rural residents have always gone to the city for any 

serious surgery.  There have been very little surgery done in 

small hospitals.  In fact it has amounted to things such as wart 

removals, for example, Mr. Speaker.  Surgery of the nature that 

people travel to the city hospitals for is simply not offered in 

rural hospitals. 

 

And for the member opposite to suggest that it is, is being 

dishonest because he knows it isn't; he knows his constituents 

have travelled to larger centres for years, Mr. Speaker.  And if 

the member opposite wants cardiac surgery done in a small 

hospital of 10 beds or less, I think he's dreaming.  I mean it 

shows his understanding, or lack of it, of the health care 

system. 

 

Now with respect to the hospitals closed, these hospitals have 

been converted into health centres.  They provide basic 

emergency services -- x-ray, diagnostic services -- they provide 

programing in health prevention . . . or disease prevention 

programing, and more community-based programing out of it.  

There will be a broader range of services for a broader range of 

people in his communities.  And the member opposite knows 

that that's in the process of being developed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By the minister's 

answer, I can tell that she has a very poor understanding of 

what actually occurs in the hospitals in rural Saskatchewan.  

Madam Minister, they do far more than wart removals, at least 

until you shut their doors. 

 

Madam Minister, this particular woman was able to pay for her 

room.  However she told me of an elderly woman from 

Melville in the same situation who could not afford a hotel, 

drove home, and then back early the next morning for the 

surgery.  That made an already stressful ordeal much worse. 

 

Madam Minister, members of your government, including the 

Premier, have spoken out strongly against deterrent fees.  Is 

having a system in place in which rural people have to pay 50, 

$60, $70 a night for a hotel room, not a deterrent fee to proper 

medical care? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

member's suggestion that the health care system doesn't meet 

people's needs, let me make this point.  We spend some 1.5 

billion in Saskatchewan on health care and we have a very 

good health care system that meets the needs of the residents of 

Saskatchewan.  The 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

important issue is to ensure that our health care system is 

affordable for future generations, and that it is more responsive 

and more effective and delivers health care services that people 

really need, and that improves the health status or improves the 

health of the population generally. 

 

That is what has to take place in Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to rural residents coming into cities for surgery, as 

I mentioned before, that has been going on for years.  It has 

been going on for years.  There have always been a number of 

expenses in the health care system, such as dentists, such as 

other health care services of that nature, that people have paid 

for.  No one has suggested because they have to pay for some 

of these uninsured services that the health care system is a mess 

and they don't have access to health care services, because they 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower White City Office 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question this afternoon is for the minister responsible for 

SaskPower.  Mr. Minister, on March 7, on behalf of a woman 

from Southey, I asked why you were closing the White City 

SaskPower office when the lease does not expire for three more 

years.  You responded by saying that the White City office is 

not going to be closed. 

 

On March 11 I asked about the White City office again.  Once 

again you told me that the White City office was not scheduled 

for closure. 

 

In last Saturday's Leader-Post there was a notice that White 

City SaskPower customers . . . to the White City SaskPower 

customers that that office is indeed closing effective May 16. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you mislead the House on two separate 

occasions?  Or is this simply another case of being overruled by 

the organ-grinder, Jack Messer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The hon. member is correct, the White 

City SaskPower office is closing.  To put the answers in 

context I gave on the two dates the member referred to, we 

were talking about the overall reorganization of SaskPower, 

Mr. Speaker, and I was offering the answer in that context.  I 

want to confirm that the SaskPower office in White City is 

closing.  At the time when the member had asked the questions, 

it was not being anticipated by myself or the management at 

SaskPower. 

 

But I want to tell you very clearly the situation of the 

SaskPower office in White City.  It was a cushy rental deal 

made up by the former administration, the most expensive 

leased property that SaskPower had in the entire province.  We 

were able to get out 

of the lease -- and not through the political favours that the 

former government was handing out.  We were able to get out 

of the lease, and White City will be serviced out of the city of 

Regina where most of the employees would centre out of in any 

event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Elections 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, two 

following questions are for the Minister of Health.  Madam 

Minister, yesterday an ad appeared in the newspapers which 

was a shameless admission to the fact that your government has 

no intention of holding health board elections in conjunction 

with municipal elections this fall. 

 

Your one-man commission headed up by Garf Stevenson 

placed an ad, and I quote: 

 

 To accommodate the busy schedules of Saskatchewan 

residents during the early spring, the commission plans on 

holding consultations beginning in mid-June. 

 

Madam Minister, that's a sad joke.  You know full well that 

your one-man commission could be having hearings right now 

in Saskatchewan's major cities, starting in Regina. 

 

Madam Minister, is it not your plan to delay Stevenson's 

findings long enough to prohibit fall elections?  Will you admit 

that this afternoon, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I have said on numerous 

occasions that Mr. Stevenson will report to us as he makes a 

determination, that there will be interim reports as he goes 

through this process. 

 

If he wishes to report to us that he thinks we should proceed to 

elections in October or sometime this fall, then we would 

receive that report and make a decision as to whether or not we 

would proceed with elections. 

 

He may choose, however, in his consultation process . . . and 

incidentally, he is having ongoing consultations at this time.  

Already he has been meeting with people and doing work in 

this regard.  He is looking at many more issues than when 

elections should be held.  He's looking at a very broad range of 

issues, and his consultations will go far beyond that because 

Mr. Stevenson doesn't have a one-track mind like the member 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Environmental Assessment Reform 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like to 

update the House on environmental assessment reform. 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

On March 10 I released a summary document describing 

proposed reforms to Saskatchewan's environmental assessment 

process.  I've been pleased by the level of interest shown by 

stakeholders in this important legislation.  I want to thank those 

many groups and individuals who have taken the time to 

review the summary document and provide my department 

with their views. 

 

Sound reform of The Environmental Assessment Act requires 

that we involve stakeholders in the review of government 

reform proposals.  Release of the summary document was the 

first step in that process of involvement.  Since that time a 

number of groups have expressed interest in further 

consultation on the development of the legislation and the 

proposed regulations.  They have requested clarification in a 

number of areas such as federal-provincial processes, 

mediation, access to information, and protection for 

commercially-sensitive information. 

 

As a result, I'm announcing today that the government plans to 

provide additional time for further consultation prior to 

proceeding with a new Environmental Assessment Act.  More 

consultations will provide interested parties with additional 

time to review and clarify the reforms.  It is also an opportunity 

to involve these parties in developing the regulations before 

they are finalized.  This will take significant time because of all 

the detail involved. 

 

For these reasons I will not be introducing new environmental 

assessment legislation during this session.  Our first step will 

be to develop a consensus among our stakeholders as to how 

these additional consultations should take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe extensive additional consultation on 

the legislation and regulations is worth doing and will result in 

a better product.  A reformed Environmental Assessment Act 

will impact on economic development and sustainable 

development into the next decade.  It is important that 

interested groups affected by the environmental assessment 

process feel that they are involved, that their commitment to the 

reforms are essential to its success.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we would 

have been pleased to have received a copy of the report but I 

want to respond by indicating that as an opposition we're glad 

to hear that the government is certainly taking the time to 

consult.  And I thank the minister for having a moment just to 

chat with him this morning about this whole process. 

 

And what we find, I think what the minister has indicated, 

certainly businesses, small communities, and RMs are going to 

be glad to hear that there will be some consultation because I 

believe what has been taking place over the last while certainly 

has raised a lot of frustration and concern across the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

And the fact that the government is now opening up this door 

and allowing for greater consultation is appropriate in view of 

the fact that most people have looked at this.  Everyone has 

environmental concerns, but they're also concerned with the 

costs of what we've just been discussing.  And so I think it's 

appropriate we open the door, have this consultation, and come 

up with a sound and reasonable address to this problem. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to Prohibit the Sale of Tobacco to 

Young Persons and to enact certain other provisions 

respecting Tobacco 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

Prohibit the Sale of Tobacco to Young Persons and to enact 

certain other provisions respecting Tobacco be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act to amend certain Acts respecting 

Highways and Vehicles 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to do two things.  I 

want to add my greetings to Dr. John Egnatoff, who I got to 

know in my early days of school trusteeship and with whom we 

had many, many discussions over the years.  Welcome him to 

the Assembly. 

 

But I want to introduce two other people who've been very 

important, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, to the educational 

process in Saskatchewan.  George Bothwell has been many 

times introduced in the House for the work he's done through 

the library system; and Jim Burnett, who has been a leader in 

education, both as a professional educator and as a trustee for 

many years.  I welcome them as friends and colleagues.  

Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 2:22 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

and gave Royal Assent to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to 

enact certain consequential provisions 

resulting from the repeal of that Act 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality 

Act, 1989 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Registered 

Psychologists Act 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Physical Therapists 

Act, 1984 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act respecting the Licensing and 

Operation of Medical Laboratories 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting Chiropractors 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting Victims of Domestic 

Violence 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

create a Family Law Division and to enact 

Consequential Amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act respecting Representation in the 

Legislative Assembly 

 

Her Honour: -- In the name of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth 

II, Queen of Canada, I assent to these Bills. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:25 p.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of 

the Assembly to move a motion of recess which I think 

everyone anticipates, so I'll ask for leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 

 

Recess of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move, seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

 That this House do now recess until later in the afternoon in 

order to pay tribute to Her Honour, the Hon. 

Sylvia Fedoruk, Lieutenant Governor of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I move that this House recess, I would 

like to invite all those people who may not have come for the 

special ceremony to stay for the ceremony, and also to join us 

for tea later on in the afternoon. 

 

This House stands recessed until later this afternoon. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Would members please come to order.  

We will continue on our agenda where we left off this 

afternoon. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well we certainly 

can't go into clause 1 on this Bill just yet because it has such an 

immense impact on our province and the potential of our 

citizenry to develop and grow and to prosper. 

 

Mr. Minister, we were talking about Bill 54 yesterday and a 

few times before.  We haven't done a whole lot of work on it 

yet. 

 

We were happy to see your amendments though, and we want 

to say that we're glad that you're at least modifying somewhat, 

but we need to work on you a little harder because we've got to 

see a little bit more give here in order to save the province.  

And it's that serious.  This is the sleeper in the bunch.  I've said 

that before.  You know it, everybody else knows it.  Nobody's 

willing to say it, but I'm going to stand here in my place and 

say that this is the sleeper that could kill our province. 

 

This Bill has the potential to destroy the job base and the tax 

base of our province.  We've related that to you in figures 

yesterday from the letters that we've received, letters that were 

examined by members of the press, incidentally.  And we're 

happy that they did that; they did their homework and we're 

glad they did that. They examined and read the letters for 

themselves. They checked the numbers and found them to be 

accurate and correct, and we're happy to report that to you.  

And you know very well that they are, because you have copies 

of those letters. 

 

We want the general public to know that we tie this Bill 

directly to the Labour Standards Bill because they do affect the 

same groups of peoples in our province and in our society.  So 

once in awhile the chairman will note, as the member from 

Rosthern indicated earlier, on the side here, we will probably 

be tying the two together and making some comparisons 

between the two Bills and how they're going to affect the folks 

in our province and how they're going to affect our economy. 

 

I want to talk a little bit, Minister, about the explanations that 

you gave with regards to the amendments that you're going to 

provide to the amendment of The Trade Union Act.  Those 

were finally forthcoming, we're glad to see that.  Unfortunately, 

there's . . . now that overnight the business community and a 

few folks have had a chance to study these a bit, and they say 

that while you've got a good start here, and they're happy about 

that, they don't go far enough and there are some sweeping 

changes that need to be made yet in order to bring some 

comfort to the community in 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

Saskatchewan -- not just from the business side but even a lot 

of the labour force now realizes that if there isn't some 

compromise here, they will have no jobs. 

 

And even though they would like to have the extended benefits 

of these two Bills, they know very well that it's no use having 

extended benefits if you no longer have a job.  You might just 

as well then start to work on extended benefits for welfare and 

unemployment because that's exactly where you're going to end 

up. 

 

And with 81,000 people plus on welfare already, and another 

30,000 on unemployment insurance, and only the Lord knows 

for sure how many people are out of both of those systems and 

simply existing on their wits within our society and have 

dropped out of the whole process and are no longer counted, 

we've got some serious problems in that area of how many 

people we've got not working and not able to find jobs, and 

some not wanting to, but most that do. 

 

So realistically, Minister, we've got to do some really hard 

work at finding ways to save the job base and to expand it.  

Now I don't believe that the government should expand the job 

base by its own direct action, but by allowing business to do 

that for us.  We have to have the government get out of 

business's way so that they can provide jobs. 

 

There may be room though for the government and yourself to 

do some things to encourage business, and I'm sure we'll do 

that through the new organization that takes the place of 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), 

and I've just forgot the name of it right now. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation), son of SEDCO. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Son of SEDCO, I guess.  Yes, that would be 

the one.  Anyway, you know where we're coming from on that. 

 

So let's talk for a minute.  Now we had a list of the things that 

were specifically bad in the old Bill, and that the business 

community was particularly upset about.  The first one of 

course was the sweeping powers of the Labour Relations 

Board.  There's a lot of people that are very concerned that this 

board that used to be kind of quasi-judicial is now becoming a 

powerful judicial body with the actual right to make decisions 

that cannot be challenged and cannot ever be changed. 

 

They have become judges, dictatorial type of board, with these 

kind of sweeping powers that people don't believe this kind of 

board should actually have.  In our society people believe I 

think, Minister, that the judicial system and the parliamentary 

system should take control and power over all of these kind of 

semi decision-making boards.  And we are bypassing that 

process and changing it.  That's a precedent in our democratic 

process that we have to be very careful about. 

So I want you to consider the fact that people are very 

concerned about the sweeping powers of the Labour Relations 

Board.  And rather than for me to orate all afternoon about the 

problems, I'm going to ask you to explain to the people of this 

province how the powers of this Labour Relations Board could 

be accepted.  I want to give you that opportunity.  How could 

this board be accepted and allowed to function with these 

sweeping powers without destroying the confidence of the 

business community to redevelop the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, we have done two 

things with the Labour Relations Board.  It is true we have 

expanded the powers of the Labour Relations Board.  Every 

jurisdiction in Canada has a labour relations board whose basic 

function is to interpret collective agreements and the rights that 

arise thereunder.  It is like so many other administrative 

tribunals.  It exercises quasi-judicial functions, and it still 

remains a quasi-judicial body. 

 

It is true that the . . . to a very modest extent the jurisdiction has 

been expanded, but to a far greater extent the powers of the 

board to enforce their orders have been expanded.  We do so 

because we believe that it is in the best interests of all parties to 

have their rights under the collective agreement interpreted by 

the Labour Relations Board and not at the civil court. 

 

The problem with the civil court is that they are too slow and 

too expensive. It is difficult to access the civil courts without a 

lawyer.  The civil courts, of which I spent many years of my 

life in civil courts, civil courts . . . and I have every respect for 

the institution which I served and if the wishes of members 

opposite are realized, I may go back to serving in a civil court 

at some time.  So I have every respect for civil courts, but I 

want to say that they're not structured to do what's needed to be 

done here. 

 

What is needed is . . . what the member of Kindersley will 

agree that is needed here under collective agreements is 

something that's fairly quick, fairly cheap.  You don't need a 

study decision in a year hence; you need something fairly quick 

and cheap now.  And that is true of both sides who need a fairly 

quick result. 

 

(1615) 

 

So we make no apologies for strengthening the Labour 

Relations Board.   We think it is appropriate that it interpret the 

collective agreement and the rights that arise under a collective 

agreement and under The Trade Union Act.  We have 

attempted, and I want to emphasize this to members opposite, 

we have attempted to take the politics out of the appointment of 

members to the Labour Relations Board. 

 

This has been a problem for some time.  It didn't originate a 

few . . . it didn't originate in the '80s by any stretch of the 

imagination.  We want to provide neutral people who will be 

free from political influence who can provide a balanced 

approach.  Ideally, we want both sides to look upon the Labour 

Relations Board as 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

a place where they will get a fair hearing.  And at the end of the 

day they can say, whether they won or lost -- well, perhaps we 

lost, but we had a fair hearing and that is a fair board. 

 

And so we have provided in the Act that the chairperson and 

vice-chairperson shall enjoy security of tenure for five years.  

The members of the board go from being alternate members, in 

which they are called on an ad hoc basis for given cases, to 

being permanent members.  These new permanent members 

will also enjoy security of tenure; they'll enjoy a fixed term for 

three years. 

 

By so doing, we hope to remove the politics.  We hope to wring 

the politics out of this board, and this is badly needed.  We 

badly need to get the politics out of the system of appointment 

of the Labour Relations Board. 

 

I'm in no sense being disparaging about current members.  I'm 

in no sense suggesting that they are anybody's political toady.  I 

am just saying that this has been a problem which has plagued 

this board over the years and we want to eliminate this 

problem; we're doing so with these fixed terms. 

 

And I will make a prediction for the member opposite: that so 

long as you and I are in this Assembly -- no matter who's in 

office -- we'll not go back to the old way of doing things 

whereby we have people appointed at will, and we had a board 

which had difficulty enforcing its rules. 

 

I think this will be the way of the future.  We'll have permanent 

people, free from political influence, and they'll enjoy broad 

powers to enforce their orders.  I really think this is the way of 

the future. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, minister, I'd be the last one to say or 

suggest that we would ever go without a board of this nature.  

Obviously they are necessary in our society and will continue.  

However, I'll reserve my judgement as to how they will be 

picked in the future because I'm not so sure that your process 

will work or not yet.  We'll wait and judge that as it goes. 

 

My next question has to do with the boards and your comment 

that you have boards of this nature in every jurisdiction in 

Canada and a lot of other places in the world.  In Canada 

though I think is what we're mostly interested in.  I'd like you to 

draw a comparison for us, how the new powers of this board 

compare to the powers of other boards in other jurisdictions in 

our country. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- By and large we're in the mainstream 

among Canadian jurisdictions.  With respect to the general 

powers given to the board, ours are the same as Canada, B.C. 

(British Columbia), Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario, to pick the 

five western provinces. 

 

With respect to our remedial powers, we now have the power 

to issue compliance orders.  Again, everybody's got that. 

We also now have the power to . . . The board will now have 

the power to make rectification orders.  And while we didn't 

have that before, and I guess Alberta still doesn't, among again  

-- I'm going to confine myself to the five western provinces; 

Ontario and the four western provinces -- Canada, B.C., 

Manitoba and Ontario all share this power to make remedial 

orders. 

 

With respect to the power to order monetary compensation to 

employees, all of the jurisdictions have that.  With respect to 

the power to order monetary compensation to unions, we have 

that and so does Manitoba, I would emphasize. 

 

They've also now got the power to make interim orders.  That 

wasn't there before.  We now have it now.  B.C., Alberta, 

Manitoba, and Ontario also have that power. 

 

The final thing which we have added is the power to order 

someone to do or to refrain from doing anything to remedy a 

breach of the Act.  We didn't have that before, but Canada, 

B.C., and Manitoba have that. 

 

So I think the member can see that the powers given to the 

Labour Relations Board are not leading-edge stuff.  We're not 

away out in front of everybody else.  This is something that 

most Canadian jurisdictions have.  Most of these powers are 

shared by other jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

there are some that do believe that you are way ahead of others 

in terms of being out of balance with this particular piece of 

legislation.  And I think their argument is well made in that 

observation.  And I tend to think that you have oversimplified 

the effects of this legislation. 

 

So I want to put to you this question: you say that the board 

will now have the right to rectification, the right to make 

rectification, the right to enforce its rulings, the right to make 

an employer pay to the unions certain monies -- they can force 

them to do that.  All right, if it's fair ball, then will this board 

have the right to force the unions to pay monies to the 

employers where they do an injustice to the employer by illegal 

strike or some action like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The kind of remedy which you 

suggest would have to be sought in a civil court.  If I 

understood the member's question directly -- and I'm not 100 

per cent certain I did -- but I think the kind of remedy you 

suggest would have to be sought in a civil court.  The member 

may want to restate it, and perhaps I may have to ask the 

member some questions to clarify it.  But I think I'm right in 

saying that it would have to be sought in a civil court. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well then, that proves my original point that 

the Bill is unfair.  It is labour oriented only; it is not a balanced 

Bill that is made to help society to function better.  It's a Bill 

designed exclusively to make life good for the union leaders 

and to make them prosperous and powerful.  And that is 

exactly what we 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

are saying is wrong, is that the thing is out of balance; and the 

quicker we send you back to the civil courts so that you can 

work on these cases, the better we'll all be off, unless of course 

it happens to be a judgeship that you're appointed to. 

 

We definitely want to keep you down to the ranks of working, 

because that's where you deserve to be when you bring in this 

kind of a Bill -- such a lopsided, out-of-balance Bill, with only 

power for the unions and only money for the unions to be 

forced on the public by a Labour Relations Board given the 

power to make one-sided jurisdictional decisions, one-sided 

rectifications.  And that's not fair, Mr. Minister.  That's just not 

fair. 

 

You want to make a further explanation, and I'm going to let 

you do that, and that's fair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry, I had a notion that I might 

have misunderstood your question.  I did.  Let me read section 

5.  If you turn to page 4 of the Bill and you look at the section 

5, we are amending also section 5 of the Bill in subclause (b) 

by repealing clause (g) and substituting the following.  I'll read 

this for the member: 

 

 "(g) fixing and determining the monetary loss suffered by an 

employee, an employer (note the employer) 

or a trade union as a result of a violation of 

this Act, the regulations or a decision of the 

board  . . . and requiring those persons to 

pay to that employee, employer (note the 

word employer) or trade union the amount 

of the monetary loss or any portion of the 

monetary loss that the board (members) 

considers to be appropriate"; 

 

So it does go both ways, and I apologize for having 

misunderstood the member the first time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well now we're getting somewhere, Minister.  

At least we got you woke up.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and 

we're going to go on and ask for a little more detailed 

explanation of where the minister's coming from, now that 

we've got his attention. 

 

Supposing there is an illegal strike called by a union against an 

employer and it costs that employer several thousands of 

dollars from loss of work or whatever not being done.  Does 

this board now then have the power to rule that that union 

would have to pay the damages to that employer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not being coy here, but these are 

complex cases and these are dangerous questions to ask in the 

abstract.  I'd need a lot more detail about why the strike was 

illegal, what the circumstances were, what the state of the 

contract was, whether or not there'd been any unfair labour 

practices leading up to it.  I would need a lot of detail about this 

before one could render a decision.  These kind of hypothetical 

questions are really very difficult to answer. 

 

To be fair to the member and to be fair to anyone 

who's following this discussion outside of the Chamber, you 

can't really ask these questions in the abstract.  It may well be 

that there would be compensation that could be ordered; it may 

be that there couldn't be compensation ordered.  It would 

depend on the circumstances of which I don't have, obviously, 

because the case is hypothetical. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, don't be fair to me at all.  Just 

be totally unfair and tell me, is the potential there for the board, 

this Labour Relations Board with all of its new power, is the 

potential there for that board to rule that a strike was illegal, 

that the union called the strike illegally, that the illegal strike 

cost the employer several thousands of dollars because the 

work didn't get done that should have got done, and it was their 

fault.  And the Labour Board makes that ruling.  Is that 

potential there that they can make that ruling, and then having 

made that ruling that they say it was illegal, that you did wrong, 

can they then say, you have to pay the compensation?  And can 

they make the ruling then that you have to pay it and enforce 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The basic answer to your question is 

yes.  I like the way the member phrased it the first time -- is the 

potential there for the board to make that ruling.  The answer is 

yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  That's exactly what we 

need, is to try and find out if there is some balance in this thing.  

And we need to have that on the record because people will 

judge your answers as the interpretation of what the intent of 

the Bill is in cases where it does become grey and fuzzy. 

 

As you have pointed out yourself, there can be many times 

when specific cases are so complicated that they will be fogged 

over and grey, and nobody will know for sure whether you are 

following the intent of the law or the written text of the law.  

They will come back to Hansard and say, the minister said his 

intention was that it be fair and balanced both ways.  So it's 

important that you put this in the record. 

 

So, Minister, let's go on then a little bit, now that we've cleared 

up a little bit about this Labour Relations Board, although I do 

want to say that I do believe that we are wrong by giving this 

kind of extended power to all of these boards and commissions 

throughout our society. 

 

This one is not isolated in your government's attempt to give 

sweeping, uncontrolled power to bureaucrats in our system.  

And we have the right under one Act last year for people to 

break and enter without explanation by bureaucrats that have 

no police training; this follows that same line of general police 

state kind of approach to life.  That is unacceptable in a 

democratic society and can lead to nothing but trouble in the 

long run.  It won't happen today or tomorrow, we hope.  I don't 

think it'll happen next year, but sometime, some day it's going 

to happen and our society will, to some extent, collapse just a 

little bit as a result of these outrageous power grabs that are 

being doled out by your administration. 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

Now the second area of concern that was brought to our 

attention was the first bargaining agreement, that can be 

ordered.  And you discussed with us yesterday that you now 

have made some amendments to the amendment, that you are 

going to have the board given some discretion in this area to try 

to encourage people to bargain in good faith without the 

Labour Relations Board becoming directly involved 

immediately. 

 

However, that's small comfort to the business community who 

know that if in fact a particularly contentious issue comes up -- 

and let's take the Woolco example down at Moose Jaw, 

because that obviously fits into this first bargaining agreement 

category where we had all of this trouble because they couldn't 

get things settled --obviously there would be a lot of pressure 

on that Labour Relations Board to make a quick decision 

because the government -- I don't care if it is your party, my 

party, or party XYZ -- politics is politics, and no government 

wants these kind of disputes to be going on because, it's called 

putting out brush fires in political terms, and that's what you'd 

want to do and that's what we'd want; everybody would want to 

use whatever power is available under any Bill to put that kind 

of brush fire out fast. 

 

(1630) 

 

There would be a lot of pressure to have them make a decision 

really quick, and you would throw in some kind of a first 

agreement bargaining thing that would be ordered, because the 

board simply has that power to do it.  And if you never gave 

them the power, they wouldn't have to be pressured into using 

that power. 

 

And I think the business community is saying that even though 

you've said you want to temper this a little, your word that you 

want it tempered isn't enough.  And I'm wondering if you've 

considered strengthening your amendment here, to restrict the 

immediate entry of the Labour Relations Board into these kind 

of disputes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, we're not.  To be candid with the 

member, we're not giving any serious consideration to that.  I'm 

interested in hearing the member's argument on that, but we're 

not giving any serious consideration to this. 

 

We believe that these amendments, as they're structured, are 

what is needed to provide an effective and efficient Labour 

Relations Board.  And we really are not considering any further 

amendments to this to be perfectly candid with the member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- As the next few days go on, minister, I think 

you will want to give some more serious consideration due to 

the fact that we are anticipating that people in our community 

will be contacting you to let you know that they, themselves, 

the people in our society and our community, want these 

changes --not particularly myself. 

But I will be the voluntary mouthpiece for the community for a 

few minutes here and tell you that what you probably are going 

to have to do here is to compromise a little bit further in order 

to appease the people of our province, especially the business 

community.  And what you're going to have to do in that area 

of compromise is restrict the ability of the board to interfere 

and to become an interferee by their own choice and by their 

own timing. 

 

What you will have to do is put some stumbling blocks in front 

of that board's ability to intercede.  And I'm suggesting straight 

out that there would be some time constraints involved.  That 

the board must not interfere within the first six months of 

attempts to negotiate a settlement, or something along that line.  

I don't want that to be the arbitrary figure used.  I want that to 

be an example figure for explanation purposes for you. 

 

And I'm sure that the business community will be passing 

further information on to us in the next few days -- and yourself 

-- about the kind of stumbling-block process that they think 

will have to be in there.  Obviously I think they recognize that 

they're not going to get you to back off on this Bill altogether.  

You couldn't do that.  Politically you have to save face for 

yourself and you have to appease the union people that your 

leader has made the deals with. 

 

And of course the business community recognizes that.  So 

they know very well that the compromise has to be just exactly 

that -- a compromise of stumbling blocks, not a withdrawal of 

the whole process which they would rather see.  So we will 

work on what we can achieve here rather than what people 

want.  And I think it's more important that we spend our time 

trying to change those things in life that can be changed, rather 

than to beat our head on the wall trying to change those things 

that never can be changed. 

 

So I want you to be aware of the fact that we are going to 

pursue that issue further, and we're going to do that in the days 

to come when we get more information about a detailed plan by 

the business community on how they would like to have this 

thing worked out.  And I'm sure they'll be contacting you 

directly on that. 

 

The next item was of course the certification and decertification 

and the democratic vote process that they brought to our 

attention and we brought to your attention and everybody 

brought it to everybody's attention quite well here for the last 

couple of weeks.  And we were happy with the changes that 

you suggested in the amendments, where there finally will be a 

vote. 

 

However there is some confusion in the country about how this 

vote is going to be conducted and the timing at which it will be 

interjected into the process.  One person suggested to me 

yesterday that even though you have now put in place the 

ability for a secret ballot to take place just before certification 

happens, it is so far into the process of the development of the 

union structure that nobody could realistically vote it out; that 

there would be a kind of a brainwashing mind-set 



May 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

process that would have pushed people into that direction so far 

that the likelihood of a negative vote or a vote against the 

certification simply couldn't happen. 

 

So explain to us about your feelings on that timing and how 

you, you know, appease those kinds of thoughts that people 

have brought to my attention. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well we'll certainly consider the 

member's comments.  I just want to say though with respect to 

all of what you say, is that this has undergone an enormously 

long, complicated consultation process.  It hasn't produced 

perfect harmony, as the member may have noted.  It hasn't 

produced perfect harmony.  We certainly seek that and we seek 

a state of perfect harmony.  We haven't quite achieved it. 

 

I'm not sure a great deal more consultation is going to change 

things and I am not sure that further amendments would 

achieve that.  When you move in one direction you tend to get 

somebody moving in a different direction on you, and what you 

lose in one side, you gain on the other.  So I'm not . . . I don't 

want to encourage the member to believe that we will be 

making any further amendments to this Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I live with a constant hope 

and a bright outlook to the future, and I am absolutely 

convinced that in the last days and the last breaths before we 

conclude this you will see the need to do something right for 

society and you will make a few more changes in order to save 

our province and the structure that we need to have here. 

 

One of the problems, sir, and I hate to be cantankerous about 

this issue, but I find myself in a position where I can't do 

anything else except to get a little angry with you.  Because the 

fact of the matter is you did not consult very much with the 

business community; you only consulted with the union 

leaders, and you took their opinions only.  In fact I wouldn't be 

surprised if Mr. Rosenau and Barb Byers didn't write this 

legislation for you and plunked it on your desk and said, here 

boys, this is what we want and this is what we demand. 

 

You didn't consult with the business community, according to 

all the correspondence we've got.  You've seen hundreds of 

letters -- the same ones we've got.  There's be no consultation 

with them.  If you'd have taken the time to consult with them 

you wouldn't have come up with this one-sided, lopsided piece 

of legislation.  You'd have written in these amendments to 

begin with. They wouldn't have had to been brought in as a 

brush-fire political control. 

 

And realistically, as you listen for the next few days -- and 

you're going to be forced to listen now because this has gotten 

to the point where even you can't ignore it -- you're going to be 

under some tremendous pressure.  And I'm going to suggest to 

you, sir, that in all fairness you should listen to the business 

community and modify your position somewhat more. 

We can't change the past but we can do better in the future.  

And while you didn't listen before, you can start to listen now.  

So start to listen and do something about making some 

changes. 

 

And I've told you quite frankly that we don't expect to see you 

pull the legislation, although I think that's what would be the 

best thing that could happen.  But realistically we're looking for 

a compromise that will try to save some semblance of order in 

our province. 

 

When you've got all kinds of businesses saying to us openly in 

open letters -- this is not quiet, behind-the-scenes, 

on-the-telephone kind of stuff, this is out in the open, in open 

letters -- that they're going to leave the province, that they're 

going to take the job base away; that's serious stuff, sir.  

Because we are the assemblies of the people who make the 

rules that people live under and if we're going to lose our base, 

that's serious stuff.  Those folks out there need your attention. 

 

I want to go on to the next section, because I have a couple of 

more that we want to deal with before we get on here.  The 

employers are worried about not being able to communicate 

with their folks, and I want you to explain that as you progress. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will be happy to do that.  I say to 

members opposite that we have given all of these matters full 

and fair consideration, and we think the Bill as it is, is near 

perfect, wouldn't you say? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, this Bill is far from perfect.  

And that last comment about it being perfect is absolutely out 

of order.  If it was so perfect why would we have had to have 

all of these amendments come in at the last minute? 

 

Realistically, sir, it's not perfect and I want you to withdraw 

that remark. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It isn't perfect but it's near perfect.  

That's all I said. 

 

I move this committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

Items 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1993-94 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Social Services 

Vote 36 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1994 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 41 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 59 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:44 p.m. 

 


