






















































Hansard: February 10, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 87 
 February 10, 1994 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, and seconded by Mr. 
Whitmore. 
 
Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Prior to the 
supper break I had just concluded some remarks as they relate 
to the federal-provincial infrastructure program, and intend to 
move forward in speaking a bit about health care and families 
and some of the trade union legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our journey also includes the assurances that 
Saskatchewan people will be guaranteed some quality health 
care. In spite of the criticisms of the opposition, our 
communities are the winners as the district health boards take 
on the responsibilities of shaping health programs and services 
that meet the needs of our communities. 
 
No one, Mr. Speaker, no one at all knows better the needs of 
communities than the people who live in them. Our new district 
boards will ensure that communities receive the best care that, 
in fact, funding can provide. It remains my opinion and the 
desire to see our government relate and address itself to the 
issues of regional disparities. Accordingly, our funding and our 
policies must and will adapt themselves to these variables, 
because it is rare to impossible to develop a policy or a strategy 
that is totally encompassing. Through the structures of the 
district boards and our department, a good deal of flexibility 
already exists, and will, to sustain efficient and comprehensive 
health care services for each and every jurisdiction across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased that our government recognizes 
and moves forward to ensure the needs of Saskatchewan 
children and families are sustained and enriched. Families and 
children are our most precious resource and today they are our 
most vulnerable to the changes in times and structures. 
 
Our government's commitment to address the problems of child 
hunger and poverty, family violence, and literacy are 
progressive steps of the long-term objective. The concept of 
community-based integrated services, like the Prince Albert 
project, further demonstrates how communities and 
neighbourhoods and professionals can work in unison to 
enhance the quality of life for citizens and families. 
 
The expansion of the unified family court program will provide 
for a more sensitive and accessible way of assisting families to 
function during and after the difficult and painful processes of 
separation and family breakdown. The move to expand these 
services 

to rural Saskatchewan will be most welcome and most 
supported. 
 
During this session, Mr. Speaker, our government will move to 
further assist working people in this province to sustain equal 
opportunities in the workplace that allow them to balance work 
and family responsibilities. 
 
Today our labour force is undergoing major changes. There are 
more women in the workplace. There are more single parents 
and women and young people remaining on the lowest-paid 
jobs. Our proposed amendments to The Labour Standards Act 
and The Trade Union Act will move to ensure fair, balanced, 
and a healthy climate in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation will assist working families to 
function in a competitive society that places a tremendous 
amount of pressure today on our institution of family. As a 
parent and a professional, and today a politician, I support any 
legislation that strengthens and enhances the family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, in mid-December of 1993, the 
Leader of the Third Party from Greystone was in Yorkton and 
she spoke to a party fund raiser where our local media attended 
and reported. The article in the newspaper was of December 
22. In her speech the media quotes the member from Greystone 
saying that in the last session of our legislature our government 
passed labour legislation, which is true, and would do so again 
this session because we are catering to our party faithful. 
 
She stated, and I quote: 
 

What are these yahoos doing dealing with legislation that is 
completely irrelevant? 

 
Did it really make a difference or make it better for the people 
of Saskatchewan? 
 

Did it (really) make it better for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
She asks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe the lines. A public servant, a 
professional human service worker, a professional career 
before politics, including I'm sure, working with disadvantaged 
folks, people who are discriminated against, people whose 
rights were violated, and she asks the question, is progressive 
legislation that preserves the integrity and the value of families 
and individuals relevant? 
 
I say, shame, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I read the 
comments coming from a party leader, a person whose 
professional credibility . . . whose personal credibility as a 
professional I happen to regard with some respect -- or had 
regarded with some respect -- abandons her professional ethics 
and, I suspect, 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

convictions for the sake of partisan acceptance, places in 
question for me, and I know the people of this province, the 
integrity of the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can hardly wait for the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone to enter the debate on the labour legislation this 
session and tell this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
that those 70,000-plus working people, women in low wages, 
part-time employees, that they are irrelevant to our 
Saskatchewan community, because that's what this article said. 
 
And I say that is the kind of politics that Liberals believe 
in -- satisfying their personal egos, saying what is politically 
correct, and lip service to the principles that we hear so much 
about: fairness and equity. This, Mr. Speaker, is a new age of 
Liberal politics under the leadership of the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is for the people, our government 
is for the people, and that is why I am a New Democrat and that 
is why I was elected to this Assembly by the good folks of 
Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Serby: -- It is my belief and value that there is good in all 
people, irrespective of what cards in life they may have been 
dealt. It is true that people make their own choices and 
sometimes those choices we make may not be totally 
acceptable to everyone. But that's why we protect our 
democratic rights and freedoms and choices, which is what this 
Assembly and what we as legislators are here to preserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government still has a steep climb to reach the 
goals or the summit that I talked about in comparison to a 
mountain climb for Saskatchewan people. In our climb we will 
still see many obstacles and barriers and we will work hard to 
overcome those. Working together in partnership, hand in hand, 
we will get there, and when we do, I know that there will be 
with us a great crowd of solid, courageous mountain climbers 
who will direct and lead this province well into the 21st 
century. 
 
Thus in closing, Mr. Speaker, upon the conclusion of this 
throne speech debate I will be taking my place, and on behalf 
of my constituents of Yorkton, I will be supporting the 
government and its accomplishments in the future direction as 
we venture upwards to complete our journey in renewing 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
always, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to rise in 
this Legislative Assembly and enter into debate. And I think 
that is a healthy sign for any kind of a democracy where we can 
freely express ourselves and try to make our points as well as 
we possibly can. 

I think first of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge 
the fact that we do have a new make-up in this legislature, that 
it is not as we had left it in spring. And I too want to join with 
all of the members of the legislature that have spoken so far in 
congratulating and welcoming the new member from Regina 
North West. 
 
I think it brings back some nostalgic memories for all of us 
when we remember the first time when we were in this 
legislature. It is kind of awe-inspiring as we traverse the halls, 
as we traverse the Chamber itself and recognize the history, and 
we recognize the heritage, and we recognize the influence that 
this building has had upon the lives of the Saskatchewan people 
since 1905. 
 
And I welcome her and I say to her that if she still finds it 
awe-inspiring, a little bit star-gazing, I would say to her, don't 
lose that enthusiasm, don't give up on this place; it can be 
discouraging at times. It can be, when we get complaints, 
whether it is from our constituents, whether it is from the 
media, whether it is from the public or whomever it happens to 
be. It can be discouraging because you can never seem to do 
enough to please all the people. 
 
But then, Mr. Speaker, there are the good sides when we do get 
the occasional nod, when we do get the occasional accolade 
and actually a person might even phone up and say, job well 
done, and that certainly makes it easier for us as well. So I 
certainly welcome the member from Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tonight I'm going to be relatively brief. I have 
some succinct remarks that I want to make to the Assembly. 
And keeping in the true official opposition's position that we 
have taken of reforming this legislature and discussing more 
pressing matters facing Saskatchewan people, I want to bring to 
members' attention the fact that last spring the Alberta 
government did not even have a throne speech. Instead the 
Premier delivered an American-style, a republican-style 
address to the province, and then it was on to the pressing 
business of the province that was at hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like Alberta, Saskatchewan is facing many 
pressing matters that need to be addressed. And I am sorry to 
say that as I read this throne speech, as I listened to Her 
Honour, I did not see these pressing matters being addressed in 
this current throne speech. 
 
I say this because the throne speech gave no specifics of how to 
alleviate the pain that the people of Saskatchewan are 
experiencing. It said nothing about the number of jobs that this 
government plans to create, nothing about a time frame in 
which to create those jobs, Mr. Speaker. In fact, quite frankly, 
nothing much of anything. 
 
Further, the speech says nothing about consulting the people 
about casinos. Nothing about what this government is going to 
do to stimulate the economy or cut taxes. Nothing about the 
many crises facing health, facing education. Even though the 
throne 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

speech remains void of substance, Mr. Speaker, NDP (New 
Democratic Party) members, as we have seen them getting up 
one after another, like to say we're right on track, we've turned 
the corner. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to pursue that theme just a little bit 
this evening. I dare say, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
turned so many corners that they are going full circle. That I 
would admit. And as far as being on track, I submit to you, 
members of this Assembly, that that is also debatable. 
 
Now I would like to take a few moments to remind the Premier 
of words that he spoke while he was leader of the opposition. 
And he said, and I'm quoting from Hansard, page 80: 
 
 We're going to tackle poverty as I've described. We're going 
to put an end to food banks. 
 
And we know and remember Peter Prebble getting up as 
opposition Social Service critic saying that poverty was going 
to be ended. 
 
The Premier also said, however, and I quote again: 
 

. . . this side of the House is committed that when an election 
takes place and when we are elected to office, we are going 
to put as a priority, as an objective within the first term of 
our government, the elimination of the food banks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. (And then he continues.) Nothing 
less will do. 

 
(1915) 
 
Hansard, page 77. And I notice that I've got the current Social 
Services minister's attention. 
 
So the members opposite can say, we are on track. And that is 
what you say -- we are on track. And I ask you, sir, are you on 
track in eliminating poverty and food banks? Are you on track? 
 
Well I'm afraid statistics don't bear that out. Statistics prove 
that there's a record number of families on social services in 
this province. These records say that there are presently over 
77,000 cases in Saskatchewan, and the numbers are climbing 
dramatically week by week. 
 
So far we have 20,000 up from when the members opposite 
formed government. We've got 20,000 more now than when 
you formed government. And this is on track. So I guess if on 
track means setting records for the highest poverty numbers in 
the history of the province, then the government is right on 
track. 
 
After all of these statistics reported to the public, all that the 
government can say is, well that may be so but Saskatchewan 
has a low unemployment rate. 
 
Now it's true, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan does have a 
fairly low unemployment rate compared to the other provinces. 
But then, we've always had. When we were in government we 
were either the lowest 

with the unemployment rate across Canada or second lowest. 
But ours was because there were people working. But you now 
under these circumstances, I submit to you, are considering that 
people are leaving unemployment and receiving social 
assistance instead. And that's not too much to brag about, I 
would submit to you. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there is the issue of jobs. And again as 
far as job creation, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, what do statistics 
say? Statistics Canada figures released February 4, which is 
fairly recent, says that there are now 12,000 fewer jobs in 
Saskatchewan than in January of 1991 -- 12,000 fewer. And 
that number of jobs in this province has hit a 10-year low, Mr. 
Speaker -- a 10-year low. 
 
So all I can say is well, so much for partnership renewal and for 
this government being on track. 
 
Well further, Mr. Speaker, the government also says that they 
are financially on track, financially on track, and this comes 
from a government that closed down 52 rural hospitals in order 
to save money, but is now . . . the converse of that is they are 
using $23 million to start casinos in this province. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that will give 
political hacks salary boosts up over 40 per cent and then turn 
around and they say to the rest of the people in this province 
things are tough, tighten your belts, we've all got to pay. 
 
We have a government that promised no new taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, and instead have raised every tax, every utility, and 
every fee imaginable in two and a half years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that we have a government that has no 
priorities, a government that is on the wrong track. 
 
And now there are many more examples of this government 
heading down the wrong track, Mr. Speaker, and I could spend 
my regular hour and a half speech reciting those. Some of my 
colleagues will pick up on some of the others, I imagine, as we 
go along. So I plan not to continue on that theme. 
 
But before I conclude I want to specifically address two 
ministers of this government and I want them to pay attention. I 
want them to pay attention because what I'm going to be 
talking about right now for the next few moments is 
specifically directed to the Minister of Finance and to the 
Minister of Health. And to those two ministers I want to just 
simply say this: good job, good job, Mr. Speaker, because I'm 
going to compliment them. And because this is something that 
was missed in the throne speech but I think is something that 
has to be recognized. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer particularly to the tobacco tax 
and this government's reaction to the Liberal federal 
government's stand on the tobacco tax. Mr. Speaker, my 
personal opinion is it's a reprehensible step. And when I hear 
the Minister of 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

Finance getting up and saying that Saskatchewan will not 
kowtow to eastern Canada or smugglers or anybody who is not 
going to follow the law of order then I say, good job. 
 
But I say good job more than that also to the Minister of Health 
and her stand when I see some of these situations arising, Mr. 
Speaker, when I see clips like this one taken out of the Leader-
Post, "Teenagers like cut in cigarette prices." I think it is a 
deplorable situation when we were so far down the track to 
cutting down the number of people that smoke. There are under 
30 per cent of this population that smokes right now and it 
should be under 10 if we can possibly do it. It's a backward step 
by the federal government, and I say to you right now that if we 
can do anything to support a stand like this I would urge these 
two ministers to continue on that track and the government to 
continue on that track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- However before you think that I'm changing 
my normal personality, I am not, because I'm going to continue 
on to do a little bit of role reversal -- it's good from time to 
time, Mr. Speaker -- because what I will say now is that . . . I 
don't have a copy of that cartoon in the paper but I'm sure the 
Premier has seen that cartoon, and others. I have a constituency 
meeting tomorrow and I'm going to be showing it around 
because it showed the two sides of the coin. While we do this 
with the tobacco tax, and I commend you for 
that -- unfortunately I can't hold this up as an exhibit so I won't 
do that -- but . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, but the point I'm 
trying to make is that while we commend what you are doing 
as far as the tobacco tax situation is concerned, I would just 
impress upon the Premier to be consistent and that he uses this 
same approach as far as the gambling is concerned. 
 
Now while we say we must not allow lawbreakers to dictate 
what the laws of Canada are going to be -- and that's the stand 
that I take -- I distinctly saw the Premier on television, on 
CFQC television in Saskatoon, where he made the statement, if 
I had my druthers, we would not have gambling casinos in this 
province. However, if we don't -- and I'm paraphrasing, Mr. 
Speaker -- however, if we don't submit to these casinos, we're 
going to have another Oka on our hands. 
 
That's a dramatic statement. That's a dramatic statement that I 
think does not augur well for the future of this province where 
we can, in quotations, be blackmailed to make certain 
concessions in the order of law. That is not right, Mr. Speaker; 
that is wrong. 
 
Now as I've said before, normally I would take for a hour and a 
half to debate the throne speech because most throne speeches 
are significant, they are important, and there is meat to be 
discussed. 
 
Now this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, is void of reality. It's 
void and out of touch. Why? Because it does not address the 
severe problems facing 

Saskatchewan. It does not address the real economic growth 
problems. It does not address the problem of job creation. It 
does not address meaningful reform of the democratic process. 
And it does not address the rural crisis in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are spending $35,000 a day -- $35,000 a 
day -- discussing a throne speech that by all accounts of 
everyone that I have talked to, every media account that I have 
listened to, is vague to the utmost. It is vagueness, Mr. Speaker, 
I submit to you and to the people of Saskatchewan, that renders 
it useless. 
 
And therefore, because we have urgent and pressing matters to 
deliberate on, I would now, Mr. Speaker, move: 
 
 That the House do now proceed to Bill No. 1, a Bill to 
amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
(Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 
 
Seconded by my colleague from Morse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 7:26 p.m. until 7:27 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
Swenson Britton 
Neudorf D'Autremont 
Martens Goohsen 
Boyd  
 

Nays — 22  
Van Mulligen Serby 
Lingenfelter Sonntag 
Teichrob Flavel 
Goulet Scott 
Atkinson Crofford 
Kowalsky Wormsbecker 
Mitchell Kujawa 
Pringle Stanger 
Murray  Knezacek 
Hamilton Keeping 
Trew Jess 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it's indeed an honour for me 
again to take part in the throne speech and outline, you know, 
some of the major initiatives in regards to the government. 
 
Before I get started, I would like first of all to say thanks of 
course to the staff of the Legislative Assembly, you know, and 
the new workers that we have and the existing workers from 
the past in regards to keeping our legislature open. 
 
And I would also like to personally thank my staff from my 
office who take a lot of the issues, you know, of the people 
from throughout the province, 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

Education or in SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
and from my constituency, and deal with the issues in an 
effective manner. I would like to say thank you to Cheryl and 
Fred and Adelle, Laura, Elaine, Wendy, and also Cec in my La 
Ronge office. Without their due diligence to the issues of the 
people of the province, you know, a lot of our work simply 
wouldn't get done. It is their hard work that makes our job a lot 
more easier and a lot more manageable as we carry out our 
daily activities. 
 
(1930) 
 
I would like to in this throne speech cover basically four areas. 
I wanted to deal with the issue of economic development and 
jobs. I also wanted to deal with the issues of our education and 
health. And as well I wanted to delve into the issue of land, and 
more particularly, the treaty land entitlement. I wanted to do a 
focus, Mr. Speaker, in the parameters of basically dealing with 
Northerners as well as dealing with Indian and Metis people. 
Some of the issues that I raise will also affect, you know, other 
Saskatchewanites through the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get started I would like as well to say a 
few words in my own language, with due respect to all the 
languages, you know, of Saskatchewan and the world, and 
proceed to provide the overview which I will then immediately 
translate into English. 
 
And I do that, Mr. Speaker, in due respect to my own personal 
background, you know, as a Cree being raised in northern 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes we have people 
from northern Saskatchewan who are in our hospitals, at the 
University Hospital, and sometimes they watch television 
programs and it's very important for them to be able to listen to 
the proceedings of the legislature in their own language. Many 
of the younger people are quite bilingual and will be able to 
listen to both, but for a lot of the older people, they are still 
pretty well only able to speak English in my constituency 
although some of them are, you know, quite bilingual as well. 
But it's also therefore a respect to them in regards, you know, to 
the proceedings of this House. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I have given a broad, general overview, Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to the overview of the summary there done in English, and I've 
done much the same in Cree. 
 
I will therefore now proceed to give the overview of the throne 
speech in the English language, my second language, which I 
started learning when I started school at age 7. As a matter of 
fact, a very interesting thing happened. After 12 years of 
schooling, I remember a particular little story I have that I 
sometimes tell to students. 
 
As a matter of fact, I was in Campbell Collegiate in Regina just 
a couple of weeks ago; I was invited to a class. And they were 
trying to find out what my background was, and so on. And of 
course they were interested in my educational background of 
my 

Bachelor of Education and a Master of Education. But a lot of 
them were more interested in what my background was at the 
community level, where I was born where, you know, my first 
language was Cree. 
 
And I told them that I was born and raised in Cumberland, 
basically a trapping, fishing, and a tourist economy. And a lot 
of our people worked at the mines and a lot of our people 
worked in the resource sector in forestry, etc. And some went 
to work at the railroads, and some even went to work at the 
DEW (distant early warning) line in the Arctic. I know some 
people went to work in the States. I know some people went to 
work at the sugar beet plantations in Alberta and so on. So a lot 
of our people, you know, had worked all over the place 
throughout North America. 
 
So I come from quite a varied background of people with a lot 
of experience. People, when you listen to a northern 
community, tend to think that we stay in that one community 
all the time, without recognizing the historical aspects of 
people travelling. Personally I've taught school in James Bay in 
northern Ontario, Lake Superior area. I lived in Ontario for five 
years in my teaching experience, you know, and I moved back 
to Saskatchewan in the early '70s. 
 
So a lot of the people sometimes tend to think that when you're 
born in a northern community in a trapping and fishing 
economy and that you have experienced these very important 
aspects of development in this province, that sometimes we 
haven't had time to travel and so on. But such is not the case, 
you know, from my experience. 
 
And when I was listening to the students, they were trying to 
get at some of these issues of self-government and land 
questions. They had heard about the Qu'Appelle situation and 
so on. So they were very, very interested in a lot of my own 
personal experiences in regards to northern Saskatchewan as 
well as moving around throughout different parts of Canada 
and dealing with substantive issues of the day. 
 
Now one of the major issues that has been raised all the time in 
the public, and it's an ongoing issue for everybody, is the whole 
question of economic development and jobs. Sometimes as we 
get into these debates we tend to look at a situation, as our 
member from across talked about, and focusing in on Oka and 
so on and dealing with that aspects. But sometimes we forget 
some of the partnerships that we've had with people of the 
province, particularly the partnerships that we've had with 
people from northern Saskatchewan and partnerships impacting 
on the Indian and Metis community as well as the 
non-aboriginal community of the North. And so I'd like to 
focus a little bit on that, you know, right now. 
 
In the throne speech of course we had mentioned that we had 
had the opening of two new uranium mines, one at McClean 
Lake and Dominique Janine, 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

you know, up on the north-west side, and the other one more on 
the central side of northern Saskatchewan. And a lot of the 
people did not know that in regards to that approval, that first 
mine, that Dominique Janine was actually approximating about 
20 jobs. I was very pleased when McClean Lake came in, 
because that one had 400 jobs. 
 
And when you come from a community . . . and I'll mention 
this a little bit later on, on the impact of unemployment and the 
welfare history, and I'll talk about that later on. But I want to 
talk right now about positive aspects of it, because I think that's 
sometimes lost in regards to the debate. 
 
When I look at the jobs, we now have about 1,300 mine and 
contract workers in northern Saskatchewan. What a lot of 
people don't know is that 607, or 47 per cent of the workforce 
in northern Saskatchewan are Northerners. When you compare 
that to places like Ontario or Northwest Territories where the 
population of Indian-Metis people is about 90 per cent, and 
ours is about 70 per cent in northern Saskatchewan, one 
recognizes that in Northwest Territories it's about 9 per cent, 
you know, in regards to the hiring of people of Indian-Metis 
ancestry. 
 
But in our case in northern Saskatchewan, we have 40 per cent, 
you know, of the people hired of Indian-Metis ancestry. And I 
think that is a significant record, not only in the history of 
Canada, but I think in the history of the world. You know, there 
is not very many situations where aboriginal or indigenous 
peoples in a particular area get to partake in the benefits of 
development to such an extent, you know, as is happening right 
now in the mining industry of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- When I've talked to a lot of the workers 
and I relate to them a lot of my experiences in regards to the 
time I did my master's degree, and I did an oral history project 
with the community of Sandy Bay. And Sandy Bay of course 
had built a dam in their . . . the Island Falls dam in 1927. And 
when they had built that dam, a lot of the workforce had come 
in from quite a few different places, but they used a lot of the 
workforce, you know, from Sandy Bay during the construction 
phase. 
 
And a lot of the workers were telling me their stories, you 
know, that they had worked there for 40 years without a 
pension, but they talked about the tremendous friends that they 
had made with some of the workers in there and some of the 
respect that some of these workers gave them in return over the 
years, some coming back and visiting the community, you 
know, after many years and still keeping up with the friendship. 
 
But they also told me about some aspects of the workforce, you 
know, not as respectful of them in the process. And they told 
me about the tough times that they did have. During that period 
they had a two-tiered system of wages, you know. Sometimes 
they wouldn't get paid the same. Sometimes they would be paid 
in kind, meaning that they wouldn't be paid in money, they 
would be paid in food. 

One time they told me a story. They said, I asked them, I said, 
well what kind of food did you get? They said, well mainly the 
construction food. And I said, well what kind did you get? 
They said, well they gave us a lot of meat and they said it was 
mainly bologna in those days. 
 
And so a lot of the people in the community told me these 
stories of the hardships, and they went through these 
experiences and some of them survived in those jobs, you 
know, for 40 and 35 years. 
 
There's sometimes a myth of people, you know, from my 
background stating that we were lazy, etc., and that type of 
thing. My experience when I look back at some of the people 
without any pensions, without this and that, working, you 
know, for 40 years and their wages at the end result was not 
very high, and they stuck it out on these jobs. And these are the 
type of people that I talked to, you know, during that time. And 
some of the things they told me were very, very, reminiscent 
about the changes you see in South Africa. And some things 
that they did were sometimes . . . they're heard in disbelief in 
this day and age. 
 
When we looked at it, we saw some people having different 
washrooms; they weren't allowed to be in the same washrooms. 
In some cases the people who had built the construction site 
where they had a swimming pool, houses with . . . (inaudible) 
. . . they were not allowed on that site. And in many cases they 
built the recreation centres, a golf course around that place. 
They were not allowed on the golf courses. They were not 
allowed to even go and see a movie in the recreation centres. 
 
And a lot of the people told me about these stories in regards to 
the situation that you had dealt with. But yet they still survived 
because they still kept on working and they still kept . . . to this 
very day they still have, you know, a strong workforce from 
Sandy Bay working at the Island Falls site. 
 
I'm saying this as a comparative analysis to what's going on 
today and what happened in history. Historically we have 
tended to see during the construction phases a lot of people got 
hired at the bottom end of the scale, and many times they were 
told they would work their way from the bottom. And the story 
I get is that 40 years later some people were still working their 
way from the bottom. 
 
And in many cases when we were looking at these stories I was 
. . . when I talk to the young workers and I see their dedication 
and determination at the uranium mines, I give them, you 
know, tremendous positive encouragement because they 
reflect, you know, that strength and determination that previous 
workers before them had experienced. And it gives them a real 
sense of pride, you know, as they go on with their daily jobs in 
the northern mining industry. 
 
Now when we have about 600 workers, Northerners in the 
mines, I say that the salary level is about $13 million right now 
in the North. And I'd like to do a little bit of a comparison. 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

I had been brought up as a person in the trapping industry, and 
with the animal rights activity and the leghold trap being 
brought into . . . the ban being brought in perspective this 
coming year . . . The trappers used to make about 3 to $2 
million. It's dropped down now to about less than a million 
dollars for all the trappers in northern Saskatchewan. So when 
you compare that less than a million dollars and you see the 
mine workers -- I'm talking about just the direct people who are 
on wages; I'm not even talking about all the contracts -- it's $13 
million worth of wages. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now the other thing that's very important is that on the 
monetary side this is not only $13 million in wages. A lot of the 
companies like Cameco and other companies like COGEMA 
are now moving in and buying goods and services from 
northern Saskatchewan. And they buy a lot of different goods 
that we have in the North. And they purchase approximately 
$13 million. The contractual work in northern Saskatchewan 
from the northern contract groups is about $25 million. 
 
So when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, this indeed has been a 
very, very significant thing for the North. Sometimes when 
people ask me about the uranium industry and its impact on the 
North, I tell them it's more than the combined effect, you know, 
on the agricultural sector of wheat and barley and oats and 
canola. The mining industry is of such a strong base in the 
North that it is even more than that, Mr. Speaker. So when we 
talk about the development in the North, the mining sector then 
becomes very important. 
 
The other thing too as I look back into the past is that the 
historic experience of the first entrepreneurs and workers in the 
North were Indian-Metis workers through the fur trade period. 
And we saw some transportation workers; we saw the whole 
history of food -- buying and selling. So there's been a long 
historical tradition of that in my area and a lot of my 
grandparents used to tell us those stories. And today we see 
modern day entrepreneurs interconnected with the mining 
community. 
 
I was at a meeting just about a month ago when we were 
talking about the multi-party educational training plan. And 
there I saw a person from Pinehouse by the name of Rene Red 
Iron, in discussing the issue of trying to get more people trained 
in different areas. And he had a construction company called 
Snake Lake Construction, and they were talking about the 
different contracts in this area. And some other contractors 
from the North were there and they had about 75 per cent of 
people from the North, you know, that they hired in there and 
they wanted to hire more. And that's why they were talking 
about more training, which I will discuss a little bit later on. 
 
So we've seen entrepreneurs like Mr. Red Iron and many others 
that I know of, and one of the most 

significant has been the Lac la Ronge Indian Band. They have 
really, really come out as one of the strong companies, not only 
in Saskatchewan, they're the number one trucking company in 
the North. But throughout Canada as an aboriginal company, 
they've become one of the top. 
 
And with the leadership of Chief Cook and his council they 
have developed Kitsaki Development Corporation. Kitsaki 
Development Corporation is 51 per cent owner of Northern 
Resource Trucking. They have done a joint venture with one of 
the more well-known trucking companies such as . . . which is 
Trimac. And with a joint venture approach where a northern 
company owns 51 per cent, and with strong technical and 
business experience of Trimac, they have combined the trained 
labour from the North, you know, with the experience of an 
existing company, and have gone on to be very, very 
successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I'm very, very proud, you know, as a Northerner to be able 
to talk about positive aspects of development such as this 
company. I see a lot of the people in the Athabasca regions, the 
further North, are talking about the same thing in regards to 
developing joint ventures, you know, with people from the 
South and doing it in partnership. It's the same type of 
partnership we're talking about between business, labour and 
government and the community and moving forward in a 
positive direction. And it's in this light, you know, that they're 
also governing themselves as Indian people through the first 
nation, you know, in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. So I'm very, very, 
very proud of that. 
 
The other thing is sometimes I hear in the news that a lot of the 
workers who are hired in the mine are living down South. You 
know, they live in Saskatoon and P.A. (Prince Albert). There is 
no doubt a lot of the young people do live in Saskatoon and 
Prince Albert. But I started looking at the facts. By the news it 
sounded like more than half of them. When I actually looked at 
the facts, there is about 30 per cent. So 70 per cent of the 
workforce actually live at the community level in each of our 
northern communities. 
 
And when I looked at it, I looked at the west-side communities 
and I wanted to find out, well how many of the west-side 
communities were involved in the mining industry. And the 
people from the west side, I found on the stats, on the direct 
wage ones -- I'm not talking only about the contract, but on the 
wage ones -- 24 per cent of them were from the west side or 
143. There was also 24 per cent on the central region in around 
La Ronge; 145 workers were from there. On the east side, in 
around Cumberland House and Pelican Narrows, we had 32 
workers at about 5 per cent. And very interestingly -- and this is 
where I hear a lot of comments -- they said, well there's nobody 
from Athabasca. Like somebody always tells me that there's 
two people working from Athabasca region. 
 
When I look at the facts, Mr. Speaker, and I looked at the 
different communities from Black Lake, 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

Fond-du-lac, and we have a total of 103 workers, you know, 
from that area, and a total of 17 per cent of the total Northerner 
workforce. 
 
So again we're seeing proper representation, not only on the 
southern areas of the North but in the far North as well in the 
Athabasca region. And I might say with the Athabasca region 
that they are not only trying to deal with the joining together of 
the communities and the bands and trying to get at the business 
aspect, but they're looking at joining together in regards to 
developing educational plans. And I worked with them, you 
know, in Wollaston last year to try and get at some of the 
training aspects and move forward with it. And so I think we've 
been very, very successful therefore in dealing with people 
from throughout northern Saskatchewan and so on. 
 
The other thing that is raised to me quite often, they said oh 
yes, but they've just got the labour jobs. You know, you've got 
your fancy statistics and all they've got is the labour jobs. 
 
Well I'll tell you, for the record, that the per hour jobs in 
northern Saskatchewan, it's $15 an hour for secretarial staff, 
etc., and the labour rates are about $20 and more. And even the 
mill operators, I know one person told me that they were 
making $24 an hour, you know, the other day and that they 
were very, very proud of earning that money, versus sometimes 
the smaller level wages that occur in at the local level. 
 
So they are very, very proud to be working and earning wages 
at the same level with other workers from the farm area and 
from the city area. And they feel very, very proud of that. But 
the main point is that it's not only the labour sector; about 60 
per cent of the mill operators are from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Also the people who drive the heavy machinery, over 60 per 
cent are also from northern Saskatchewan. The place where we 
need to make some improvement, and this is where I saw what 
Mr. Red Iron was talking about, was the need to get into the 
area of training more people in the technical trades. And I saw 
we had approximately 20 per cent in that area. 
 
The same with supervision. We had people that were in a 
supervisory capacity at about 20 per cent, you know, of the 
supervisors. So we're going to have to do some more work in 
the supervisory area and the technical trades. 
 
And therefore I would like to move on to the aspect of training. 
But before I do that, I would like to make this point as I talk 
about the positive aspect. These people are very, very proud of 
being workers. You know for the first time they can say, we're 
being paid the same level as any worker in the world. 
Throughout the province we're being respected; we're working 
side by side with our brothers and sisters from all over. 
 
And we're now looking at the different jobs and moving 
forward with it. They said, we'd like to help our other brothers 
and sisters at the local community 

level. There is still a high unemployment rate, and a lot of them 
talk about helping their own people who are still on welfare. 
 
And we talk a lot about the effects of welfare, the effects of 
alcoholism, the fetal alcohol syndrome. And a lot of the people 
have heard me talk about the fact that many people are dying 
from unemployment, and the devastating effects from 
unemployment. 
 
And I know that as a government we will be trying hard to 
work with the communities in moving forward with the 
northern development fund and trying to create northern type 
. . . (inaudible) . . . etc., and making sure that the regional and 
local economic development that is part of the South is also 
part of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was very pleased with our document on partnership and 
economic development that we will be moving forth to do that. 
 
So when we look at these things, Mr. Speaker, although that 
there is still a tough situation in the North, sometimes we forget 
that we have indeed achieved standards that is unmatched 
anywhere in the world. 
 
The other thing I would like to say is that the training 
component becomes very important. Everybody talks about the 
importance of the new science and technology; the new 
developments in the world are going so fast and that our 
education system has to try and keep up. 
 
Well I'm proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the North we have 
been working very closely with the rest of the province and 
trying to, you know, upgrade ourselves in regards to the latest 
in teaching methodology, the latest in curriculum and resource 
materials, the latest debates in testing and evaluation. And 
there's many things that we have done in the North. 
 
I would like to say that one of the central and critical aspects of 
education is the linkage between education and jobs. Many of 
the people recognize that there has to be a strong linkage there. 
People figure that when you are spending money, especially 
when the fiscal situation throughout the world is in dire straits, 
that indeed we have to make more effective use of our money. 
And this happens, and this debate comes along in regards to 
what we do with the money in education. 
 
So when we look at the educational scene, a lot of people are 
trying to see the linkage and trying to see a lot more futuristic 
view in regards to what we do with our educational dollar. And 
a lot of that comes in the North. 
 
I might say that the computer instruction that we have heard 
about in the South is also happening in the North. We're 
moving forth not only at the K to 12 area, but at the 
post-secondary level aspect as well. 
 
And we're seeing that we're trying to get at those 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

technical trades, and we're moving forth with a $10.5 million 
multi-party training plan in the North. And this multi-party 
training plan will focus in different sectors, but it will focus a 
lot on the mining industry because that's where the majority of 
the jobs are. 
 
And when we look at this training aspect we're also looking at 
something that we had talked about in the North when you 
combine education. When you combine the linkage you need 
labour market committees. I must say that when I was the 
principal of the community college back in the '70s, we had 
started this process where we worked with the business sector 
in the North and with labour. And together we tried to do some 
planning on a yearly basis as to where the jobs were going to 
be. 
 
We had a northern labour market committee. And a lot of the 
people have been talking about this type of process in the South 
and throughout Canada. And it's an important development. 
 
But I might add, in the North, that we also have a more specific 
mineral sector task team. And in that sense we're not only 
looking at the provincial government, we're combining our 
strategy with the mining sector, the federal government, and 
we're working with the P.A. tribal council, the Meadow Lake 
tribal council. We're working with the Jim Brady local, the 
Metis local. Jim Brady was historically a Metis leader from the 
past who was working, you know, as a prospector in mining. 
And they are working together with us. 
 
And we are therefore doing a lot of work with the existing 
institution, the Northlands College. And we're moving forward 
in partnership, Mr. Speaker, and trying to make sure that when 
we're doing planning it's interconnected. 
 
The other thing that's important is that many people -- and we 
see that in Europe and we see that throughout the world -- that 
the linkage of jobs and education is not only at the 
post-secondary level, it's moving to apprenticeship systems in 
the high school. Work experience, co-op education is moving 
into the high school level. 
 
(2000) 
 
I'm proud to report, Mr. Speaker, and you saw that in the throne 
speech, La Ronge and an apprenticeship training program built 
in with the high school. I might say that similar things are 
happening as well in La Loche. When Mr. Eisler wrote about 
La Loche and that type of thing, he forgot to mention some of 
the positive things. I might say that he did mention a couple of 
the positive things, but in this case I might say that, you know, 
there was this linkage, you know, occurring at the high school 
level in La Loche, which I'm also proud to report. 
 
So we're trying to make that linkage between education and 
jobs and the computer aspect and trying to keep up with science 
as well as respect for our traditional culture in northern 
Saskatchewan, because that is also important. People have to 
respect 

themselves, you know, wherever they go. They have to respect 
themselves whether they're in the legislature or whether they're 
at the mine. So that aspect is an important component of 
northern education as well. So these are some of the things that 
a lot of people forget to mention when they talk about northern 
development and education. 
 
The other thing that some people will tell me about northern 
education is, well we seem to have filled the jobs in the mill 
operators and heavy equipment operators and the labour 
section; why don't we get jobs in the technical trades? 
 
I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that indeed we're going 
forward with that. That $10.5 million multi-party training plan 
will move in to try and get more people trained, not only in the 
regions from La Ronge to Cumberland House, you know, to 
Buffalo Narrows, but in the Athabasca region. We'll be moving 
forward to get at the apprenticeship areas, with the electricians, 
you know, as well as with the heavy-duty mechanics and 
industrial mechanics and then moving forward in other areas. 
 
So we're moving forward, Mr. Speaker, and we're doing, you 
know, some of these things in partnership with the people of 
the North, with the first nations and with the communities. And 
we're being successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- On a finishing comment, right now I had 
mentioned that in regards to employment, we had 47 per cent, 
you know, of the people working in the North -- over 600 
workers. We are proud of that accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, 
but we feel that we need to do more. When we made the 
announcement on a multi-party training plan and I was there 
with the Minister of Economic Development, we were not only 
talking about the new northern development fund, you know, 
for northern Saskatchewan, but we were also talking about not 
only the interconnection between us and the northern 
entrepreneurs, but we were also talking at trying to achieve the 
next phase, which is 60 per cent. So we are moving forward to 
get 60 per cent of the employment. 
 
Some of the people were talking about and asked us at the 
public meeting whether we would ever, you know, approach 70 
and 80 per cent. And we said, when we reach 60 per cent, we 
will be moving towards 70 and 80 per cent. 
 
And it's this type of a thing that we are trying to show 
leadership in, you know, throughout the province, that indeed a 
lot of people don't want welfare in the North. What people are 
saying is that we want the pay cheques, you know, that people 
are looking forward to. We want to get to be able to put food on 
the table, you know, for our own children. We want to be able 
to do these things. Because it is important for not only our 
pride in ourselves but pride in our families and pride in our 
communities. And this is what the message is from the people 
throughout northern 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

Saskatchewan. 
 
When I looked at the aspect of health, I would like to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is truly one of the toughest issues of the day 
that's facing, you know, not only this government, but many 
governments throughout the world. And we see that in the 
news, you know, starvation on different parts of the world. We 
see the decrepit conditions, we see war devastation, the impact 
on destruction of sewer and water systems over there. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to report that on 
health we have been slowly moving forward in northern 
Saskatchewan. In the past couple of years we have been trying 
to get at the sewer and water question. We spent about $6.2 
million and we spent about -- and this has been spent 
throughout northern Saskatchewan -- we spent about 2.9 
million on the Athabasca constituency and about 3.1 in the 
Cumberland constituency. 
 
And so we've had quite a development in sewer and water 
systems which have been at a standstill, you know, for quite a 
few years. And a lot of people are very happy about that 
because there's a direct interconnection between sewer and 
water systems and health. When you have to walk half a mile to 
get your water in a pail when it's 40 below and it's windy, you 
know, coming off the lake, it's not one of the easiest tasks. And 
when you have sewer and water in your house it becomes very 
important in regards to the health of a person. 
 
So we're moving forward with that, Mr. Speaker, and we're 
seeing these developments occurring at a very difficult time in 
our budget history. I wish we didn't have that $15 billion debt 
and over $800 million in interest payments because I know that 
we would be able to do more in many more of the communities 
if that wasn't the case. And I think it's very important that the 
health question be dealt with in this light. 
 
On another aspect of health is our facilities in the North were 
way behind. And I know that on the west side and I know that 
on the far north and I know that on the east side as well as in 
the central area in La Ronge, I am pleased to report, Mr. 
Speaker, that we will be going ahead with La Ronge hospital, 
you know, the construction of the regional hospital. And a lot 
of the people are very, very happy about that. You know, 
they've been scraping over the years because there has been 
neglect in the North. Throughout all the years of the 
Conservative government absolutely nothing had been built in 
the North, absolutely nothing. 
 
There was many places where there was all kinds of hospitals 
built, etc., and great big fancy buildings, whether in Saskatoon 
or all over the place in the province. But yet the North was 
completely neglected during those years. And when we came 
into power we promised we would go ahead with it. 
 
A lot of the people were sceptical. They said, you're broke; we 
know that you can't do it. But I'll tell you, 

Mr. Minister, I am proud of this government because we knew 
the tough situation and we knew the compassion of 
Saskatchewan people. We know that the people of 
Saskatchewan will say yes, it needed to be done. We know the 
decrepit conditions in the North and we know that it had to be 
done in light of the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the health we're also trying 
to combine educational training. We have done teacher 
education. One of the best teacher education programs in the 
North was NORTEP (northern teacher education program) 
teacher education. And we now have 25 per cent of the 
teaching force in our schools being of Indian-Metis 
background. When I was growing up there was none, and when 
I was teaching back up there in the early '70s there was about 5 
people out of approximately 400 at that time, and I'm pleased to 
report now that we have about 25 per cent and it's moving 
forward. 
 
So we're doing success and continuing, you know, to move 
forward with teacher education, but we're also interconnecting 
that in the health field. There's what you call a NORPAP 
program or a northern professional access program. And we're 
doing it in the health field and we're preparing, you know, for 
the building of a La Ronge hospital as well as future areas, you 
know, of health workers in northern Saskatchewan. So I'm 
pleased to report that this government again took the initiative 
in this area. 
 
The last point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is to discuss the 
issue of land. We have talked about working with all people in 
the province and cooperating with all people. Last year, Mr. 
Speaker, we passed the legislation which paid due respect to 
the famous agreement of the Treaty Land Entitlement. It was an 
historic agreement, Mr. Speaker. It was totalling $450 million 
to purchase land to be able to fulfil the treaty obligations, you 
know, of the past. 
 
I think what I will do is explain a little bit on the historical 
context. A lot of the people, when I talk to them and explain the 
situation and understand the history of treaty land entitlement, 
recognize the fairness and the justice in regards to this 
settlement. I will do that in the light of doing a comparative 
analysis on what happened. 
 
When Saskatchewan became a province in 1905, Mr. Speaker, 
we did not have control of the resources. So I want to look at 
the record as it was when the Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement was made in 1930 and what the situation was like at 
that time in history as compared to today. 
 
But I want to go back a little bit further back in regards to the 
signing of the treaties. A lot of the treaties were signed in this 
province in the 1970s. During that time there was land 
settlements and land set aside for reserves, which came under 
section 91.24. At that time it was called the British North 
America Act. 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

And when they did the treaty negotiations, there was an 
incompleteness in the process. People had been moving around. 
Some people were uncertain of whether or not the treaty land 
settlement of the day was enough. I knew that a lot of the bands 
at that time held out on signing a treaty because they said, the 
land base that we were being given was not going to be enough, 
that indeed that they needed a bigger land base. I know that a 
famous leader, whether it was Piapot or it was Big Bear, and 
many others that held out to try and get a larger land base. 
 
But lo and behold, it did not happen. They stuck with the 
formula of the day and there was therefore unfilled land 
entitlement -- an unfulfilled section of the treaty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people measure those in regards to what they call 
date of first survey. They surveyed the land and there was some 
aspects that were settled and some that, maybe 20 per cent or 
30 per cent, that was not settled. And it totalled about 160,000 
acres of land, although there was a debate as to whether or not 
there was more when further research was done. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to do a bit of . . . the amount of land that 
was provided for treaty Indians by 1930 on all the land 
settlements in comparison to other land settlements in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, land is one of the most highly emotional and one 
of the strongest topics in the world. We see that situation, you 
know, the wars, the devastation here and there. 
 
We have tried to do it on peaceful means through the treaty 
process in this province and it has been largely successful. It 
has been mainly successful. When we looked at the treaty land 
settlement, a lot of the people did not know that there was also 
land policies that affected new settlers as well as corporations, 
as well schools and other situations. 
 
But I want to, therefore, look at the situation of the land and the 
dominion lands policy of the late 1800s and the early 1900s, 
and the impact it did have. The impact was quite tremendous, 
Mr. Speaker, because the dominion lands policy had provided 
for, number one, a Homesteads Act. This Homesteads Act by 
1930 had provided for 31 million acres of land. Mr. Speaker, at 
that time there was about 900,000 people in this province. 
That's how effective that dominion lands policy had been. It 
attracted many people in this area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the dominion lands policy also extended the 
free Homesteads Act to a paid Homesteads Act. And the 
amount of land on the paid Homesteads Act was 6 million 
acres. So we had approximately 37 million acres of land in 
regards to the new settlers. 
 
(2015) 
 
It's very interesting from an historic perspective because when 
you look at the amount of the population today, we have close 
to a million people, you know, just not very much different 
from 1930. 

And we also have about 40,000 acres of cultivated land in this 
province and we had 37, you know, million acres of land 
through the homestead policy. 
 
I would say that this was very successful because we know the 
history of agriculture in this province and the tremendous 
influence it has had, not only on the economics but on the 
social fabric and cultural fabric of this province. It has been a 
tremendous and positive impact. 
 
And when we look at some of the downturns and we look at the 
250,000 farms now going up to about 60,000 and we look at 
the problem of loss of land, you know, sometimes we forget the 
historic basis of it, you know, in the early days. A lot of the 
people went through tough times during those periods and 
survived and were able to make it, and now we see, you know, 
the results later on. 
 
We see also at the corporate sector we had about over 15 
million acres of land provide for the railroad companies. One of 
the more famous companies that came from there was CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway). The CPR had received about 6 
million acres of land in this province alone. And you must look 
at it, Mr. Speaker, because that has been very beneficial. The 
CPR as a company is one of the more outstanding corporations 
and, of course, there's mixed opinion, you know, of the CPR, 
but a lot of the people cannot deny the fact that they are a 
highly successful company. 
 
That dominion lands policy, which provided an economic base 
for them which gave them a head start over a lot of businesses, 
provided that base for them to develop into the area of air 
transportation and many other fields as well. They're 
interlocked in many different companies and they've been very 
successful. Even the Hudson Bay Company, during that period 
in time in the province of Saskatchewan alone, received 3.4 
billion acres of land. 
 
The other thing is that a lot of the settlers wanted schools and 
an important aspect did develop where the schools did get land 
as well. And for historical purposes, a lot of these histories 
actually were written down in a booklet in 1934 by Chester 
Martin called Dominion Lands Policy, you know, for the 
people who are interested in the historical documentation of it. 
But in that regard there was 4 million acres of land for the 
schools in the province of Saskatchewan. When I saw the 
debate and the concern over taxation loss on municipalities and 
to the schools, you know, sometimes people do not remember 
the history of the early days. 
 
So in summary on that history, Mr. Speaker, we had about 37 
million acres of land for the farms which developed a great 
agricultural region in the world. We had about 15 million acres 
of land for the railroad companies alone and many more for the 
corporations, 3.4 for Hudson Bay alone, and also 4 million 
acres of land for the schools. 
 
And what a lot of people don't understand is there 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

seems to be an opinion out there that there's a lot of land on 
treaties and a lot of land had been settled. For the record, Mr. 
Speaker, by 1930 the amount of treaty land in the province of 
Saskatchewan was 1.2 million acres. It was 1.2 million acres. 
 
When I did a quick summary -- and I didn't look at all the 
land -- there was approximately 60 million acres of land set 
aside for everybody by 1930 and we were looking at just over 1 
million acres of land for the people who had the original 
authority over this land. So when somebody talks to me about 
fairness in regards to the treaty land entitlement, you know, 
some people forget about it. 
 
When I thought about it, sometimes people will say, well how 
was it in 1930s; it's not the same today, that it's very different 
today. Well, Mr. Speaker, just on that, I see the benefits of land 
policy, whether we do lease agreements or whether we do 
community pastures or whether we do this and that. I just had a 
quick overview on the land policy and I didn't even do the 
mining companies. I just had a look at even the Weyerhaeuser 
agreement where we had over 12 million acres of land. I didn't 
even look at the acreages on the new Millar Western land or on 
the one on the Hudson Bay area; I'm just talking about Prince 
Albert north and the 12 million acres of land. Very, very useful 
for economic development, I would say, and some Northerners 
are employed in the forestry area as well. 
 
But I wanted to make a point that we do have good land policy, 
you know, that affects economic development in this area. I 
know that our community pastures and grazing lands are about 
8 billion acres today. I know that I mentioned already that there 
was 40 million acres cultivated from the original one that I've 
talked about. 
 
And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at the parks, 
our parks in the province of Saskatchewan are about three and a 
half million acres, and we're proposing some more parks and 
we'll be getting about 4 million acres of parks pretty soon in 
this province. And the other thing is that . . . and it's a very 
important development because in the modern-day culture 
today we need our parks and it's important to save our trees, 
you know, and our unique berries that we have throughout the 
province and our unique plants, etc. And I think it's important 
for our grandchildren to be able to see that in the future as time 
goes on. 
 
But the point I want to make in regards to the land is that this 
year there was a great big forest fire and I forget how much we 
spent -- it was in the tens of millions of dollars to fight that 
forest fire on the Primrose weapons range. 
 
What a lot of people don't know is that the Primrose weapons 
range has a total land of 1.5 million acres. And the Liberals 
were debating this in the legislature whether or not we should 
be dropping the cruise missiles and dropping the bombs again 
in northern Saskatchewan and they gave the go-ahead to it. And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, I mean one can debate pro and 

con in the Primrose weapons range and so on, but the fact is it's 
1.5 million acres of land. 
 
And today's treaty land entitlement, Mr. Speaker, is just a shade 
bigger than the Primrose Air Weapons Range. It is going to be 
about 1.7 million acres of land. And I think that's an important 
stat to look at. We can have 1.5 million acres of land where we 
drop bombs, and sometimes they create forest fires and that 
indeed -- and then we have to pay for it -- but when we have 
1.7 million acres of land on treaty land entitlement, you know, 
some people will argue about it. 
 
But I think many times when I have spoken in public and 
people started hearing these historical facts and looking at it in 
an historical dimension, they say: why hasn't this been done a 
long time ago? Why is it that this has not been, you know, done 
in the past. And a lot of people are starting to understand. 
 
And I was very happy, you know, with the debate that took 
place, you know, in the Fort Qu'Appelle area. And I was very 
proud of the people of that area. You know, they came out and 
supported the treaty land entitlement process, and it was a 
measure of success. And I know that somebody was talking 
about Oka, you know, earlier on from the other side, but here 
we had a situation of Fort Qu'Appelle saying yes to treaty land 
entitlement, and yes to fairness and justice. And this is 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that we have to be very, 
very proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- So, Mr. Speaker, I've gone on for quite a 
while, and I might say that indeed, again, when I looked at this 
government, and we look at the historical development in 
northern Saskatchewan and the impact on our partnership with 
Indian-Metis people and all other peoples of the province of 
Saskatchewan, although in tough situations, Mr. Speaker, and 
although we have made some tough decisions in the past 
couple of years, we are still going forward. We are still going 
forward with tremendous successes that sometimes we do not 
hear, and sometimes that the press does not report. 
 
And these are the things that are the essence of Saskatchewan 
people. These are the essence that creates the change. These are 
the essence that creates a new vision and a new dynamic, not 
for despair, Mr. Speaker, but a vision of hope, a vision that we 
can say: yes, at this stage in Canadian and Saskatchewan 
history, that the government of Saskatchewan have taken a 
leadership role. They've taken a leadership role in many areas, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must say that as an aboriginal person in this province, 
and as a Saskatchewanite, I must say that I am proud of this 
government. We know we have some of the things that are 
unfinished in regards to moving forward, but I know that we 
have a firm belief that the people of Saskatchewan have gone 
through traumatic experiences in the past, whether it was in the 
'30s where the downturns of the economy here and then, but 
they have always met it with the 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

challenge, and it's in this spirit that we speak about our throne 
speech, Mr. Speaker. We are speaking about hope. We are 
speaking and moving forward. We are speaking about moving 
forward and saying yes to Saskatchewan people and saying yes 
to hope and yes for the future of our children. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
begin by saying how proud I am of course to be representing 
the constituency of Meadow Lake. It is located in the 
north-west corner of the province along the Alberta border and 
runs eastward along the beautiful Meadow Lake Provincial 
Park. 
 
What I enjoy the least about my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is 
how far it is from Regina. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, 
what I enjoy most about my constituency at times is how far it 
is from Regina. 
 
The constituency of Meadow Lake is so diverse, and while this 
makes it a very interesting place to live, it also makes it a very 
interesting place to represent. I stand proudly here today as I 
enter into the debate on the throne speech delivered on 
February 7 by Her Honour, Lieutenant Sylvia Fedoruk. And I 
want to compliment, Mr. Speaker, the mover of the throne 
speech, the member from Regina Lake Centre, on the fine job 
that she did, and also too, to the member from Biggar on the 
very fine job that he did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- And certainly I want to compliment you too, 
Mr. Speaker. You often face great adversity and I admire and 
respect the manner with which you control this Assembly. I 
have heard you do not wish too much praise, so I will stop and 
wish you good luck, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker also, 
the best of luck in the coming session. I have every confidence 
that you will both provide fairness and leadership as we pass 
new and progressive legislation for the people of Saskatchewan 
in this coming session. 
 
Lastly, I certainly want to take the time to welcome the new 
member to the Assembly, the member from Regina North 
West. While I am sure we will disagree strongly on philosophy, 
I want to wish her the very, very best. As the Deputy Premier 
said the day before yesterday, I believe, to be elected to this 
Assembly is a privilege and an honour bestowed on few people. 
 
I want to speak briefly again, Mr. Speaker, about the 
constituency of Meadow Lake. I am sure that there is not a 
more beautiful place in the world. I have had the good fortune 
of travelling some in this world and each time I return home I 
truly believe it's more beautiful than when I left. 
 
I am an avid canoer, Mr. Speaker, as many of my constituents 
will know. Every year I try to canoe a new waterway in 
northern Saskatchewan. Last year, along with friends, I canoed 
180 kilometres down the 

Churchill River system. Surely there can be nothing more 
powerful and, at the same time, tranquil as a trip like this. 
There is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that tourism is becoming one 
of the major industries in our area. 
 
To this point I want to compliment all the members of the 
Northwest Tourist Association, who do such a wonderful job of 
promoting our area. They do marvellous work in promoting 
this area. And I have spoken on the beauty, Mr. Speaker, in 
comparing it with other parts of the world. For the time being 
though, I shall not talk about the temperature. 
 
To all the good people of Meadow Lake constituency, I hope 
that I'm able to represent you here in the Assembly for many, 
many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- Last year, Mr. Speaker, we put our four-year 
plan in place. It was a plan for recovery and restoration. We 
said that we would bring back common sense and competency 
to the managing of our finances. We said we would protect the 
disadvantaged and renew our spirit of cooperation and of 
community. 
 
Well this year, Mr. Speaker, we want to reaffirm our journey of 
success. Our government put its plan in place and we made the 
hard choices. Many of our choices were not popular at first, but 
more and more I sense acceptance and a certain kind of relief 
from the people who believe that finally a government did what 
they said they would do. A government committed to restoring 
the fiscal integrity of this province; a government committed to 
the people of Saskatchewan, not a government committed to 
simply trying to get re-elected. 
 
(2030) 
 
Much of the credit, Mr. Speaker, must go however to the 
people of Saskatchewan -- ordinary people like those of the 
communities of Meadow Lake, St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, 
Pierceland, Loon Lake, and my home town, Goodsoil. These 
are the people that deserve the real credit. Saskatchewan people 
seem to have the ability to dig in and do what needs to be done, 
regardless of the barriers that face them. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
we are working with the people of Saskatchewan. We have put 
our four-year recovery plan in place and it is working. 
 
I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, it has been some time since I've 
heard the good members in opposition ask, where is the plan? It 
is because they know that we always did have a plan and it's 
working wonderfully. 
 
And we receive much criticism from the third party as well. I 
did not look it up in the Hansard but I believe I would be fairly 
accurate in saying that the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
promised this Assembly she would come up with one new idea 
per week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would applaud the third party if they 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

could come up with one new idea a year. We have been in 
government for two years now, so unless I missed it, by my 
count that means they owe us two. Maybe with more seats now 
I can expect at least one of these new ideas. I won't hold my 
breath though. If I had, I would have suffocated probably pretty 
early in our mandate. 
 
Under our government, Mr. Speaker, there are new ideas and 
things are changing. The number of women entrepreneurs has 
increased drastically over the last 40 years. In the early 1960s, 
about one in ten business owners was a woman. But today that 
has increased to one in four businesses being owned by women. 
That 250 per cent increase has occurred not only in Canada as a 
national statistic, but holds true here in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Some predictions suggest that by the year 2000 fully one-third 
of all Canadian businesses will be owned by women. It is 
believed that most Saskatchewan women start their businesses 
with an initial investment of $1,000 or less. New female 
business owners seem to have a knack for survival. After the 
first three years, 47 per cent of female entrepreneurs are still in 
business compared to only 25 per cent of us males. I'm not 
going to go into what this necessarily means. 
 
Mr. Speaker, retail sales in Saskatchewan were 5.4 per cent 
higher in the first eight months of 1993 compared to the same 
period in 1992. October 1993 marked the fifth consecutive 
month when the province's growth rate in retail sales was both 
the highest on the Prairies and higher than the national rate. 
Final 1993 retail sales figures are predicted to achieve a 4 to 6 
per cent increase which would be the best growth since 1986 
and superior to the 1.8 per cent increase in 1992. 
 
Indeed there is a renewed confidence in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. The number of new businesses in Saskatchewan is 
rising. To the end of November 1993, 10 per cent more, to be 
exact, in new businesses were incorporated than in the same 
period in 1992. 
 
On the national scene, Canada's largest companies plan to 
spend nearly $2.5 billion more in capital spending in 1994 than 
they did in 1993 or a projected increase of 7.7 per cent. 
 
On page 5 of Business Unlimited magazine, it says, and I quote: 
 

Optimism suggested in these figures may be partly 
anchored, in Saskatchewan, in recent manufacturing 
growth. 

 
Not in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, not in British Columbia or in 
Ontario, but in Saskatchewan. 
 
Manufacturing shipments in the province rose 5 per cent by 
October 1993, compared to the same period in 1992. This 
increase was dominated by growth in the manufacturing of 
machinery, wood products, and plastics. 

Well we have a lot of good news, Mr. Speaker, and the results 
are showing. I want to quote from an article in December 20, 
1993 issue of Northern Pride. The headline says, "Meadow 
Lake economy enjoys strong year". 
 

The past year has seen unprecedented growth in Meadow 
Lake, according to the town and provincial records. 

 
Bylaw enforcement officer Bill Grona said the town has 
already issued permits for 42 new residences this year -- the 
greatest number he has seen since he started the job in 1985. 
There have been 96 building permits issued in total so far, 
including for renovations and additions. Last year that figure 
was 94. 

 
Herman Stang, a tax appraiser for the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency, said Meadow Lake's 
growth has been by far the greatest in his district. 

 
"Meadow Lake is growing, so buildings are growing with it." 

 
Population has also increased, with Saskatchewan Health 
putting it at 4,711 -- up nearly 400 from 1991. 

 
"We've had maybe one of the best years for population," said 
Mayor Dave Bridger, adding the increase was also visible in 
other areas. 

 
Economic Development Council chairman Walter McNabb 
said new business in the town was another certain sign of 
growth. A new A & W restaurant, a Ford dealership, a post 
factory, a new newspaper, and other business expansions all 
point to a strong local economy. 

 
PineRidge Ford Mercury owner Bill Griffiths said he did 
some research on the subject before he and his partner, Larry 
Moeller, opened the dealership in August. He attributes his 
good business projects to tourism, forestry, agriculture and 
ranching. 

 
Griffiths' and the Ford's research found there were sufficient 
sales to justify a third car dealership in Meadow Lake. 
PineRidge was the only new franchise opened in the 
province (last) year, (Mr. Speaker.) 

 
I want to speak briefly, Mr. Speaker, about agriculture. And I 
would like to begin by complimenting all those involved in 
developing the Ag 2000 strategy. I'm fully aware that this will 
not resolve our problems overnight, but I think farmers are tired 
of quick-fix approaches. 
 
There are a lot of positive things happening out there in our 
farming community. The minister in the Department of 
Agriculture and Food has for the first time in many, many years 
laid out a plan for the future. If farmers and the public are 
interested, they can now 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

see clearly what our direction is well into the next century. 
 
I want to speak about some of the positive things in agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker. Agriculture implements among Saskatchewan's 
100 manufacturers rose 19.6 per cent in 1993 over 1992, and 
some Saskatchewan companies achieved sales of 30 to 50 per 
cent higher than in 1992. 
 
In the western Canadian agricultural implement industry as a 
whole, 1993 sales hit well over $1 billion. This is a level never 
before achieved and a net increase of 30 per cent over 1992. 
 
And things are changing on the farm itself. I refer you to a 
recent article in the Regina Leader-Post, "Wheat acreage likely 
to drop." 
 
 Canadian wheat acreage will slip again in 1994 as farmers 
(will) seed more land to canola, durum and special crops in the 
hope of better returns. 
 
 Forecasters at an international grain outlook conference here 
said high-flying canola is poised to hit a record 12-million 
seeded acres, up from 10 million last year. 
 
 "The big increase last year occurred mainly in Saskatchewan 
and first-time canola growers have had very good success." 
 
 Prices that were good through the year peaked in January at 
levels not seen since the 1988 drought. 
 
 Meanwhile, farmers looking at soaring prices for 
high-quality durum are expected to increase seeding 25 per cent 
or more. 
 
 Field pea acreage last year jumped 85 per cent, (Mr. 
Speaker), and this year could jump another 60 per cent to reach 
2 million acres. 
 
Farmers really are beginning to diversify and I give credit first 
of all of course, Mr. Speaker, to our Saskatchewan farmers, but 
also to both the current and former ministers of Agriculture and 
Food. I believe the leadership that they've provided, their 
willingness to make some tough decisions which were not very 
popular, certainly have contributed in a large part to our 
recovery. 
 
Since I come from a fairly large family, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
speak about children and the family. The United Nations has 
declared 1994 as the International Year of the Family. It is a 
year in which the accomplishments and contributions of 
families in all of their diverse forms will be promoted and 
celebrated. 
 
It is also a time to promote the basic human rights and 
fundamental freedoms accorded to all individuals. 
Saskatchewan's action plan for children outlines a process that 
will include government, 

non-government organizations, communities, families and 
individuals in ensuring that our children will grow in 
environments that support their well-being and enable them to 
reach their full potential. 
 
One of the new initiatives under way which falls under the 
auspices of the action plan is a program called Children First: 
coordinating community action. In this program communities 
identify their own needs and are supported in their efforts to 
design and set up holistic and integrated services. To date, there 
are about 20 different initiatives in various stages of planning 
and implementation. Government is working with aboriginal 
communities to develop Indian child and family service 
agencies as well. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, before I decided to let my name stand 
for the nomination to the New Democratic Party, there were 
tremendous struggles that went on in my mind. If I was elected, 
would I face the wrath of unhappy constituents? Would I be 
happy in the job that kept me constantly on the road? And very 
coincidently, Mr. Speaker, it was you who said to me about 
four or five years ago, you said that the honour of serving the 
public in this capacity would, if I were fortunate enough to be 
elected, be something that would give me much personal 
satisfaction. 
 
After two years, Mr. Speaker, your words could not be more 
true. I have found this to be an incredible privilege, serving my 
constituents in Meadow Lake, and there has never been a 
moment of regret. 
 
I ran for basically two reasons, Mr. Speaker. The first was 
because I believed that it was important that there was more 
openness and accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. 
The second was because I believe the public was demanding a 
government that would assume some sense of fiscal 
responsibility. Perhaps part of what makes my job so enjoyable 
is that I believe that our government has to a large degree 
fulfilled those two objectives. 
 
My whole background in the credit union required that I be 
open and accountable to our membership, and of course that we 
had to be fiscally responsible. So you see, Mr. Speaker, this 
new job has been a fairly easy transition. 
 
By the way, I also enjoy chairing meetings, so don't get too 
complacent in your position there. 
 
Back to accountability. I want to refer to chapter 2 of the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor for the year ended March 31, 
1992. I quote: 
 

The Government moved from providing what the Financial 
Management Review Commission viewed as the weakest 
and least useful financial statements in Canada to providing 
one of the most useful financial statements issued by a senior 
government in Canada. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are powerful words. The proof is in 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

the pudding. The people of Saskatchewan can be comforted in 
knowing that, if they so desire, they will receive full and can 
receive full disclosure of the province's finances. 
 
On the second objective of finances, again the proof is there. 
We have taken a projected deficit of $1.3 billion in 1991 and 
reduced it to 295 million in 1993 -- a reduction of over $1 
billion in just two years. Our budget projections are ahead of 
schedule despite cuts of 62.2 million from Ottawa. Through 
good management our province's borrowing requirements have 
been reduced by more than $227 million. 
 
The government is on top of its budget plan even though it has 
spent 31 million more on social services, 4 million more on 
agricultural programs, 15 million more on environmental 
programs, and 2 million more on education, that they had not 
originally planned to spend. 
 
Increased royalties of 61 million and an increase in corporate 
taxes of nearly 19 million have allowed the government to 
remain on target with its four-year deficit elimination plan. In 
the Pierceland area, for instance, the natural gas activity has 
virtually exploded. And I pardon the pun for using the term 
exploded. 
 
I sincerely believe that much credit has to go to our Minister of 
Energy and Mines. This was certainly evidenced at the recent 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention when the mayor for Kindersley complimented the 
minister for his extreme competency. Perhaps the member from 
Kindersley would like to do the same some day. 
 
Anyway, in our area in the month of October of 1993, Mr. 
Speaker, there were 332 active gas wells out of 446 capable, 
which produced a total, Mr. Speaker, of 215 million cubic feet 
of gas per day. The average in 1992 was only 182 million cubic 
feet per day. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the only 
provinces to get its finances under control -- under control. 
Investment houses are already speculating that Saskatchewan 
could be the first province in Canada to get an actual credit 
rating upgrade. 
 
(2045) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- Referring to Saskatchewan, Salomon Brothers 
says that: 
 

The province most beleaguered by the rating agencies also is 
the one with the most impressive attempt to attack its fiscal 
problems. 

 
Richard Kay of Nesbitt Thomson says: 
 

While all Canadian provinces face similar problems of large 
deficits and debt loads as well as high taxes, Saskatchewan is 

demonstrating leadership in finding and implementing 
solutions. 

 
Before I finish, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister 
responsible for SaskTel. As we move forward on this journey 
of renewal, the minister saw that with all the activity in 
Meadow Lake, cellular service was a necessary service. 
Besides the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
Meadow Lake would then be able to report all of the good 
news on an ongoing basis. The decision was therefore made 
with SaskTel officials to have cellular service extended to 
Meadow Lake . . . to the Meadow Lake area by the summer of 
1994. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- I assure you however, Mr. Speaker, that even 
with this convenience my bill will remain substantially lower 
than the member from Shaunavon. I have a lot of good news, 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of good news, but not even I could 
talk that much. 
 
And finally in closing, I want to pay a special tribute to the 
incredible work that the Meadow Lake tribal council has done 
this year. The tribal council was involved in an historic signing 
with the Minister of Social Services in mid-December of 1993. 
 
I want to read from an article in the Meadow Lake Progress, 
Mr. Speaker. It's entitled, "MLTC to control child care." 
 
 A long hard struggle came to a partial end on Tuesday 
afternoon at the Flying Dust Gymnasium when Social Services 
Minister Bob Pringle signed an agreement turning over 
responsibility for child and family services to the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council. 
 
 The agreement will only come into effect after the tribal 
council has also penned a similar agreement with the federal 
government and the funding is settled some time in January. 
 
As an aside, Mr. Speaker, I believe that has now been signed. 
 

Executive director Ray Ahonakew said it had been MLTC's 
hope to pen both agreements on the same day but there are 
still a few hurdles to clear. 
 
Senator Fred Martell was glad to see the step taken which 
brings the tribal council one step closer on the road to 
self-government. He thanked the chiefs for being united in 
their stand although they have not always agreed with the 
decisions. 
 
"You have always made an effort to work as a team with 
partners. We are very fortunate we have what we have 
today." 
 
Chief Richard Gladue, chairman of the 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

Meadow Lake Health and Social Development Authority 
spoke about all the things which led to the signing of the 
agreement. "When we first embarked on signing our health 
agreement, we had a vision." 
 
The vision included healthy people who are prosperous and 
strong as well as self-reliant and self-sufficient. 
 
Gladue sees education and awareness as the key to any 
process and self-government is no different. He also sees a 
need for a strong economic base. 
 
"The more we talk about self-government the more we know 
what that means and it is happening here today." 
 
Gladue said the vision of health care goes far beyond 
treatment and includes healing and wellness. "This 
agreement provides us with one more tool." 
 
Within the framework there will be a community family 
worker and an office. "This will be a valuable part of the 
human resource team." 
 
He said apprehension and placing children under care will 
still remain a provincial responsibility. He (also) said that the 
negotiations were challenging and often complex, but he 
(complimented) the government for taking up the challenge. 

 
And I too want to compliment them once again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Meadow Lake tribal council was also instrumental in 
bringing to a conclusion the blockade that took place on the 
Wiggins Bay road. As a result of an agreement that was signed 
with NorSask and the province, it sets up a structure for 
co-management agreements. These agreements will allow for 
direct input from the affected community when the harvesting 
is taking place there. Such things as traplines, traditional 
hunting areas, berry-picking areas and wild rice fields are all 
things that now will be taken into effect before the wood is 
harvested. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake tribal council 
will be hosting the 1994 Provincial Indian Winter Games from 
February 24 to 27 of this year. This will be a major 
undertaking, and I invite all members to come to Meadow Lake 
to take part in the activities. 
 
There is so much reason to be optimistic, Mr. Speaker. Things 
are getting better, and I want to give my assurance to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and especially to my constituents of Meadow 
Lake, that I will continue to represent them to the best of my 
ability. I will of course be voting in favour of the throne speech 
and I urge all members to do the same. 

Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure and a 
privilege to enter into the debate today, a privilege I know the 
new member from Regina North West will take seriously, and I 
welcome her to this Assembly. 
 
I congratulate the mover of the throne speech, the member from 
Regina Lake Centre, and the seconder, the member from 
Biggar, who shared with us their approaches to the service they 
provide to this province, a service well grounded in our journey 
of renewal, based on our principles of community, cooperation, 
and compassion. They are colleagues that I also appreciate and 
respect for their commitment to the renewal of our economy. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I know you are someone who will help 
us on our journey by ensuring that our deliberations here will 
occur with democratic spirit of lively debate and thoughtful 
deliberation. 
 
And unlike the member from Rosthern who tried to 
short-circuit the tradition of having members speak to the 
throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I feel indeed privileged to stand in 
the Chamber and give the views of my constituents on the 
throne speech, but also to hear the intelligence and the wit of 
the members as they give us a picture of their constituencies 
and how things are going throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When I look at the legislative agenda before us, Mr. Speaker, I 
can say this session will also mark a session of renewal, a 
renewal of hope for the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
faced difficult choices and we've tackled them with innovation 
and initiative. While we can look to other jurisdictions led by 
Liberal or Tory governments, they have chosen to either 
aimlessly slash important program areas and services to people 
or to impose their solutions with no consultation and 
involvement of the communities. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the highest taxed 
provinces in this country right now are led by Liberal 
administrations. And in monitoring what Saskatchewan 
Liberals have said in this Chamber in the last few days, I've 
been noting that with their suggestions and their ideas that 
they've put forward that they've doubled the deficit in the 
province of Saskatchewan within the last 48 hours. 
 
Interesting to see how they would be able to finance those 
without raising any new taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is also even more interesting, when I had an opportunity to 
speak to the members that have come to us from Alberta, that 
they noted before the election the Liberals in Alberta were 
saying that the Conservatives were not going to make cuts that 
were deep enough for the province of Alberta, and we know 
what's going on in that province right now. 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

And just when I'm lulled into thinking that the politics of fear 
that were demonstrated over the last number of years in this 
province are finally dead, and lulled into thinking that maybe a 
Liberal isn't a Tory after all, I open my mail and get a plain 
white envelope that's addressed to myself at my home that says 
the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) bandwagon's 
rolling and it's going to roll right over me, says a member. It 
says it's rolling . . . will roll right over you, Doreen Hamilton, 
and your seat's targeted plan for your retirement. Old-style 
politics by an old-style party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It would be intimidating if I weren't familiar with the members 
of my constituency, Mr. Speaker. And as I stated to you in the 
first session of the Legislative Assembly, I would now like to 
also reintroduce you to those constituents who restore my faith 
in the democratic process and the decency of the new politics 
of Saskatchewan, the politics of New Democrats in honesty and 
integrity and openness who would sign letters rather than drop 
them off in a plain white envelope with no signature, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce you and my colleagues 
in the Assembly to the people that I have been elected to serve. 
They are the people of Wascana Plains. They live on the edge 
of our fair city, which gives them a connectedness to rural life 
and to the environment. They have young families and many 
have teens ready to enter post-secondary education. They are 
business leaders and employers and people who have moved 
here from other places to be employed in the city of Regina by 
the efforts of the REDA, the Regina Economic Development 
Authority, making overtures to them to come to a city in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some are seniors who have lived through difficult times in the 
past and who have worked hard to improve the quality of life 
for all of us. They told me, Mr. Speaker, that any journey of 
renewal has to have a first step that takes the people of the 
province back to restoring the confidence in our ability to 
manage its financial affairs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these steps have been made on our journey. 
They've made our journey difficult. But together we've been 
able to make great progress, and right now I would like to 
thank my constituents for their support and the part they've 
played in this mammoth task. 
 
So here we are at the beginning of the next leg of our 
journey -- the fourth session of the twenty-second legislature, a 
session that I believe will take us further down that road to 
renewal. And whose road map do we follow to guide us on our 
way? The important anniversaries mentioned early in the 
throne speech point to those who 50 years ago fought to 
preserve democracy so that today we live as free men and 
women. Their sacrifices allow us to bring forward new ideas to 
further many principles of democratic reform. The struggle to 
protect democracy is an important fight that is important as 
now . . . as it was then, it is now. And it is why that we are 
known as Democrats. 

Our course is also charted for us by the courage and wisdom of 
the people who elected Tommy Douglas and those of the first 
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation government -- a 
social democratic government. This legacy sets our course, 
grounded in a deep commitment to economic and social justice. 
 
Clearly the way to achieve this is to seek full employment, jobs 
for Saskatchewan people. This is the first of three key 
principles in our Partnership for Renewal -- an economic 
development strategy for Saskatchewan. We are now working 
with communities and development organizations to form a 
number of regional economic development authorities. Regina 
is a working model of success in this area. They brought 
together members of all sectors of the community to build on 
existing strengths, capture new opportunities that would 
provide sustainable employment for their people. 
 
These new regional authorities will tell us what we can do to 
help them, what we can do to facilitate their plans, their 
marketing and promotion. And it's quite a contrast to the Tory 
strategy of throwing out massive dollars to fly-by-night friends 
on ill-conceived plans through SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation) financing, through Sask 
Development Corporation's financing, only later to see them 
collapse or require major refinancing to go on with their 
projects. Mr. Speaker, no sustainable jobs. And we still -- the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan -- foot the bill. 
 
It's also quite a contrast to the people that would look to the 
Saskatchewan Liberals, who have a complete lack of a job 
strategy, because what we've only heard from them is that they 
would cut taxes and the private sector would somehow create 
the jobs. But at what cost, Mr. Speaker, when we cut taxes? 
What jobs are lost when they cut even more programs and 
services to the people of this province? 
 
The Liberal leader said that she would submit a new idea a 
week -- as our other colleague and member had 
mentioned -- and our Economic Development minister still 
awaits one idea. Well we look over and we've got three 
members of the Liberal Party. But I think in looking at the 
mathematics of it all, that three times nothing will still be 
nothing. Nothing new in job creation from the Liberal members 
opposite. 
 
(2100) 
 
Our throne speech outlines many ways that we can create a 
positive climate for renewal -- the tourism authority Act; the 
trade development corporations Act managing all provincial 
export marketing services; a research and technology 
commercialization plan supporting product and process 
development for internal market opportunities; a transportation 
policy council; the new Saskatchewan opportunities 
corporation Act to replace SEDCO with a new corporation 
that's mandate is focused and defined and that is accountable to 
the Legislative Assembly. An information technology and 
telecommunication 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

strategy committee is already at work to make sure 
Saskatchewan benefits from the electronic highway project. 
These are just to name but a few initiatives that will help us to 
maintain the lowest unemployment rate in the country. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that many of my colleagues can tell you 
of the projects in their constituencies that have been put in 
place through the hard work and dedication of the people of 
their constituencies and of the small businesses in 
Saskatchewan. We've heard some of them this evening and 
they restore my confidence and faith in the spirit of cooperation 
and community that is now renewed throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I look back to Tommy's first term 50 years ago that was 
based on a campaign slogan "Humanity First". Clarence Fines, 
a man whose life we celebrated and honoured in the 
condolence motion earlier this week, made sure that the budget 
of that term reflected this slogan. 
 
In his budget speech on March 14, 1945, Mr. Fines said: 
 

What we require today is a revolution in our attitude 
toward the purpose of public finance. The budget, rather 
than a monetary budget alone, must also become a human 
budget. Such a budget is one that I have presented to you 
tonight. 

 
That human budget included medical, dental, hospital, and 
nursing services for old age and blind pensioners, and mother's 
allowance recipients and their dependants. It provided free 
books to school children in grades 1 to 8, where formerly only 
readers were given to the grade 6's. 
 
In monetary terms, Fines succeeded not only in restoring the 
province's credit standing but also in the successful financing 
of public development and socialized undertakings as set out in 
the 1945 budget. 
 
When he presented his last budget in 1960, 15 years later, Fines 
reported that it was his 16th balanced budget and the province 
would be out of the debt, the Liberal and Tory debt that they 
inherited, by the end of that fiscal year -- 15 years to get out of 
the debt. 
 
With that information, we can see that there is not much that 
has changed today. Our last budget, we put a human face on the 
budgeting process of Saskatchewan once again. We are once 
again getting the province out of the mess of the last 10 years 
and we will by the end of our term, balance the budget in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the tradition of Tommy and Fines and other social 
democrats, our session too puts a human face on the issues of 
children and families and our youth. It updates labour 
legislation to reflect the growing number of women in the 
workplace, single parents in the paid labour force. The 
amendments to The Labour Standards Act will have greatest 
benefit for the 70,000 

people working in Saskatchewan's lowest wage jobs, most of 
whom are women and young people in our province. 
 
Amendments to The Trade Union Act will encourage a healthy 
climate for job creation and economic development. 
 
As I looked over the work of our last session, with the 
improvements to The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 
Workers' Compensation Act, I came across two interesting 
facts, one that has already been mentioned by our member from 
Yorkton, but I think it's worth repeating. It was a quote from 
the Leader of the Liberal Party in December 22 issue of the 
Yorkton This Week, and she was quoted as saying: What are 
these yahoos . . . Now the respect to people in a democratic 
process and represented people in these chambers being called 
yahoo was enough to make me take note and say, where's the 
respect for democracy? 
 
But then I was completely shocked when she went on to say: 
"What are these yahoos doing dealing with legislation that's 
completely irrelevant?" Irrelevant to the working conditions of 
over 70,000 people in the lowest paid working jobs in this 
province? -- shocking and shameful to the people of this 
province. 
 
Then I also noted that she went on to vote with the PCs 
(Progressive Conservative) against the amendments to The 
Workers' Compensation Act, the changes in the Act that would 
better protect workers and improve the compensation process. 
 
This from a party that says they have a program to put people 
to work with safety and dignity. But at least it clarifies for me, 
Mr. Speaker, why three Liberals are needed on the opposite 
side of this Chamber. There's one to argue one side of an issue, 
another to argue the other side of an issue, and one to sit on the 
fence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- Typical Liberals. This was an onerous task 
for only one member to carry all three of these in the last year, 
but she did quite a job of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this International Year of the Family it is very 
important that we pass amendments to legislation which will 
improve the working conditions faced by Saskatchewan people. 
It will be interesting to see what the members opposite have 
planned, but it sounds to me like after the speech from the 
leader opposite, that I know what the plans are. She's going to 
collapse to the corporate agenda that says, I'm going to take my 
ball and go elsewhere. She's going to collapse to the corporate 
agenda because those are where the donations come for the 
Liberal Party, and she's going to forget the harm and the hurt 
that the Liberal Party put upon this province and the country 
when the Liberals passed NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement) in the federal legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The left-wing out of office; the 
right-wing in office. 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

Ms. Hamilton: -- That's the way it goes for the Liberals, who 
said that they would be able to congratulate people when they 
do a good job and then totally ignore the growth in the six 
sectors of the economy that were mentioned by the member 
from Meadow Lake. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have a plan to assist 
families. We will continue the action plan for children, 
focusing on prevention and support for Saskatchewan's 
families. The Ombudsman Act will establish a children's 
advocate. Legislation will accommodate the expansion of the 
Unified Family Court on a province-wide basis. The victims of 
domestic violence Act will provide remedies to address 
situations of immediate danger and minimize disruption to the 
victims' lives. We have a plan for the people of Saskatchewan, 
to enhance their lives and provide better quality for everyone's 
lives. 
 
And that brings me to talk about the issue of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Much has been said about what we have been 
doing in health care. And I want to say, what have we been 
doing in health care? We've reduced 400 governance boards, 
many of them overlapping in their boundaries and jurisdictions 
and responsibilities, to 30 health districts, and created an 
integrated, streamlined system which will give us more for our 
health dollars. We have decentralized the decision-making 
process -- a fact that clearly respects individual communities' 
needs to make their own decisions. We are now stressing taking 
a personal and local responsibility for health. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is a smart move for it is ultimately up to each and 
every one of us to play a part, to make changes to meet the 
future, whether or not it is in health, agriculture or social 
services. 
 
We have a lot to be thankful for in the legacy of Mr. Douglas 
and his government, who provided the road map for our path 
and our way and our journey of renewal. We have a lot to be 
thankful for in the health system that he developed and 
sponsored and drew up, that was going to be publicly 
administered, publicly funded, and would protect universality 
for all people. 
 
And we're moving forward to protect those principles of 
medicare. A health care system, a system based on a 
philosophy -- the wellness model. Thirty new health districts 
empowering Saskatchewan people, communities and health 
professionals to plan and deliver services to best meet their 
community's needs. It's not been easy. 
 
In the same way that a parent can set standards and provide 
principles and, most often, some financing to their teens and 
children coming of age, we must now, after we've set the 
standards that have been there for years and years in the 
province of Saskatchewan and updated them, set the principles 
in motion for the second stage or the second generation of 
health care. We now must let those district boards become 
autonomous bodies to manage the affairs of their own lives. 
 
In the case of the health districts, there are some who 

feel we should be managing the districts ourselves, and that we 
would know better from a distance how to best provide a good 
quality of health care for everyone. But we know that 
individuals who are close to home, close to their families, and 
close to those they serve on the district health boards are the 
best equipped to make decisions based on community needs 
and to move their districts to programs and services that will 
make their communities healthier. Not a health system focused 
on illness and treatment, but a system based on the philosophy 
of prevention and healthy public policy in all aspects of our 
lives. 
 
Change is difficult for anyone, but history will record the 
courage of those today who are reorganizing and reordering 
health care so that we would once again be looked on as the 
saviours of medicare for not only this province but this country. 
There are others that would see it collapse under the burden of 
the weight of the system that had been delivered up to date. 
And we are not prepared to let health care become one system, 
a private system, for those of wealth, and the rest of us stand in 
line and wait for what's left after that process is done. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's because of these important steps, steps in 
job creation, steps in protecting the families and the working 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, steps that I care 
deeply about and that mean so much to the people that I 
represent, it's because of this I support the throne speech. I'm in 
favour of the strong foundations it lays down. I'm delighted 
with the journey of renewal described by Her Honour, the 
journey we began over two years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the great folk-singer, Woodie Guthrie, has a song 
called "Hard Travellin'". The recurring refrain in that song is: 
"I've been doing some hard travelling . . . way down the road." 
It's a good song. I'm not sure anyone would like me to open up 
with a rendition of it right now. But the people of 
Saskatchewan have done some awfully hard travelling in the 
past few years. They have stood by us and we are thankful for 
their courage and their dedication to renewal of Saskatchewan. 
 
They saw the Conservatives come forward and say, follow me, 
follow us down the path. And they knew that the ordinary 
people of Saskatchewan were the casualties along the way. 
They've seen the Liberals come along and say, follow us, and 
then go off in three different directions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan see that the 
New Democrats are the ones who have regained the path 
mapped out by those generations before us, the ones who hit 
the beaches on D-Day and the ones at home who began the 
rebuilding of Saskatchewan -- Tommy, Woodrow, Clarence 
Fines, and Charlie Cuming, a CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) MLA from 1944 who's still living 
in Regina. 
 
Those pioneers set the way for us so that we can prepare for our 
children and the generations after 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

them. Our accomplishments will be their legacy. And if we 
value what they record of us in history, we will leave them with 
more than we found. 
 
I believe we have a good chance to do that. I believe we are on 
the right track. I believe we have a document which trumpets 
an equal measure of progress, justice, and compassion. And as 
many speakers before me have said, we can't have one unless 
we have them all. 
 
So because I believe our vision is clear, we have the people of 
Saskatchewan to help us with their compassion and their 
cooperation along the way, there is a promise of success at the 
end, and I am happy to support the motion before us on the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, I am privileged to be once more 
taking part in the debate on the Speech from the Throne. This is 
my fourth such debate. And although I am still a rookie in the 
House, I am more and more comfortable with the House and 
with the government and its plans as reaffirmed in the throne 
speech and my part in the plan. I am more than comfortable 
actually; I am thrilled that we are on the right track and that the 
journey of renewal is well under way and its successful 
completion is now in view. 
 
A well-known phrase of John Kennedy's pops into my head: a 
journey of a thousand miles begins with a first step. We are 
well past that first step, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
congratulate the members from Regina Lake Centre, a good 
friend of mine, and the member from Biggar for their eloquent 
discussions on the throne speech and its implications. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- I want to join my colleagues in the legislature 
in welcoming our newest rookie, the member from Regina 
North West. I know she will find this Assembly rewarding and 
challenging. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to wish you well as we begin a new 
session as head parliamentarian and lion tamer extraordinaire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said last session during the debate, I'm proud 
to represent the people of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I want to 
congratulate my small-business people who in the last three 
years have hung in there through thick and thin and now are 
beginning to tell me, when I go down Main Street, that things 
are getting better. 
 
I want to congratulate my health workers who have worked so 
diligently in the health reform. I can tell you that if it wasn't for 
the health workers -- and not only 

working during their working day but their volunteer work that 
they have done -- our Twin Rivers Health District would not be 
in the state that it's in today. 
 
I want to congratulate the farmers of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
We have farmers that have begun diversification years ago and 
they are continuing on this path. And we grow some of the best 
pulse crops in the province. 
 
I also want to tell you that we have the most innovative and 
dedicated educators, right from K to the college level. 
 
And also the seniors, the seniors who I enjoy so much, the 
seniors who give me so much good advice. These are the 
people that keep me going when the days are getting tough. 
They come and they say, keep on working hard for us; we need 
you there. Thank you to all the seniors in my constituency. 
 
And the children. I can tell you, members of this House, I was 
an educator for 23 years and I appreciate the children in my 
constituency. They are a great inspiration to me most days 
when you get down. 
 
I am particularly proud at this point of our first term because 
the hard work is beginning to pay off. The sacrifices that all the 
people of Saskatchewan have made are proving to be 
worthwhile, as we knew they would be. As the mover and the 
seconder said, we have restored fiscal integrity in government. 
Instead of going $1 billion into a hole, into a black hole, we are 
nearly to our announced target of a balanced budget in 1996. 
When we reach that goal -- and we will -- and when deficit 
budgets become a thing of the past, that all that will remain is a 
simple task of paying off that $16 billion. Now that's another 
journey, an even longer one. But we will take the first step for 
that one too. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have restored fiscal integrity without 
increasing the suffering of those least able to protect 
themselves. Others have mentioned this but I would like to go 
into a bit of detail because I want to assure people that there is 
a difference between governments and there is a difference 
between politicians. 
 
My constituency borders Alberta. My constituents live with the 
constant barrage of how much cheaper things are in Alberta. 
Alberta has no sales tax; Alberta has oil; Alberta has Gretzky; 
Alberta has the West Edmonton Mall; and so on. But, Mr. 
Speaker, Alberta also has Peter Pocklington and he got rid of 
Gretzky, and also has a government now with an attitude that 
makes Peter Pocklington look like Santa Claus. 
 
Don't get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, I love to visit Alberta and 
have many friends there, but I live on the correct, the 
compassionate side of the border. In Saskatchewan we have 
reduced spending across the board but we have not cut social 
spending; rather we have increased it. In Alberta the Klein 
government has cut social services by 18 per cent, where rates 
were already among the lowest in Canada; has increased 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

also the number of free bus tickets out of Alberta however. 
 
The Alberta government is fighting its deficit by cutting child 
care subsidies by 20 per cent. It's cutting its health budget by 
nearly 18 per cent, with hospitals in Calgary and Edmonton 
facing close to 30 per cent cuts. These health care cuts are 
simply slashes off the budget. There are no reforms, my 
friends, no adjustments, no realignments -- just cuts. 
 
We announced in the throne speech an action plan for children 
with the creation of a child's advocate. Alberta is cutting 
kindergarten funding by 50 per cent this year. And just think 
what it'll mean next year when families have to pay 8 to 900 
per cent to send their children to kindergarten. You know who 
will be suffering -- it's the children. Native education is being 
cut by 7.5 per cent. Home education is being cut by 50 per cent. 
 
In Saskatchewan we are working to get more and more 
individuals and organizations involved in the decisions that 
affect their lives. Our government is open, collaborative, and 
cooperative. 
 
In Alberta the government has taken over complete control of 
all education administration from the local boards. All 
decisions will now be made in Edmonton to the extent that 
local boards will not be able to tax, and also all directors and 
superintendents will be hired directly from Edmonton. All this 
in free enterprise, individualistic Alberta. 
 
Just goes to prove what I have always known. Our government 
is different. We confront our problems with a compassionate, 
cooperative approach -- our approach which attempts to 
consider all people, not just the fortunate few. 
 
And we should not just mention Tory governments, Mr. 
Speaker. Other governments have budget problems and are 
trying to solve them. The Liberal government in New 
Brunswick, for instance, in a spasm of participatory democracy, 
took over complete control of its health system, abolishing 
hospital boards and centralizing all activities in its hand. God 
forbid that the people have a say in what their money is going 
to be used for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while we are talking of courage and 
sacrifices and hard choices and leadership, what, whatever are 
we to make of the federal Liberal government's cave-in to the 
smugglers and dope kings of Ontario and Quebec? As a parent 
and a tax-abiding citizen and a taxpaying citizen all of my life, 
I am absolutely mortified. I'm not often speechless, as my 
colleagues know, but it almost makes me speechless. 
 
But here I think I'd better move on to more pleasant subjects. 
My point is, the Saskatchewan New Democratic government 
has acted quite decisively; quite courageously acted in concert 
with the people it represents. This session has been hard, but it 
has, as Her Honour said, marked a renewal of hope for the 
people of Saskatchewan. We have tackled adversity 

with innovation, initiative, and with compassion. 
 
And I would add to what Her Honour said, we have acted in the 
honourable tradition of previous New Democratic 
governments. The Douglas government brought in 
hospitalization and then universal health care. The Blakeney 
government created the fiscal security to carry on with 
medicare and expand its health programs. In that great 
tradition, this current government has instituted the wellness 
model -- an innovative and as necessary and appropriate in 
today's society as medicare was in the decade of the 1960s. 
 
If you can imagine, in the first term of the Douglas government 
they introduced paid holiday time -- a startling innovation in its 
time. And who would do without paid holiday time today? 
Allan Blakeney undid seven years of Liberal heavy-handedness 
by creating both The Trade Union Act and The Labour 
Standards Act, which we will be amending this session. 
 
Those Bills were to their time what the holiday pay was to an 
earlier time what our amendments to the workmen's 
compensation Act and Occupational Health and Safety Act are 
today. Courageous, necessary moves by all three governments. 
 
And as the member from Regina Lake Centre said, we have 
acted forcefully and strongly for the family and for those 
individuals marginalized by society. We are working on 
wellness across the board. And as many of the speakers have 
said in the last few days, much of wellness depends on a secure 
economy. 
 
And here too there is much to be pleased about. Good things 
are happening across the province. And in my constituency of 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster we have the rural district health board 
just finishing an assessment evaluation of our services. What is 
exciting about it is we are able to tell where we are doing well. 
We're able to also tell that in the ages of 6 months to 19 years, 
our people are underserviced. 
 
We are going to have to work hard to provide better services, 
better counselling, better services for teenagers, all kinds of 
services. And the health board is beginning an initiative in this 
area and I just ask the members to watch what will be 
happening in our constituency. 
 
The city of Lloydminster is ready to go. They have to have an 
agreement with both the province of Saskatchewan and the 
province of Alberta. There has to be a memorandum of 
understanding, but the folks in Lloydminster have been ready 
and their health professionals are ready to go in their district 
also. 
 
On the agricultural front -- pardon me, I seem to have a marble 
in my mouth -- I was very interested in the remarks on 
diversification made by the member from Biggar. I noticed as 
well that he participated in the debate on the west coast lockout 
and talked about the Wheat Board. 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

What I also noticed was that the Liberal member from 
Shaunavon did not speak in the debate. That surprised me. I'm 
sure his constituents expect to hear from him on agricultural 
matters as they once did. 
 
They want to hear him comment, as he did in Hansard on 
March 3 last year, speaking in favour of the Canadian Wheat 
Board, and I quote: 
 

And I look . . . the private member from the constituency of 
Greystone, her comments on the Canadian Wheat Board. 
And I quote: (from The Western Producer, she) . . . has at 
times been critical of the degree of control exercised by the 
Wheat Board over the grain marketing system. She says 
Saskatchewan must be more self-reliant and farmers should 
be more directly involved in marketing their own crops. 

 
That (says the member from Shaunavon) isn't what I hear 
farmers saying. It must be different farmers writing to 
members opposite than what deal with myself on a daily 
basis because they're not saying that. 

 
So once the member from Shaunavon supported the Canadian 
Wheat Board and single-desk marketing. I'm sure those same 
farmers who wrote him last year expect his continued support 
of the Wheat Board as do many farmers from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
And as I said previously, our ability to bring in and carry on 
necessary innovations depends on a healthy economy. Bills, 
after all, must be paid. And I'm happy to say that the indicators 
are good -- modest but hopeful. 
 
The Partnership for Renewal is working, contrary to what the 
members opposite said tonight. The Conference Board of 
Canada predicts that Saskatchewan's economic growth will 
exceed that of the national economy in 1993. Its forecast has 
been . . . remember these are not our statistics; this is the 
Conference Board. Its forecast has been revised upward to 3.9 
per cent from 1.7 per cent. The board also predicts that 
Saskatchewan will post an average annual growth of 2.3 per 
cent from 1995 to 1997. Not spectacular, but it is better to grow 
than to shrink. 
 
(2130) 
 
From January to October, manufacturing grew by 5 per cent. 
Crude oil production is up by 9.2 per cent and uranium sales 
are up 14.9 per cent. In the area of Lloydminster, drilling has 
increased. In 1992 we drilled 149 wells; 1993, 407 wells. And 
the total for the province, 1992, 837 wells; and this year, 
provincially, 2,274 wells. Good news for the oilfield. 
 
Tourism inquiries increased in 1993 by 28.6 per cent, and it 
will be even more enhanced by the cooperation coming about 
from the tourism authority Act announced in the throne speech. 
Mr. Speaker, restaurant receipts are up, retail sales are up, even 
catering services are up. 

The key word in all these statistics is up. Not off the board, but 
up -- slowly, steadily rising. And we have said over and over 
that we are not after the spectacular. We had enough of boom 
and bust economies in our history. Rather we want to establish 
a framework which will provide sensible, slow, steady, and 
viable growth. Mr. Speaker, we are doing that. 
 
I want to mention two things quickly in my own constituency. 
Cut Knife will soon have operating an oil and solvent recycling 
plant. The construction of the building has been done mostly by 
local workers using local materials, and it will employ mostly 
local people as it processes and recycles 400 barrels of oil and 
400 barrels of solvent every day. And Morgan HydroCarbon 
Inc. has discovered a new heavy oil pool at Rutland. Start-up of 
a 5,000-barrel-a-day facility is planned for the second quarter 
of 1994. Good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues, the cabinet 
ministers, and the Premier for all the efforts and assistance they 
have provided in my constituency. In the past two years every 
cabinet minister has been in my constituency, some two or 
three times. And the two that haven't, we have made 
appointments to do so in the next few months. That is an 
incredible feat when you realize the distance that Lloydminster 
and my area is from Regina. 
 
Never has one of my colleagues or cabinet ministers refused to 
meet with constituents when I requested a meeting. This 
government does not only talk of open, accountable 
government, it lives it. You do not . . . If there is someone in 
the House that doesn't believe me, ask my local media in 
Lloydminster or the city council in Lloydminster how many 
ministers have visited from the Alberta side versus the 
Saskatchewan side. 
 
I'm honoured to have this opportunity to speak in the throne 
speech debate. I'm sorry to say that I have heard that in certain 
quarters folks think that these speeches are a waste of time. 
Well let me assure you that I believe in our parliamentary 
traditions. This House is a symbol of the democratic process 
which I value highly. If you listen to my speeches or read them, 
you will realize that I mean every word that I say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- Where else do people have this chance, except 
in a democratic system such as ours. And it is very rare in the 
world, I am told by Mr. Blakeney, a past premier of this 
province. He said to me the other day, Violet, there's only eight 
democracies like ours out of 146 countries. And I agree with 
him. 
 
Democratic reform is important, but believing in the basic 
democratic principles we have followed is the first step towards 
reform. If one does not believe in this House and the basic 
principles that developed our parliamentary system, how can 
one speak of 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

reforming it? People who do not think this House is worthwhile 
do not have the patience to listen to others' opinion. Good 
debate -- notice I said, good debate -- provokes thought, and 
thought is the first step to establishing policy. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we have taken our first steps on 
our journey of renewal. The people of Saskatchewan, in 
cooperation with the government, have set a course to financial 
freedom thereby giving us the choices we need to create a 
society that is just and equitable. 
 
Because I believe the journey of renewal is the right one to 
take, I am proud to support the motion in support of the throne 
from the . . . throne speech. I always get mixed up on that. I'm 
going to read that. I am proud to support the motion in support 
of the throne speech. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank my 
colleagues for their support at this time. I want to congratulate 
the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster on an excellent 
presentation and I know you speak from the heart, and I very 
much value your contribution to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Before I get rolling, Mr. Speaker, I do want to of course 
commend you and the Deputy Speaker for the job that you have 
been doing to maintain order in this legislature. And I would be 
remiss if I didn't also commend the member for Moose Jaw 
Palliser, when the House goes into Committee of the Whole, 
for the fine job that he does when he is in the Chair. 
 
I want to deal tonight, Mr. Speaker, with an issue that has 
received a fair amount of attention in recent weeks. And it's an 
issue that I haven't heard anyone frontally deal with -- I 
apologize if somebody did -- in their speeches. But the issue I 
want to deal with is that of ministerial assistants' pay raises and 
the manner in which ministerial assistants are paid. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, there has been no shortage of ink, 
there's been no shortage of reports on the television. I hear 
colleagues saying no shortage of misinformation, and frankly 
it's a view that I share and that's why I wish to address it right 
now. 
 
Men and women who work in the public or work for 
corporations, work particularly where there is a collective 
agreement, where there's a union to speak out on their behalf, 
will be very much aware that for many decades now they've 
had the option of seeking a reclassification of the work they do. 
In a reclassification of work, there's no magic to it. Virtually 
every job that I, and I suspect many, many . . . most other 
working people have had, you get hired to do a job and you go 
learn the job; you do the best you can and sometimes you even 
get acknowledged for doing a good job. And lo and behold, you 
get other duties piled on. 

And over a period of time -- it may be months, it may be 
years -- but the job evolves and you often wind up doing 
something significantly different than what you were hired for. 
In the absence of applying for a different job -- that being the 
job that you're doing at the moment -- there is reclassification 
for working people to request. 
 
And it's not unreasonable. Not all reclassification requests are 
granted in the affirmative. That's certainly patently obvious to 
working people. Just because you request a reclassification 
doesn't mean you're going to get what, in your heart, you know 
is fair. 
 
I don't mean to denigrate any former bosses I may have had, 
but at times, even as good as they were, they didn't recognize 
the inherent value of my work to the extent that I would have 
liked them to. And I do want to stress I'm not denigrating any 
of my former bosses. Others would argue that they recognized 
the work that I was doing all too well. And in fact, I deserved a 
reclass but in the opposite direction that I thought I did. 
 
The situation with respect to ministerial assistants, Mr. 
Speaker, was somewhat different in that we formed a 
government after the general election in October of 1991, and 
what initially you have to do is, of course, you get sworn in and 
the Premier chooses and has his cabinet sworn in, and the 
cabinet ministers then say, oh, we've got this huge job. We've 
got a million people, all kinds of agencies and Crown 
corporations and people demanding answers. 
 
And of course as an individual, a cabinet minister cannot 
possibly keep up to even just answering the phone in their 
office. If the minister were to try and answer every single call 
that came in, they would, I think, have a great deal of difficulty 
to put it mildly. So ministers then hire staff. And this happens 
everywhere. 
 
But what we found was that there was no guidelines set up for 
ministerial offices in terms of how many ministerial assistants 
they could have, in terms of how the hiring process would take 
place. There was no guidelines in terms of, well here's the 
ministerial pay, here's the scale, here's what is normal. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what the situation was, was that the 
exception was the rule. And I know that sounds absurd, but 
frankly that was the position -- it was absurd. 
 
I recall in my years in opposition in Crown Corporations 
Committee asking several ministers about a particular 
individual that was working out of the then premier's office and 
yet paid for by Saskatchewan Transportation Company. And lo 
and behold, nobody at STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) even knew this individual. He clearly never worked 
there but worked directly out of the then premier, the member 
for Estevan's office, and was paid for by STC. 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

Now clearly this is not right. Nobody would deny that a 
premier requires aides. Nobody would deny that a premier 
needs staff nor that cabinet ministers need staff to operate their 
office. In fact I think people tend to complain bitterly if the 
Premier or the cabinet don't respond when they're called upon. 
So we accept that the Premier and the cabinet ministers need 
staff. 
 
In light of the milieu, the lack of rules that there was in October 
of 1991, ministers hired ministerial assistants, staffed up their 
offices within the guidelines that our government set up, the 
initial guidelines. And I have to stress they were initial. There 
was an awful lot more to think about in October of 1991, an 
awful lot more to think about than gee, what should the 
fine-tuned pay scale be; or what should the fine-tuned 
conditions of work be; what should the fine-tuned regulations 
around ministerial assistants be? 
 
(2145) 
 
So the offices were staffed up. Of course pay had to be agreed 
to. I think there's very, very few people I know that would 
agree to work for -- I'm going to choose the Minister of Energy 
because I have a liking for him and he can hear my remarks 
firsthand -- but nobody would even work for the Minister of 
Energy without knowing what they're going to be paid, at least 
in pretty general terms. They'd have to know if the pay range 
was going to be a dollar a day or a hundred dollars a day or 
whatever. So the hiring took place. 
 
The initial problem that the government had, outside of simply 
what to pay ministerial assistants and how many ministerial 
assistants to hire, the initial problem was how on earth to 
finance next month's payroll, the December payroll; how to 
keep the bills paid; how to get the creditors to in fact lend the 
money that we required at that particular moment. 
 
And of course that issue got dealt with. We were on the very 
edge of the financial cliff and we're probably back a few feet 
from the edge of that cliff, although it's still a pretty precarious 
situation. 
 
But subsequent to that, the government had an opportunity to 
lay out very specific regulations, to lay out a very specific chart 
with respect to the pay that ministerial assistants would have. 
And the government said, all ministerial assistants will be hired 
at the bottom of their range and they'll move through five steps. 
They'll get an increment worth roughly 4 per cent per year in 
each of the five years and they will not participate in any other 
economic gain. 
 
So there's an increment system which . . . I have always worked 
under an increment system outside of the government and it 
strikes me as quite a logical thing for us to have here. The 
alternative of course that we could have followed would have 
been simply to hire people at more than market value and paid 
them too much right from the beginning. Overpay somebody 
and then you don't have to give them an increase, but I don't 
think that very many of us would agree 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina North West in fact used 
this in the by-election campaign, and I don't think I fault the 
new member for having not spread things with as much 
accuracy as indeed could have been. Indeed I think the new 
member from Regina North West got a very bad briefing from 
her leader. I think a very, very bad briefing, as a result of which 
I saw during the campaign, a letter saying that if you were a 
ministerial assistant, you would have received a twelve and a 
half per cent pay raise. 
 
Well I've got some very good friends who are ministerial 
assistants and the only difference in their pay cheque now from 
when they were hired -- in one instance 13 or 14 months 
ago -- the only difference in that ministerial assistant's cheque 
is that we have taken more deductions by way of taxes so the 
take-home pay is less. The gross amount of the cheque is 
identical to the day that that ministerial assistant was hired, and 
that is common throughout the ministerial assistant ranks. 
There were fewer than 20 ministerial assistants that got 
reclassifications, and the pay raises, I'm told, averaged right 
about two and a half per cent. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I get somewhat confused when we talk about 
this because the Leader of the Third Party is fond of talking 
about the new politics, the new politics. And I don't understand 
how it is that when three secretaries receive a reclassification 
and receive a modest increase that this is somehow to be 
attacked. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Third Party in fact 
received a reclassification not very long ago -- received a 
reclassification by virtue of, as soon as the Leader of the Third 
Party got another member, under the rules of the Legislative 
Assembly the Leader of the Third Party was reclassified and 
because that leader had to supervise now one more person, a 
colleague, that leader was entitled to a reclassification and in 
fact took a reclassification of 17 per cent. 
 
I'm not, Mr. Speaker, arguing that the Leader of the Third Party 
should not have accepted a reclassification. The rules of the 
legislature -- the rules of pay for members right from the 
Premier to back-benchers -- the rules are very clear. And 
clearly under the rules, and the way that we're paid, you get a 
reclassification under certain conditions. If I were to be named 
a cabinet minister, I would receive some additional stipend. 
 
But it really strikes me odd that in this new politics, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Leader of the Third Party would decry three 
women who got a reclassification -- three secretaries who got a 
reclassification would get blown up all out of proportion. And 
this is somehow terrible and yet, within the same new politics, 
it is perfectly all right for the Leader of the Third Party to take 
and grab a 17 per cent pay raise. I think that's hypocritical. And 
I just haven't quite squared this old and this new politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had earlier today . . . just before question 
period it is customary that we would introduce guests, and I 
was pleased that the Leader of 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

the Third Party had invited former members of the legislature 
to be in attendance for question period and, I understand, when 
the Leader of the Third Party spoke in her response to the 
Speech from the Throne. I am always pleased to see former 
members interested, involved, part of the proceedings, and 
indeed acknowledged for the role that they have played in the 
past. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, again I get confused between the new 
politics that the Leader of the Liberal Party is so fond of talking 
about, and the actions; because you see, Mr. Speaker, after the 
former MLAs were introduced, the Leader of the Third Party 
then introduced what was called a family of . . . the Liberal 
family in the gallery. And you know, I hear that amongst this 
elite family of Liberals there was a person there that is known 
to have been none other than a major adviser to the former 
Devine government, a former adviser . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I think the member knows full well he 
is not to refer to members by their last name in this House. 
Previous government. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I gather I didn't talk of 
the member for Estevan. I apologize for that error. 
 
The bagman, the bagman for the former Progressive 
Conservative government, the Regina bagman, was 
introduced -- this is part of the new politics -- but was 
introduced as part of the Liberal family. 
 
Now I don't know, it seems to me -- others will have to judge, 
Mr. Speaker -- but it seems to me, if we're talking new politics, 
let's get into new politics. If we're talking about this person that 
was introduced as part of the Liberal family, this bagman was 
the same person that organized for former cabinet ministers in 
that government, the former government, to have their liquor 
cabinets well stocked at taxpayers' expense. 
 
Maybe that's the new politics. I thought part of the new politics 
was to do away with that. We don't have any taxpayer liquor in 
ministers' offices nor in the Premier's office. Don't have it. Why 
should my constituents or yours or anyone else's pay for liquor? 
But I just struggle, Mr. Speaker, between the examples of the 
new and the old politics. 
 
Now I know that what I just spoke of is public knowledge 
because it was dealt with in Public Accounts. And the Leader 
of the Third Party was there when the Public Accounts . . . 
when that transpired. So I just struggle with how one could say 
this is the new politics when it's a senior adviser to the former 
government that was so thoroughly disgraced, so thoroughly 
ousted in the last . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. We have about three or four 
people speaking at the same time. And I only see one person 
standing, so I think we should give that person the opportunity 
to speak. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question I 

have is, in my mind is, why in the world would anyone 
knowing that this was the record, why would a leader of a party 
welcome a senior adviser of the former government with open 
arms and then have the audacity to say this is somehow the new 
politics? This is the new politics. 
 
I wonder . . . I'd love to believe that the Leader of the Third 
Party is sincere. I'd love to believe that the actions would 
somehow match the words. It just seems to be a bit problematic 
because the actions, Mr. Speaker, don't match the rhetoric. I 
think action should be straight up, straightforward, this is the 
direction we're going, and proceed. 
 
I don't think we need to dig up relics of the past, particularly 
relics of the past that clearly caused so much problem, that 
clearly led our province down a dismal prairie trail to the point 
where we were stuck in a mud hole. We weren't saying whoa, 
but we were sure stuck in a mud hole. And that is turning 
around and I'm pleased with that. But I just have trouble with 
the new politics and the old politics, trying to square it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am really proud of our government, of our 
government that it . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. Order. It now being 10 o'clock, this 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


