




















































Hansard: May 30, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2709 

 May 30, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair: -- As the last time the department was before the 

committee was April 29, I'll ask the minister to reintroduce the 

officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 

Les Cooke, who's seated here with me, associate deputy 

minister; Ross MacLennan, who's seated behind me, assistant 

deputy minister of operations; Don MacAulay, director of 

parks; Dennis Sherratt, who is director of wildlife, I believe 

seated . . . where?  Right to my left, in back.  And also Bruce 

Willard, who is the manager of the budget. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I look forward to questions from the opposition 

on issues concerning environment and resource management. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  Before we get going this evening, I think I should 

take this opportunity to recognize the fact that, although you 

were too modest to admit it, that the normal minister is not here 

with us tonight and that you're filling in for him.  And so I 

recognize that fact.  I also recognize the fact that you have 

capable officials around you and that you are a reasonably 

capable individual yourself, so I think that we will be able to . . 

. So, Mr. Minister, the reason I say that and I'm kind to you is 

that I hope you will reciprocate because I'm filling in for my 

colleague from Souris-Cannington as well, that could not be 

here for us this evening. 

 

So I'll be asking questions on his behalf to begin with, dealing 

with the Department of Environment and particularly dealing 

with questions surrounding the minister's office and some of 

the staff that are there.  These are fairly straightforward 

questions, Mr. Minister.  It's noted here that the minister's 

office has one staff member who is an intermediate secretary -- 

Barbara Laing by name -- who received, in what is our opinion, 

an unusually large increase in the past year.  She is reported as 

being hired in April '93 at a salary of $2,141.  That would be 

per month.  And now only a year later she is getting over $600 

a month more at 2,785.  And we're just wondering what would 

have prompted an increase like that in her salary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think this was a routine move from 

assistant secretary to minister's secretary, and with the new 

position the increase in salary. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Would this have increased her 

responsibilities?  And what about the steps?  Would you just go 

through that for me. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Actually if I could just get this note 

here.  My understanding is that Barb Laing was hired as an 

assistant secretary, and the minister's secretary, Ethel Korol, 

who was the minister's secretary, left and then Barb moved up 

into the minister's secretary.  So this is a usual approach if 

you're promoting within the office.  So it's not staying in the 

same position as assistant secretary and getting an increase; it's 

moving up to minister's secretary. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have a series 

of questions here, and I think what we'll do in the interests of 

time is to . . . I will read the question, and then I would like you 

to respond by making a commitment that in due course, which 

will mean tomorrow sometime or the day after, but we will be 

forthrightly getting the answers to these questions. 

 

First of all I would like to get your commitment to detail any 

expenses that the minister received last year, any expenses that 

he was paid for, and detail any travel undertaken by the 

minister in the past year, including costs, who accompanied the 

minister, and what the destination was, and the purpose of the 

trips that were taken, and whether these trips were in province 

or out of province -- the normal kind of questions that we 

would be asking.  And also detail any expenses paid to 

ministerial staff in the past year above and beyond their normal 

salaries, and then also detail any travel undertaken by staff, 

including costs per staff member, the total cost of the trip, the 

destination, and the purposes of the trip. 

 

Could you commit to that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  The officials say that all of 

this is standard answers and I'll get that for you, let's say, within 

a week.  I can probably get it quicker than that, and if you insist 

I could probably have it here tomorrow or the next day; but let's 

say in two days. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right.  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Minister.  As we know, there has been an amalgamation that 

occurred, and this was one of your strong points in your 

post-election rhetoric, that you were going to be saving the 

taxpayers so much money because of all the amalgamation and 

streamlining that you were going through.  How much do you 

estimate you have saved in combining the Department of 

Natural Resources with the Department of Environment and 

Public Safety? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  According to the officials, the 

amalgamation of Natural Resources, Environment and Public 

Safety, into the Environment and Resource Management saved 

the taxpayers about 1.4 million and this is the number that the 

officials had given to me. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: --  Okay.  The 1.4 million then, could you 

describe what this would have been accrued to?  What was 

responsible for the saving mainly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Two main areas, I'm told, 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

where the savings occurred:  within our government we have 

established a criteria of each minister's office having three MAs 

(ministerial assistants) at different levels and three secretaries, 

so in that area you would amalgamate and save a total of six 

individuals' salaries and expenses.  That's one area. 

 

And also in the actual administration of the department where 

the other savings occurred in the management sector of lower, 

middle, and senior management positions.  And then of course 

the simple mechanism of continuing to run what would be a 

head office for a department, just the location and actual having 

bodies doing common administration work.  So it's mainly in 

the administration work. 

 

We feel that in terms of service to the public that, if anything, 

we have enhanced that area and we don't see any lessening of 

service to the public. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well any time I think that a government can 

reduce the amount of bureaucracy and enhance services, that's a 

ticket to success.  However, like always, there's a however and 

a but involved in questions.  So we saved 1.4 million. 

 

Now let's take a bit of a look about personnel and 

administration that you were just talking about.  Now the 

information that I have here is that you had in-scope, temporary 

personnel . . . we're talking about in-scope, temporary 

personnel, is reported to us as being 222.  Is this the number as 

of March 31 or the total for the year, is one of the questions.  

And if it is only of March 31, then I want to know what is the 

total for the year. 

 

And why did you spend $9.4 million on these employees this 

year when the combined spending last year -- and I'm taking 

now when the two departments were separate.  We added 

together what was spent last year -- last year the combined 

spending on these folks was 1.7 million.  This year under your 

combined, amalgamated process, it's 9.4 million that was spent 

on these 222 employees.  Could you give me a reaction on that?  

And I've told you how we get our math on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I just need more detail because 

what . . . the numbers you're using of comparing a number of 

1.7 million one year and 9 million another year, there's 

something not quite right, and obviously we're either including 

a number of different positions or different programs in order 

to come up with that number.  But let me . . . could you just 

reword the question so I know exactly what it is that you're 

asking? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It's reported to us that you have in-scope, 

temporary personnel this year -- 222 of them -- and that when 

you add up the amount of money paid to those personnel, it was 

$9.4 million this year.  Last year when we took a look at the 

personnel in the pre-amalgamation year, the figure we come to 

is $1.7 million.  And the sum is so vastly different that that is 

what is prompting us to ask the question.  The number . . . first 

of all, perhaps what we 

should do is, so we that we know where we're talking about 

apples and oranges, what is your number of in-scope temporary 

personnel for this year that you brought? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I want to do for the member is 

I've got the number here for this year and the combined 

services, and you're right the number is 222 in-scope temp and 

casual labour services at 9.4 million.  But what I don't have is 

where you're getting the 1.7 from and whether this is one area 

and you're not adding both together from last year because 

there's no possible way that there could be that kind of a 

discrepancy.  But I need to go back, and I'll get my officials to 

do that right now, checking to make sure that we're comparing 

apples and apples and not apples to oranges because this has 

got to be two very different groupings of numbers to get that 

kind of a discrepancy.  But let me go back and re-add the 

numbers on those two positions because obviously in the 

combination of the two departments there's some discrepancy 

there. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And that is what I said before, Mr. Minister, is 

prompting us to ask that particular question.  At least our 222 

and the 9.4 are jibing.  Now what we have to do then is 

ascertain whether my figure of 1.7 million for those same folks 

in the two previous departments added together is also 

accurate.  And that begs the question: why the big difference in 

spending? 

 

Let's try something else . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All 

right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- . . . for the minister, I can send staff 

back to the office and we can dig that out for you tonight or I 

could do what we have done with the previous one and that's 

get the answer for you on this one.  I'm sure we can round 

something up for tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, that will be all right.  And if there's a 

tremendous hue and cry that should be created I'll do that in 

question period with a lot of pleasure. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And gusto. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And gusto. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year the combined -- now I'm talking of 

out-of-scope, permanent -- the combined out-of-scope 

permanent employees for the two departments was 233.  And 

this year the total of these employees according to our figures 

now are 217.  So the question now is: are we to take from that, 

that you only eliminated 16 managers out of scope, 16 

managers when you combined the departments at the same time 

that you eliminated nearly 40 in-scope positions?  Forty 

in-scope positions being eliminated, 16 managers, when you 

combined the departments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I think the member is 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

right, that the ratio is about that.  But if you compare that ratio 

to the general population within the department, it is still 

weighted towards reduction in management. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, likewise your combined 

spending on out-of-scope permanent employees last year was 

about $11 million; yet this year it's $15 million.  So how do you 

combine departments, get rid of some managers, and still wind 

up spending about 40 per cent more on their salaries?  Do you 

want me to go through those figures again . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . All right, if you're saying that there are some 

discrepancies here and you make the commitment that you go 

out and you'll come back and give us the answers to those, 

because these are figures that just jump out of the page at you, 

and I think an explanation would be in order . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . All right, then I'll take that as a commitment 

then, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, further, last year you reported combined 

personnel spending for the two departments.  Last year, before 

amalgamation, the combined personnel spending for the two 

departments was $36.6 million.  This year with the 

amalgamated department, with the amalgamated department, 

you are spending over $50 million on staff. 

 

Now I wonder how you could explain this?  Is the taxpayer 

then actually saving any money from these amalgamations?  

And your initial statement at the beginning was what a 

wonderful job you were doing in saving the taxpayer so much 

money through this amalgamation.  And what I'm seeing so far 

is that this may indeed and in fact not be the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well this goes back to your earlier 

question where these numbers that you're using from last year 

just don't, just don't jibe with what we've got here in front of us.  

So I've got to go back and I've got to go through all of them and 

find out where the discrepancy is. 

 

What we do know is that there's 71 fewer employees; 16 of 

them in management and I believe 40 of them in, about 40 of 

them in-scope, temporary or casual labour services.  And what 

I've got to go back is go through and add up these numbers and 

find out what is different about the numbers you are using.  

Because obviously you're right, there can't possibly be more 

money being spent on fewer people when in actuality there will 

absolutely be less because there are fewer people working in 

that area. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm not saying I'm right or that we are right, 

Mr. Minister.  All I'm saying is that our research staff has gone 

through these quite carefully and they were surprised enough at 

the discrepancies in the numbers that I thought it warranted 

asking those questions.  And we'll be looking forward then to 

the explanation that you will have to give us, why you could 

spend $50 million on staff this year with those many fewer 

individuals when you only spent 36.6 million combined last 

year before the amalgamation.  So that's where it stands then. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just let me give you one area where 

I can on the other which is basically forest fire.  Normally we 

spend about 2 million, 2.5 million, last year it was 6.9 so . . . 

but that isn't even one of the areas you raised. 

 

The areas that you raised where there is a discrepancy are on 

the actual areas where we've had a reduction in staff.  So this is 

where there's confusion in the numbers you're using, where 

you're adding up some numbers from last year and I don't have 

the same.  I don't have that list, so I don't know what you're 

referring to.  But what I will do is go back and I'll go through 

the personnel file and I'll make you a chart so that we can 

compare and show you exactly what happened in the two years, 

and how the amalgamation has affected both staffing and 

funding in those lines, so that we're comparing the same thing 

because obviously at this point we're not. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well the answer that you gave, Mr. Minister, 

on the forest fire component -- I wasn't going to ask this 

question but now that you raise that I'll ask it anyway -- it 

seems to us when we go through these figures of your 

personnel, there's a high change-over in the department on 

personnel, particularly on the non-permanent staff.  Why would 

that be?  Would part of the same answer apply to the increased 

numbers of forest fires that we experienced last year, and 

therefore had more people involved, and fewer right now?  

Would you attempt to answer that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well it's true in the area of forest 

fires, I guess it was early in the season when we spent an 

abundance of money on forest fires.  You remember the early 

spring last year.  And basically the extra spending here was 

hiring up, and more people being used, particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan, to fight forest fires.  So extra spending because 

of increased fire numbers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay and of course this year there's the added 

activity of fighting farm fires, and so on, as well in addition to 

the forest fires. 

 

I'm going to switch gears now, Mr. Minister.  We're still with 

the Department of Environment.  And in spite of my colleague, 

I'm going to resist the temptation to get into underground 

storage tanks, and we'll just bypass that particular topic for the 

time being, and go however into a topic that I'm in my own 

area getting a fair amount of response from -- and that is the 

issue of landfills. 

 

Now in fact, Mr. Minister, there are 900 -- I'm told -- 950 urban 

and rural landfill sites in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's 

also a fact that by 1997 50 per cent, half of those landfills, will 

be full, and obviously there's going to be a huge cost involved 

with building new sites and so on.  And I can attest to that.  As 

a former RM (rural municipality) councillor and so on, I was 

relegated to the task of finding a new landfill site.  And that is 

something that nobody really should have to do because, as you 

can imagine, everybody lines 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

up screaming that they want the landfill site on their land, as 

you can imagine, so that creates a problem in itself, and then 

the expense involved. 

 

Are you looking at extending the existing sites, developing new 

ones, or exactly what is your government considering to do 

with this problem in the very near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well actually the main objective 

that we are encouraging -- of course this is a matter of 

facilitation that the department plays here in working with 

municipalities -- but it is to minimize actually the amount of 

waste going into the landfill and extending life of existing 

landfills and then, as a last resort, actually expanding. 

 

For example, it's my understanding that Regina, for example, as 

a result of minimizing the amount of waste going into landfill, 

has recently extended the life of the landfill for a further 10 

years.  And for the second largest city in the province to be able 

to do that simply by minimizing the amount of waste entering 

the landfill area, I think these are the kinds of concepts that not 

only Saskatchewan but most jurisdictions are looking at in 

order to try to minimize, first of all, the amount of waste going 

into the landfill but also the amount of land being used up by 

landfills and of course, as you mentioned, the constant battle 

that goes on when new landfill sites are being looked at. 

 

And no matter how careful municipalities are in selection, site 

selection, or in the process of going through these processes, 

there is no easy way to start up new landfills that satisfy the 

interests of all the ratepayers in a municipality. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I have a couple more questions along that 

same topic.  And these questions come actually from members 

of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

and they've asked us to ask these questions.  And one statement 

was made: the government is going to have to show leadership 

and provide funds to help municipalities deal with this issue.  Is 

your government prepared to do anything along this way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As the member is probably aware, 

an announcement made last year of the regional landfill sites.  I 

don't know whether it's called an experiment, but at least a 

prototype system that is being used.  As I understand, my 

colleague from Shaunavon will know that one is being located 

in that area and one in Humboldt.  And to that end, the 

department has allocated $375,000 per annum in helping to get 

these established.  So there is that kind of assistance that is in 

place now. 

 

And of course this being a major issue for municipalities, and 

government, population at large, how we manage our waste . . . 

I guess we're blessed with the fact that we have a huge land 

area and only a million people, but even at that, one can very 

quickly begin to realize the huge dilemma that the vastly more 

populated coastal regions of the world have when dealing with 

waste. 

And so that's the program we have in place at this point in time.  

But we're very much in a mode of consulting with 

municipalities to always upgrade and improve our mechanism 

for disposal of waste. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You mentioned on a previous answer about 

minimizing wastes.  I'm not quite sure how you do that, 

whether you tell the householder to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Recycle. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Recycle.  All right, that's good.  I was coming 

to that, Mr. Minister.  If you do recycling, there's got to be a 

recycling strategy, and as such, there has to be some kind of 

assistance for many of these municipalities in order to 

accomplish this recycling and the like.  And yet, Mr. Minister, 

the budget, as I understand it, didn't make any allowances for 

this.  So is there any funding in place?  Is there any 

contemplation of helping the municipalities out in 

accomplishing this end? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member asks what areas people 

are looking at.  Of course, recycle and reusing and reducing are 

sort of the three R's of the environmental movement.  And I 

think if each of us in our own household think about ways that 

we can actually reduce and reuse and recycle, this is really 

where it starts. 

 

And if you listen to a futurist talk about the way that families 

can actually become involved in protecting the environment 

and the reduction in the amount of waste produced per 

household, it really is quite phenomenal, although it is almost 

too simplistic to believe.  But there are many, many ways that 

each of us in our own way can cut down on the amount of 

waste that is emitted from our households.  But as I mentioned, 

when it comes to some of the areas that we're working with 

municipal governments on, you'll know that the beverage 

recycling program, return program, which has been expanded 

significantly.  You'll be aware, as I mentioned, of the regional 

landfill concept which will go some distance to help with this 

program. 

 

One of my colleagues from Saskatoon recently, I think, 

announced or mentioned a paint recycling system in Saskatoon 

where people who have bits and pieces of paint left over after 

they're done painting projects, rather than leaving that paint sit 

in their basement and then throwing it in the garbage, there is a 

place now where you can take all of your paint and dispose of 

it, and it's reused in the manufacturing of other products. 

 

Another area that we're working with municipal government on 

at the present time is the recycling of oil, oil that had been 

either put in containers and dumped needlessly into the dump 

ground or possibly on our farms where we would simply pull 

the plug on our equipment and dump it on the ground in our 

fields.  All of these areas are really based in terms of the 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

family situation in Saskatchewan where each of us should in 

our own way be doing what we can. 

 

Municipal government has a role, provincial government, and 

obviously the federal government.  So it's not as if one level of 

government or any one group is going to make this system 

work of cleaning up our environment.  It really is the mandate 

and the prerogative of all of us to become very directly 

involved. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm glad, Mr. Minister, that you took note of 

an initiative of ours in this particular regard although you didn't 

mention the name SARCAN and the recycling and so on.  As a 

minister of Social Services, I took a great deal of enjoyment 

actually going around the province and seeing the gainful 

employment created for many of our so-called handicapped 

people that are capable of work if given the opportunity, by 

combining the recycling and reclaiming of many of our 

so-called waste products and at the same time gainfully 

employing many of the people of this province.  I think 

initiatives like that show that there is some room for 

government and people to work together to a common end.  

And certainly I would encourage you to continue with that. 

 

But like is always the case, government seems to stub its toe 

and get in the way of a lot of these things that the good folks 

out there want to do.  And I was talking previously about the 

rapidity with which landfill sites are filling up.  And you're 

partly to blame for that with some of your regulations.  And 

what I want you to do now is address the burning issue, and 

what you are going to be able to do to help municipalities deal 

with this issue.  I know that at every bear pit session and so on 

that cabinet ministers get into this is a topic that rural 

municipalities, and urban municipalities, bring up on a 

continual basis because it's a big concern of theirs. 

 

And so on the one hand you have the environmental concern 

about burning pollution, but then on the other you have the 

concomitant expenses involved with trying to address that one 

issue.  So what is the department's vision on this issue at the 

time, and what are you prepared to do to help some of the 

municipalities that are experiencing a difficulty with their 

landfill sites filling up more quickly than they normally might 

have done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member raises the issue of what 

we are doing to assist municipalities. And again I -- not to be 

repetitive -- but I do want to repeat that the prototype of the 

regional landfill systems is something that has been proposed 

and worked on with the municipalities. And I think this is a 

good concept where you have a much bigger region sort of 

supporting common landfill sites as opposed to each small 

village and town having to go through the process of that kind 

of planning.  And it really fits well within the concept of 

regional economic development, within health board concepts, 

where communities cooperate much more to solve this 

dilemma which all of us face. 

Of course the other thing we are looking at, and the 

municipalities are wanting us to consider, is large-scale 

composting where virtually all the waste that would come 

through a system would enter into a composting program.  And 

while this isn't at a point to be announced yet, it's something 

that -- I believe it's Minnesota -- has had a great deal of success 

in reducing the amount of waste entering landfill areas; simply 

by going through a process of composting every bit of matter 

that can possibly be composted.  And it's amazing how much of 

what one would throw out on a daily basis could actually enter 

a composting process. 

 

You mentioned the burning policy.  You will know there is no 

policy not to burn.  The policy really is that you can burn paper 

and waste that has no direct toxic effect but when it comes to 

things like tires and plastic --  where there's some not only 

residue that is emitted to the air that's very damaging but also 

the waste that's left in the ground may be entering the water 

system -- is difficult as well.  So it's a variety of things.  There's 

no magic to this issue of waste and waste disposal. 

 

I think the most key thing for municipalities, and government, 

and individuals to realize is exactly that.  That no one has the 

100 per cent answer.  And it really is struggling, and looking 

for more and better ways, and maintaining a fair bit of 

flexibility in our programs so that as things change, and new 

technologies come in place, we're ready to move in a relatively 

short order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And I think, Mr. Minister, that that's exactly 

what most RMs and municipalities would ask for, is a certain 

degree of flexibility built into these regulations so that they do 

have the time to adapt to the changing conditions. 

 

I'm going to switch topics completely now and I'm going to be 

more in the Parks and Renewable Resources side.  To initiate 

this discussion which should not take very long, I want to quote 

from the Star-Phoenix of February 18 of this year.  It's an 

article coming out of Yorkton and it's called "Gov't plans could 

hinder Sask. hunters."  I'll just read some selected excerpts and 

then I want to get your reaction.  And it starts this way, Mr. 

Minister: 

 

 "Money-hungry politicians, short-sighted bureaucrats and 

greedy out-fitters" pose a dangerous threat to wildlife . . . 

 

 . . . the issue of paid hunting is the most important one in the 

province today . . . 

 

 "They want to divide the province into little chunks and give 

exclusive hunting rights to out-fitters.  You'll have someone 

paying $50,000 for the right to hunt and there won't be room 

for you" . . . 

 

 "We've got to tell the government to keep its grubby hands 

off our resource." 

 

 You've got to tell them to get their dirty figures  



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

off our wildlife.  This is our resource.  Who the . . . (bleep) do 

they think they are? 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I know that I've had a discussion with you 

and I've had a discussion with the real minister a few days ago 

on this issue.  And I asked the minister to make a commitment, 

at least an intention, of where your government is going, which 

he's going to deliver through you.  And for the public record, 

where does this government stand in so far as paid public 

hunting is concerned? 

 

And I'll just give you a few examples. For example will this 

mean now that landowners will have the right to post their land 

and make it open only to those individuals whom they wish to 

have on the land and then charge whatever fee, and if this is 

going to be allowed will there be a comparable fee across the 

province or will it be what the market bears in that particular 

area? And I think you know what I'm talking about.  I think the 

farmers around Biggar will be able to charge quite a bit for 

white tail licences and so on. 

 

So what direction are you heading?  I've got a lot of people 

asking me about this, from outfitters who tend to want it, from 

city folks who don't want it at all.  Some ranchers and some 

farmers are looking at this as a possible revenue source for 

themselves, and then there are you people and your biologists 

and so on who are out there, who make an assessment as to 

what hunting pressures perhaps wild game can stand. 

 

Who would be making decisions as to what animals can be 

hunted, how many in a certain area, or will that right be given 

to the farmer or to the rancher for example?  I know that we've 

used the expression, don't tell ranchers how to take care of their 

land because their livelihood depends on it. They'll do a good 

job of it.  Is this something that you're going to be transmitting 

over to wildlife as well, wildlife management? 

 

And so I'll give you an opportunity to respond to that so that 

the public at large that has some vested interest in this in 

Saskatchewan, can have an idea of where you're heading. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well what you have to . . . Maybe 

what I should say is, to the member from Rosthern, is not to get 

too far ahead of the process and jump to any conclusions 

because this is not the policy of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  What we have done is set up a diversification 

round table that looks for and will achieve a consensus solution 

to this issue.  And one should know that you have all sorts of 

proponents on this issue, the same as on many issues.  You will 

have those who believe in the concept that you have stated and 

then attacked.  You will have others who believe in quite a 

different system of management of the wildlife in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But what we're saying is that we have set up a consensus 

process where all of the stakeholders who will have an interest 

in this process will have their say, the round table will then 

report back to the minister and then the minister and the 

department will develop 

 the policy and that will be recommended to government.  And 

there will be plenty of time for debate before any changes, if 

any, take place.  So I guess my point to you is that we will be 

wanting to talk to members of the opposition as well -- and I 

say this sincerely -- to get your opinion on the issue before any 

decision is made. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And I just may have an opinion on that, Mr. 

Minister, when the time comes.  But I take small solace in the 

fact when you tell me, don't get too far ahead, that I'm 

extrapolating too much on what I've heard already.  Because I 

think we have ample indications in this building here of how . . 

. for example, a year ago I never dreamed, I never dreamed 

what would happen with the gambling situation in this 

province.  During the election there was no mention made of 

the major change in direction that you were taking.  Now it's 

upon us.  And all I want to know is ahead of time exactly 

what's going to be happening or what you're contemplating in 

so far as paid hunting is concerned. 

 

And your answer, Mr. Minister, to a degree does assure me that 

we're not going to go pell-mell into this and that there is going 

to be proper input, that we do it right.  There's a lot at stake 

here. 

 

Just one final question -- it's very short: what time frame are 

you looking at?  Is there something that's going to be 

happening by next spring, or where are we at on that? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would think, although I don't want 

to put the minister in a spot of having to absolutely deliver on 

this date, but I would think by the first of the year 1995.  So 

we're looking at the end of this year, beginning of 1995. 

 

But there's not an absolute date because it will just depend of 

whether or not the round table has come to some conclusions.  

Sometimes this is a learning process where people, as they sit 

around the table, actually come with a preconceived notion on 

one side or the other and as discussions go on, the process of 

working together actually . . . consensus takes longer, 

sometimes shorter.  I think by the end of the year, but I would 

ask that the member not hold me absolutely to that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister and the staff, I 

know we're anxious to get on with the Exec Council, so I 

would just ask the minister: the official opposition had some 

written questions and I believe some questions that you were 

going to provide written answers for.  And if you're 

comfortable with providing the Liberal Party with those, then I 

will not hold up the evening by sending my questions to you in 

a written form and ask that you respond in a day or two. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I will have a look at these questions 

very quickly and I'm sure if they're a standard kind of questions 

we'll be able to answer them, but give me a little flexibility to 

look through 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

them and I'll give a word to the member as we go forward here. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I now wish to thank the minister and the 

staff. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we're finished with the 

scrutiny of this department and I'd just like to thank the 

minister for a capable job and the officials for their help as 

well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could, just in 

closing, thank members opposite, and most of all on behalf of 

the minister because I know most of the work here in the House 

on these estimates was done before I came this evening.  And I 

want to thank the members for their questions, and also the 

capable staff -- Les, you and your folks -- thank you for your 

effort. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1993-94 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  It is my 

pleasure to have an opportunity to speak with you and ask you 

questions this evening, Mr. Premier.  And I do want to 

welcome your officials here tonight. 

 

Rather than following in the footsteps of both yourself and the 

Leader of the Opposition, I would like to move directly to 

questions.  This is a time when you should probably be trying 

to send your caucus out the door riding high on all of the 

promises that they have kept, all the good things that your 

government has done for the province of Saskatchewan.  So I'd 

like to review some of the promises that you have made 

tonight. 

 

I just returned from Swift Current, and they were very 

concerned about your government's policies and how they were 

making businesses there less and less competitive.  You did 

indicate some specific things during the election, and one of the 

claims that you made was that you were going to save 7,500 

jobs through repealing the PST (provincial sales tax).  It seems 

that the number of jobs has declined substantially.  And can 

you explain what plans you have for the provincial sales tax, to 

improve the competitiveness of Saskatchewan businesses.  And 

would you make particular reference, please, to those 

businesses along the border of Alberta and the United States. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, our position is 

that, at 9 per cent, the figure for the sales tax is not where we 

would like to have it.  We would like to have it lower.  We'd 

like to have the personal income tax lower, we would like to 

have the corporate tax lower.  But, as the hon. member will 

know, we inherited the worst per capita deficit and the worst 

per capita debt in all of Canada.  And I don't mean marginally 

-- I mean by a country mile. 

 

And the choices in those circumstances for a government are 

very simple.  You either cut back on government services, 

which we have, to your criticism and other criticisms; or in the 

alternative, you enhance taxes in the most judicious and 

appropriate way that you can, which we also have had to do, 

which the opposition has criticized; or you do both, which 

we've had to do.  The priority of the government is to get, in the 

words of the Star-Phoenix editorial, the on-track line for 

deficit reduction first and foremost, and thereafter work into a 

scheme where we can both restore programs and lower taxes.  

That is further down the road.  We haven't articulated our 

policy in this context yet because we need to go through the 

fiscal picture for the remaining few more months or perhaps 

few more years of our balanced budget plan. 

 

So unfortunately while I very much understand -- because I've 

heard people in Swift Current and elsewhere talk to me about 

this problem -- the solutions are not readily apparent, other than 

the ones which we have been forced to take, as I said in my 

opening statements. 

 

So at this point, the statistics indicate that our retail sales in 

1993 were over 6 per cent, increased from 1992, the highest in 

all of Canada including sales-tax-free Alberta which is located 

nearby Swift Current and that this continues to the end of 

January 1994 where the increase is 4.5 per cent.  Now I don't 

overstate the worth or the value of that, but I do say that it is 

quite positive that in the face of all of those difficulties that 

exist, the economy seemingly is growing enough to warrant 

those kinds of numbers. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I think I'll back 

up a little bit.  Part of what I was asking of you is what are the 

strategies that your government has been trying to devise that 

would deal with the discrepancy of taxation.  Let me give you a 

case in point. 

 

In Swift Current I met with a group of people, and I asked them 

specifically about trends that were occurring there, primarily in 

their particular field which was real estate.  I wanted to know 

whether or not there was difference between commercial real 

estate and of course home buying.  I wanted to know who was 

moving in, who was moving out.  I was very interested in 

trends. 

 

And one of the things that they pointed out to me was 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

very telling.  They indicated that the majority of people who 

were ageing and having to make some decisions about their 

retirement in the near future were making specific decisions 

about where to locate.  The decision was coming down on the 

side of people choosing Medicine Hat rather than Swift 

Current.  Now there were certain considerations, all of which 

I'm sure we can well understand.  The first consideration is that 

seniors do not pay property taxes in Medicine Hat.  The second 

is that they don't have to pay sales tax in Medicine Hat.  The 

third was that there is a significant health care facility, a fully 

complemented facility, in Medicine Hat that at this current time 

does exceed those services which are available in Swift 

Current. 

 

So when I pose to you this question about what are the 

considerations that your government is giving in order to 

ensure that we have the most important element that we require 

in Saskatchewan in order to be successful, that element 

happens to be people.  What are we doing, not simply to deal 

with the issue of, you know, people talk about the whole 

taxation issue as though . . . come up with some solution that's 

going to help all the border communities along the United 

States and Alberta.  But this is an issue of people.  And as you 

know, even though some of the statistics bandied about often 

create some confusion, I do have some articles here saying that 

in 1993 -- the end of 1993 -- that we had the lowest population 

since 1983.  And we can debate statistics. 

 

But I want some understanding of what it is your government is 

doing to look at this issue.  How is it you're addressing the 

issues of cross-border shopping, the discrepancy between 

people who live on one side of a border versus the other, and 

the fact that we are losing people?  And it's such a crucial 

situation. 

 

You make reference, Mr. Premier, and I do want to make one 

comment on this -- if you wish to comment further, it's fine -- 

you indicated that in fact retail sales are up.  But the most 

disturbing factor is that people's disposable income is 

decreasing.  And those retail sales are directly linked to these 

individuals spending their savings, Mr. Premier.  So this is a 

short-term situation without, first of all, adding to the tax base 

through more people and also the potential for people to 

perhaps earn more of a living in order to have greater 

disposable income through economic growth. 

 

So if we could just return one more time to the way in which 

your government is proposing to deal, short term and longer 

term, with the issues of discrepancies in taxation and allowing 

us to be more competitive, if you will. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- First of all, I think the hon. member 

from Greystone's question is based on questionable 

assumptions from which she then constructs the question or 

position. 

 

The assumption is that somehow the tax rates in the province of 

Saskatchewan are so exorbitantly high that they induce people 

to go elsewhere.  I think the 

hon. member should accept some facts, upon which then we 

can discuss what the possible problems and possible solutions 

are. 

 

For a family on $25,000 income, our tax rate in Saskatchewan 

for that family is second lowest.  Only Manitoba is lower.  It's 

higher in Alberta.  For a family of $50,000, we are seventh 

lowest.  It is true that Alberta is lower.  For a family of 75,000, 

we are sixth from the top.  It is true that Alberta is lower. 

 

This reflects, of course, the philosophy of this government that 

nobody likes to pay taxes, but if there is any fair system of 

paying taxes, it's based on ability to pay.  Obviously Albertans, 

and those who believe in the system of government which the 

official opposition and presumably yourself advocate, don't 

believe that in some instances.  I believe the more you make the 

more you pay, and our system is structured on that line. 

 

Let me just take a little comment about utility rates.  You can 

have the basket of car insurance, telephone, heating, and 

electricity; put them together, blend them; and Saskatchewan 

on those four rates is the lowest in all of Canada, on the current 

rates.  By the way, Alberta is eighth.  Manitoba is right behind 

us; Alberta is next; British Columbia; and then you have the 

whole series of eastern Canadian and central Canadian 

provinces.  Now in some areas we may be higher, some areas 

we may be lower, like in heating, but as the basket of those 

services, we are very competitive. 

 

The member talks about people going . . . seniors going to 

Medicine Hat because they don't have to pay any property tax.  

Really?  I'm sure the hon. member is aware of the fact that 

Premier Klein, by 1996-97 in his budget approach, will have 

eliminated transfer payments to urban governments.  I'm not 

sure that this figure that I give you is absolutely correct because 

I don't have the document in front of me, but I can check it out. 

 

If this is so, by 1996-97 you'll have this situation.  On the 

Alberta side of Lloydminster, there'll be zero transfer payments 

from Edmonton to the Alberta people living on Lloydminster 

side.  On the Saskatchewan side, even with our difficulties, 

there'll be $350,000 transfer payments.  I wonder how long any 

municipality -- Medicine Hat or Red Deer or Lloydminster, 

Alberta side -- will be able to maintain the services without 

either increasing taxes or dramatically eliminating needed civic 

services. 

 

Now the member says that seniors are thinking about going to 

Alberta.  Really?  What is it for a medicare premium in 

Alberta?  They just jacked it up to approximately $860 a year.  

And by the way, the exemption level is so low that only the 

poorest of the poor get any protection or relief at that level -- 

$860.  I think those are roughly the figures that are there.  In 

fact I have in front of me here the Regina Leader-Post story of 

April 11, 1994, the headline says "Alta. seniors feeling pinch:  

Cutbacks start in July." 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

The hon. member talks about disposable income.  Well I'll tell 

you in Saskatchewan, StatsCanada says that personal income in 

'93 over '92 is up 2.9 and personal disposable income was up 

3.2 per cent '93 over '92.  Now these are some of the facts. 

 

I might make one other point about population loss.  It is 

correct that the province of Saskatchewan has had difficulties 

with population.  When the Liberals last held office in the 

province of Saskatchewan in 1964 -- the hon. member probably 

wouldn't know this but -- the population stood at 942,000.  And 

finally when we were able to get rid of them, banishing them 

for 23, 24 years, the population dropped from 942,000 to just a 

little over 934,000.  That was the policy of the Liberal Party.  

That was the net result. 

 

I don't mean this as a personal criticism of the Liberal Party.  

What I mean this is as an example of the ongoing problem that 

all political parties of all stripes have with respect to population 

in this province.  It's been the history. 

 

And I think we're turning the things around a bit.  We have had 

a population loss but in the period between October '91 to 

October '93, the loss has averaged a negative 1,200 a year or a 

total loss of 2,400.  This compares to a trend from '87 to '91 of 

nearly 8,000 a year and our population still is in excess of 1 

million people, 1,001,600 people. 

 

What we're endeavouring to do -- and I will not make my 

opening remarks again, I'm not sure the member heard them -- 

we're trying to create a set of programs and policies which will 

give people the incentive not only to stay but to come to this 

province.  They are, in this order:  first of all, fiscal 

responsibility, which the business community and the 

investment community want and like.  And by the way you 

don't have to be a business person; anybody with common 

sense would have to adopt that.  We are forced into that. 

 

Secondly, a detailed economic development plan called 

partnership for growth with specific clusters of activity, six in 

fact in total, which are identified whereby we are promoting the 

industry at home and where possible, attracting industry here. 

 

Thirdly, a new agricultural policy written down -- by the way 

for the first time probably in the history of Saskatchewan -- Ag 

2000, which faces the changing reality of rural life in Canada 

and policies and seeks to add value add. 

 

Fourth, a restructuring in the health care system.  I'll spare you 

the quotations of Dr. Rachlis and others about how we are 

leading the nation in that so that we'll be able to use precious 

dollars in the most effective way for our seniors in Swift 

Current and elsewhere. 

 

Now we think that's a pretty potent combination of events: 

fiscal responsibility; a realistic, world-oriented economic 

policy; a restructuring of health care in order to make it 

preservable and protectable for the future; and at the 

appropriate time, 

to ease the tax burden of our people.  We want to do that just as 

much as anybody else does.  But in the interim, this is the best 

that can be done, and in the interim if you or any other member 

of this House has an idea of what best should be done or 

alternatively should be done, we'd be very pleased to receive 

the same. 

 

But the truth is that this province was saddled by the enormous 

consequences of this deficit and debt, and that is where the 

fiscal regime sits.  But as every independent commentator has 

advised, there is now daylight at the end of the tunnel.  

Everybody should be pulling with us for those three or four 

major points that I've talked about in order to share in the 

growing confidence of this province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Just to pick up 

on some of the things that you've stated.  I did not indicate that 

people were thinking about moving from surrounding areas of 

Swift Current to Medicine Hat.  I stated that they are doing it.  

So there is a vast discrepancy between people giving this some 

thought and actually taking action. 

 

Secondly, I think we can spend a considerable number of hours 

here trying to rewrite history or give our version of history.  If 

you want to talk about what it is like to govern during a 

recessionary period or a time that's much more difficult than 

some other people had to govern in the province, how much 

more difficult it is for you now than it was for your predecessor 

as a New Democrat premier in the 1970s during an inflationary 

period, we can do that.  We can also start talking about what it 

was like for Mr. Thatcher to govern during a recessionary 

period, but I don't see much point in doing that when we're 

trying to deal with the here and now. 

 

You also start talking about our population and in fact how we 

are in really a very good set of circumstances at the moment.  

And what was of grave concern to me and of many people with 

whom I hear and visit with in the province, is the dependency 

ratio in the province of Saskatchewan.  I think that we have to 

be very clearly examining exactly what the population is in 

Saskatchewan and where the trend is going.  When we're 

talking about dependency ratio, we're talking about high 

numbers of people who have great difficulty in contributing to 

the economy: whether we're talking about seniors; those who 

are on social assistance; aboriginal people who have fewer 

options as far as employment; and so forth. 

 

So you know, when you're talking about your approach I would 

really welcome some greater specificity.  You talk as well 

about the good circumstances that we're in tax-wise in the 

province of Saskatchewan and yet in 1991 you did not think 

that that was the case, Mr. Premier, and in fact on May 2, 1991, 

you were the one who was quoted as saying: 

 

 . . . won't you agree that taxes are the silent killer of jobs, that 

enough is enough, that higher taxes do not create jobs, higher 

taxes (actually) take jobs out of the economy. 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

And I think that what we have to do is look at the 

circumstances.  I know that you're faced with a very serious 

situation and I think most people in the entire country do, 

because the first two years of your administration, everybody 

from one end of Canada to the other thought that we were the 

financial basket case of the nation. 

 

The small business corporate tax did indeed drop from 10 per 

cent to 8 per cent.  But at 8 per cent, business taxes are still 

lower in other provinces -- most of the Maritime provinces, 

Quebec, Alberta -- and so that drop alone was not going to 

increase our competitiveness.  And that's really what I was 

asking about. 

 

I'm still most interested since the large business corporate tax 

raise is the highest in Canada.  It is tied with Manitoba and 

New Brunswick.  But one of the things I want to know from 

you is what your plans are as far as Saskatchewan's tax regime 

is concerned.  How is it that you visualize being able to provide 

what would be considered to be a more competitive tax level 

for the province of Saskatchewan?  It's something you 

commented on in 1991 and I think that now that you're in 

power, it's something that will probably be of primary concern 

to you and an issue that you've been spending considerable 

time examining and wanting to come up with some solutions.  

So I'll pose that one more time to you, Mr. Premier, and then 

we will hopefully, upon your response, move on to some other 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I think the 

hon. member's facts have to be accurate upon which the 

question is based.  And from then I think we can have a 

dialogue to try to figure out what the problem is and how we 

find the solutions. 

 

She talks about the dependency rate, the hon. member does.  

The fact of the matter is that the former Conservative 

government in Ottawa did two things to increase the 

dependency rate, if you're talking about the social services rate, 

welfare rate.  There's a UI (Unemployment Insurance) cut-back 

generated 4,400 new welfare cases, and off-reserve status 

Indians changes generated 4,000 more new cases.  By the way, 

this is, in terms of people, amounts to 19,000 bodies.  Your 

counterparts, the federal Liberal government in Ottawa, 

announced further cutbacks to the UI and that adds another 

5,000 people to our list. 

 

Now that has nothing to do with our policies.  It has to do with 

a change in accounting and payment of bills by a combination 

of Conservative and Liberal governments.  Now I think again 

what we've been asking the former Conservative government 

and what we're asking the present Liberal government is: why 

are you doing this to us?  And I think that the hon. member 

should be doing the same thing on behalf of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Why are they doing this to us? 

 

But there's another dimension to social assistance 

which should be kept in mind.  We see that figures at the end of 

December 31, 1993, end of year -- we've got five months that 

are in now -- the recipients per population on a percentage basis 

in Saskatchewan was 7.8 per cent, ranking us eighth from the 

top.  Ahead of us are Newfoundland, Ontario, Nova Scotia, 

Quebec, P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), New Brunswick, B.C. 

(British Columbia), then Saskatchewan and then Alberta dead 

last.  Actually we're tied with Manitoba; that's why the ten is 

missing.  Now Alberta is the lowest, the dependency rate.  Well 

you know why they're the lowest; it's a one-way bus ticket out 

of Alberta.  That's their compassionate approach to social 

services.  We don't buy that. 

 

(2015) 

 

Now I'm not making a case to saying that one person on social 

services is a good thing.  Ideally we don't want any. And 

78,000 is for sure too much.  But in the context of the national 

economic circumstances, including if I might a combination of 

Liberal and Conservative governments across the nation, given 

the offloading that we've had both from your administration 

federally and that from the Conservatives, gives us at least an 

argument that we have, through a combination of economic 

activities and other programs, been both at the same time 

compassionate and providing jobs because we're eighth.  Not 

the tops, but eighth. 

 

Taxes are silent killers; they're direct killers.  I repeat that.  I 

think rising interest rates are going to be as big if not bigger 

killers.  I said that before '91; I say it now.  Your question is:  

what is your plan to reduce the tax rate?  My answer is the one 

that I gave you just a few moments ago.  We have in place 

specific policies for job creation, deficit reduction, and 

balancing of the budget, using surplus funds thereafter in an 

appropriate fashion, a new health care system, and a new Ag 

2000 paper which complements the Minister of Economics' 

approach on Partnership for Renewal. 

 

And again I'll spare you the speech but the statistics show that 

there is -- I'll put it as self-deprecatorily as I can -- modest signs 

of growth, modest, hopeful signs that some of this is beginning 

to work. 

 

There's our game plan.  I can mail it over to you, mail it to 

anybody who wants to see it.  We'll be judged in June of 1996 

as to whether we've accomplished any of that or not.  There's 

our specific plan.  Again I invite the Leader of the Liberal Party 

or any other member in this Legislative Assembly, if you think 

that a specific component should be changed or there's a better 

idea, let's hear it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I found it 

interesting when you made comment about off-loading.  I think 

every municipal government in Saskatchewan would find that a 

most interesting comment because they know too what it means 

to suffer from offloading. 

 

And I do think that it is very unfortunate that the 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

federal government in Ottawa changed unemployment 

insurance and that it indeed had a negative impact on so many 

provinces across the country.  And I did question them about it 

and it was something that was the lowest legal rate that could 

be brought in and something that had been brought forward by 

the previous administration that was required to follow through 

on.  And I hope that . . . in fact I hope that you keep them to 

their promise to re-examine unemployment insurance, and I 

know that I will. 

 

Along with that, however, I think that one of the things we 

have to acknowledge is that it will be more people coming to 

Saskatchewan, more young people choosing to remain in 

Saskatchewan, that is going to make the significant difference, 

that plus economic growth and changing the dependency ratio. 

 

I'm not simply making reference to those who are on social 

assistance; that's not what I meant by a dependency ratio.  I'm 

talking about all of those individuals where they have a great 

deal of difficulty contributing to the economy.  We currently 

have 2:1, and that is increasing.  The projections by the year 

2015 are absolutely astonishing. 

 

And this is really about trends.  It's one of the reasons why 

people have to look over time at what is transpiring.  If we 

want to compare apples and oranges, Saskatchewan with 

another province for example, we have to look at the trends of 

those provinces in terms of how many people have actually 

acquired more jobs over a period of time.  Where did they start 

from?  And what we keep trying to do in this legislature is 

taking a snapshot in time, which is really not representative of 

what's going on.  What we should be most concerned about at 

this time is what's transpiring in our own province.  How do we 

go about addressing the issues here? 

 

I was pleased to hear you say that the way in which you see 

being able to address the taxation issue is going to be through 

fiscal responsibility, through the economic development plan 

that was put forward, entitled Partnerships for Renewal, and I 

am interested in knowing exactly how those targets have been 

met.  There was no built-in measurability, even though there 

were some time lines suggested.  As well, as you know, your 

Agriculture 2000 document has met with considerable 

criticism, not just from within Saskatchewan. 

 

But I do hope that all of these things do work.  I mean that's 

part of what we have to have happen if we're going to be 

successful in our province, and particularly in having people 

here remain here as well as coming here. 

 

You did mention transfer payments and that raises an 

interesting question, I think.  You've made fairly bold 

comments, including your ministers on occasion, about the 

federal government and the transfer payments situation. 

 

And I do think it's interesting, and it would be an 

interesting exploration to start looking at why it is you have 

been successful at meeting some of your deficit targets.  I think 

the official opposition would have us believe that those 

numbers were inflated in the first place.  Regardless, let's put 

that aside.  I know that you have been able to benefit from 

lower interest rates which -- I agree with you -- are very much 

to the benefit of so many different governments across Canada. 

 

As well, I think that you are able to meet some of those targets 

probably because of the gambling revenues that have been 

coming in from VLTs (video lottery terminals) in particular, 

being able to renegotiate at lower interest rates, and perhaps 

what would be called increased transfer payments. 

 

I'm wondering if in fact that is indeed the case.  Can you tell 

me concisely what impact this year's increase in transfer 

payments has had on your ability to meet any of your deficit 

target or anything else in the province?  I'm most interested in 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- First of all, I want to say to the hon. 

member again, with respect, transfer payments has been a 

major problem for this government.  Not because we have 

received any increases in them, we have received massive 

decreases in transfer payments.  I'll have a little caveat to add in 

a moment which I think the member's alluding.  But I can tell 

you that three years ago we had, yearly in our provincial 

budget, $500 million more from Ottawa than we have today.  

That's the reality; it's lost income. 

 

Now what you're referring to is the announcement by the Prime 

Minister, Monsieur Chrtien in December or January, Paul 

Martin, which saw adjustments made to some elements of the 

formulae -- there are many and they are complicated, both on 

EPF (established programs financing) and equalization transfer 

payments as generally described -- the net effect of which adds 

for the first time sums of additional funds to revenue to us. 

 

I don't have the Finance department people here with me today, 

but if my memory serves me correctly, this is in the order of 

about $35 million.  I thank the Prime Minister for that, and I 

thank the federal Liberal government for that. 

 

But let's please understand that even with that additional 

income, the net losses still outweigh in a huge, considerable 

way what we have received by way of income.  So therefore 

the management has been, in terms of the fiscal situation, one 

which has been challenging to put it mildly. 

 

Now we can only hope, and we have the assurance of the Prime 

Minister, that there won't be any further changes.  We can also 

say very thankfully our Finance department officials have been 

very conservative in their estimates on transfer payments and 

unlike other provinces we've been bang-on in predicting them.  

They're, as I say, very complicated formulae based on oil 

pricing and other factors. 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Now before I take my place let me say this: with respect to the 

question of attitude and development, here is a story in the 

Leader-Post of May 20, 1994 quoting Ian Russell who is the 

vice-president of capital markets for the Toronto-based 

Investment Dealers Association of Canada.  The story says, 

quote: 

 

 Ian Russell, in a dark suit and representing Canada's 

securities industry, on Thursday called the deficit attack by 

Saskatchewan's NDP government the most advanced in the 

land. 

 

 "They're probably in the lead in this thing,"  said Russell . . . 

 

But here's a quotation to the question of jobs and what's down 

the road.  He says: 

 

 "Without the government tackling deficit reduction the way 

that it did and buttressing the confidence of business, we may 

well have seen investment figures drop off more 

precipitously. 

 

I'll stop from the quote to say, the investment figures drop-off 

is a direct result of the megaprojects of the former 

administration finally coming to an end.  Mr. Russell says, 

quote: 

 

 "What we're convinced we'll see is that as Saskatchewan 

continues moving ahead with its plan, once you start running 

surpluses and getting finances under control, you've got some 

room also to perhaps start cutting back on taxes. 

 

 "Once you begin moving in that direction, it becomes a very 

attractive place to invest." 

 

Well what's the purpose behind this?  The purpose behind this 

is to say that our budget has gained the credibility of people 

who have looked at the numbers.  You can't fudge the numbers, 

simply not possible to fudge the numbers. 

 

When Moody's and Standard and Poor's from New York check 

our books, they check them from one side to the other.  Not 

possible.  They know more about the books, with the greatest 

of respect, than perhaps more of the members of this House do.  

Those are real numbers. 

 

The transfer payments' losses are real numbers.  I stand to be 

corrected on the $35 million figure to be absolutely certain 

about it, but that's what sticks in my mind.  This is the result.  I 

don't give myself credit for this.  I said in my opening remarks, 

it is the people of Saskatchewan who have had to tighten their 

belts and pay pretty hardly.  I know about that, pretty harshly.  

They've gone through this. 

 

But if Mr. Russell is correct, as we believe he is because this is 

what this whole thing is predicated on, then we are, in his 

words, moving ahead of the . . . "you start running surpluses 

and getting finance under control," and room "to perhaps start 

cutting back on 

taxes." 

 

 Once you begin moving in that direction, it becomes a very 

attractive place to invest. 

 

So we're coming out of a difficult period, transfer payments 

notwithstanding. We hope the stability with Ottawa . . . our 

relationship with Ottawa has by and large been quite good.  

How long they'll remain I don't know, but we intend to work in 

a positive, cooperative way with them.  There has been a boost 

to us and Quebec as a result of the jiggle in the formula that I 

talked about.  And it's helpful and appreciated, but believe me, 

it does not outweigh the totality of reductions yearly now in a 

cumulative set that we have to face. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Premier.  I 

hope that you will agree to find out indeed what exactly the 

increase in transfer payments was and provide that to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm told that it is 35 million.  My 

officials say that it's right, so I get a lucky memory break on 

that one. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'm assuming from 

what you've said that this was not something on which you had 

counted.  In other words, that's something that would not have 

been in your budget at that time since there was no way of 

understanding that it would be there; since none of us could 

look into the future and know what was going to transpire as 

far as the federal election was concerned. 

 

And I do think that most people who would be trying to look at 

what would be the most responsible thing to do would come up 

with the conclusion that being fiscally responsible and 

addressing the problems that face a province and a country, that 

that would result in a province or a country being an attractive 

place to live and invest if indeed the problems were resolved. 

 

I don't want to get into some of the other things that might 

affect investment at this time, although I will reserve the 

questions regarding labour legislation for another time.  But 

investment, of course, is interested in investing in various 

places for a variety of reasons, not simply because something 

has taken care of its . . . a place is taking care of its fiscal mess, 

so to speak. 

 

I'd like to talk for a moment about the deficit and the debt.  And 

I know that you had indicated specifically that you're 

committed to a balanced budget within four years.  Now I'm 

not going to say during your first term in office because of 

course I'm hoping that there won't be a second one.  In any case 

you also committed to a 15-year plan to eliminate the 

Conservative administration debt.  And I wonder why you've 

chosen not to put forward any legislation.  And I'm not 

necessarily talking about balanced budget legislation.  It could 

be the new expenditures control Act as it's been found in some 

other provinces as of late.  Just legislation that actually results 

in your being committed to a balanced budget rather than one 

that is left up in the air. 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

And I'd like to know as well when you will be tabling your 

15-year plan.  I'm interested in knowing what that will entail. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well with respects to the latter aspect 

of the member's question, all that I can say is that we expected 

to have something to say about this perhaps by the spring of 

1996 and the budget of 1996. 

 

Mainly because we have this year to go through, and if we are 

successful in managing our finances, and the revenues are as 

projected, next year we'll be in a better position to figure out 

exactly what '96 will look like.  But it'll be somewhere in that 

time frame -- it could be earlier -- but somewhere in that time 

frame.  We'll have to revisit that very, very, very carefully. 

 

I want to say one other point, and I do not want to belabour or 

take the time of the House needlessly, but I think this is 

important to get on the record.  Wood Gundy economics has 

this to say about our fiscal policy February 18, 1994. 

 

 Saskatchewan kicked off the 1994 provincial budget season 

on a positive note, delivering on last year's deficit-cutting 

promises and keeping intact the '94-95 deficit reduction 

target.  The turnaround in Saskatchewan's finances has been 

quite remarkable. 

 

Nesbitt Thomson says, headline: Budget '94-95 on time, on 

target. 

 

 In its budget presented on February 17 the province of 

Saskatchewan continued the stunning turnaround in its fiscal 

situation.  The government's strong political will and its 

performance to date indicates an ongoing adherence to this 

schedule of fiscal restraint amidst strong constituent support.  

We would therefore repeat our view first expressed in April 

'93.  "In an environment which recently has been 

characterized by downward pressure on provincial credit 

ratings, we believe that Saskatchewan may well be the first 

Canadian province to be upgraded in the present economic 

cycle." 

 

And says that our budget deficit now is the lowest since 1982. 

 

ScotiaMcLeod says: 

 

 The government is on track.  Saskatchewan has turned the 

corner financially which should continue to bode well for 

holders of this credit. 

 

Burns Fry: 

 

 For the third consecutive year, the Saskatchewan government 

has remained on track in its program to balance the budget by 

(the fiscal year) FY96/97.  The deficit has declined . . . (sets 

of figures, etc.) . . . The target is $189 million which, if 

achieved, will reduce the deficit to less than 1 per cent of 

GDP, likely to be the lowest among Canada's provinces. 

 

By the way, that's an interesting figure, because as you know 

the federal government's objective is to reduce it to 3 per cent 

of GDP and we'll be at 1 per cent. 

 

 The Romanow government is developing an excellent track 

record in reducing the enormous deficit that it inherited . . . 

We expect the government to continue to hit its targets and 

therefore view the provincial credit rating outlook as positive. 

 

Now I won't tell you about First Boston, except they say the 

conditions are improving in the economy.  Real GDP (gross 

domestic product) has grown by 3.5 in 1993, well above the 

Canadian average.  It also speculates that Standard and Poor's 

might give us a credit rating upgrade.  I sure hope so. 

 

But I want to come back to the Burns Fry quote, just to this 

extent.  It says: 

 

 The Romanow government is developing an excellent track 

record in reducing the enormous deficit it inherited. 

 

Now I say that's a statement of credibility and confidence in us.  

And the reason that I give you all of this is because I think it's a 

good news story.  But to say in specifics to your question of the 

debt reduction plan, you can be assured, hon. member, that 

when this government puts forward its debt reduction plan, 

after we balance the budget by this determined will and ability 

and skill and contribution by the people of Saskatchewan, you 

can be sure we'll deliver on it too. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I really am rather 

curious as to why it is you feel the need, when here we are in 

June of 1994, to wait until June of 1996 or the spring budget of 

1996 to table what your plans are.  I think that people in 

Saskatchewan would be very bolstered if, in fact, they saw 

before them what the 15-year recovery plan was going to be 

that would result in jobs and real economic growth for people. 

 

You spoke during the election of working with local 

manufacturers and businesses to increase value added 

processing of our resources and commodities, both domestic 

and export markets.  And there never seems to be any tangible 

targets that are attached to those commitments so that, you 

know, it results in people like myself wondering what it is that 

you've done.  And I can only assume that you keep track of 

your progress, so will you tell me please, how much you have 

increased the gross domestic product in the areas of value 

added processing for resources and commodities over the last 

two and a half years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll have to get the 

officials to provide me with some of the detailed figures on 

this, probably from Economic 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Development and/or Finance.  But I do want to say while 

they're looking at this to see if they can find it, if not, we'll 

undertake to provide it at some later date for the hon. member. 

 

I want to say something which I overlooked in responding to 

the first part of her question immediately preceding this one.  

Balanced budget legislation -- we're looking at this very, very 

seriously.  But in our judgement there's no sense in doing that 

until we do balance the budget.  This would be putting the cart 

before the horse. 

 

In Alberta that's what they did.  They said we're going to 

balance the budget, then they had no plan as to how to do it 

except to hack and slash and cut with all the hardship on the 

seniors and others that exist in the Alberta view. 

 

I've never been a very big fan of balanced budget legislation up 

until now.  But having been in this chair for some two years 

and several months and seeing how difficult it has been for our 

people to pull through, I don't want any other future 

government to ever get away with the kind of financial mess 

which resulted in the circumstance that we had.  But we think 

that the way to do this would be at the time that we succeed in 

balancing the deficit. 

 

There is no question of reluctance.  It's one step at a time -- 

steady progress.  Let's get the deficit eliminated.  Then we'll 

worry about the debt, which is obviously a part of this.  In the 

meantime, let's make sure that the economy is going as best as 

it can be going and I would say -- I don't know if I can have 

any numbers; will there be any numbers? They're working up 

some numbers -- I can say that we are seeing a change in the 

pattern of jobs.  I don't say this particularly happily because it's 

a mixed blessing in a sense, or a mixed effect, not even a 

blessing.  In the agricultural and agriculture-related sectors, 

there continues to be a softness with respect to jobs as farms 

unfortunately get larger and mechanization and things of this 

nature. 

 

But where we are seeing the growth is in food processing; in 

the manufacturing sector, short-line farm machinery; retail 

sector.  Those figures are all available.  We've seen, for 

example, April '94 to April '93 in manufacturing, 2,000 more 

jobs; service, 6,000; wholesale and retail trade, 7,000; 

construction, 2,000.  Now this gets offset by the losses which 

are around in the other aspects of our economy, primarily in the 

area of agriculture, as it's working its way through the 

transition period that it is facing as well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, I do have a comment for your 

consideration regarding balanced budget legislation, and that is 

that I think that taken singularly would be like a ticket for 

governments to raise taxes. And I think that it has to be seen in 

a combination, whether it be coupled with a taxpayers' 

protection Act, or devised in some way that it isn't as pure, if 

you will, as has been proposed and implemented by the Alberta 

government which I think is short-sighted in 

many ways. 

 

I've been watching and I guess one would say waiting for your 

government to zero in on very specific areas of economic 

development.  And as I said before I am very sorry that the 

Minister of Economic Development chose to slip in his 

estimates under a cover of the dark -- I guess would be the best 

way to describe it  -- when not only was it not on the agenda 

the evening that it took place, but even the official opposition 

critic, the Leader of the Official Opposition was not present, 

and those of us who were attending the business rally in 

Saskatoon had it come as some surprise to us that that was the 

case. 

 

So since we did not have an opportunity to ask the Minister of 

Economic Development this question I do pose this to you, Mr. 

Premier.  I wonder what you see as the greatest area of 

potential for employment in this coming year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the member will recall 

the budget objectives of '94-95 which have been set out by the 

Minister of Finance, and in that budget what we're setting out is 

the priorities of economic development and job creation.  And 

we're having several initiatives to support this goal: $700 

million in capital projects, that's up from 140 million last year; 

6 million for the new Sask Opportunities Corporation; 173 

million shared with the federal government on infrastructure; 

20 million for agri-food equity fund; north-west forest renewal 

partnership plan funding of $330,000 over the next two years; 

$4 million to be directed at commercial development for 

northern businesses. 

 

We talked about the reduction in the small business tax, direct 

agents also phased out, new trade corporation, new Tourism 

Authority, the REDAs (rural economic development authority).  

New research and technology had a very successful conference 

which I attended in Toronto last week on ag-biotech; 

comprehensive transportation policy for market accessibility.  

And of course the member will know about the two new 

uranium mines, a $250 million expansion. 

 

There are some specific examples as well which I gave earlier 

today, which I will not belabour. 

 

Now the actual figure that we had set out as a target for job 

creation in the budget -- yes, my officials are going to get that 

figure for me so that I'm accurate on it, but it's in the budget, 

and that is the goal that we're targeting for, the one that I'll give 

you in a moment. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, I'll restate the question that I 

was posing when you were in an exchange.  I want to know 

where you see the greatest area of potential for employment in 

this coming year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I don't think that I want to 

identify one area only.  I think there are several areas.  I think 

there are great opportunities in short-line farm machinery.  

Flexi-Coil is having a very busy year with 1,100 jobs plus 

more.  There are three or four 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

major projects, of which there have been extensive negotiations 

and detailed exchanges of financial information and analysis 

currently under way which we hope will bear some fruit in 

agriculture and the food processing areas.  I cannot give you 

details because it's simply not timely.  I see jobs there. 

 

I think the infrastructure program will provide us with some 

jobs as well, the federal-provincial-municipal infrastructure 

program.  I think that as well provides some opportunities. 

 

Numerically perhaps not as great in the short run, but in the 

long run the ag-biotech field really is most exciting.  We have a 

memorandum of understanding with Monsanto.  Well you 

know all the people at Innovation Place in Saskatoon, so I 

won't belabour you with those.  We think that that has got great 

potential as well. 

 

By the way, while I'm on my feet, the employment levels we 

anticipate in the budget forecast for the economy at the end of 

'94, 445,000 people; hope to go to 448,000; 454,000 in 1996; 

and 457,000 in 1997 are the targets which have been set for 

ourselves. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I am interested in if you can give me 

your personal assessment of where your government sits in 

terms of your plans for further development of the nuclear 

industry in Saskatchewan.  How many jobs do you actually see 

being created in the next year, and what timetable do you have 

set for expansion of the industry between now and the next 

election? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Madam Member, and, Mr. Chair, the 

jobs in the uranium industry essentially are from two sources, 

first of all the mining sector and this will depend upon the 

demands of the market for uranium.  The price has been 

somewhat spotty or at least shaky, if I can put it that way, for 

the last little while.  That'll dictate to some extent how much 

economic development there is. 

 

But as I indicated in my last answer, $250 million of 

investment is on the books now as a result of the hearings 

which we confirmed a few months ago.  Subsequent 

developments will take place, presumably as the companies 

themselves see it to be timely.  Actual numbers, again this is 

another little memory test, but I think it's about 400 direct jobs 

for these two $250 million projects that I've talked about.  And 

then you can put your own spin-off factor of times six, seven or 

eight -- there are varying figures in this regard. 

 

The other area of employment, with respect to the nuclear 

industry, in a major way -- I'm not talking about academic 

research and university research -- is the research which is 

going on in Saskatoon on the CANDU (Canadian deuterium 

uranium) 3.  I think there are about 100 employees that are 

there.  There may be some additional incremental activity.  The 

member will be aware of newspaper reports indicating that 

there is a CANDU six series of negotiations with Atomic 

Energy Board for China, which presumably in AECL's (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) mind will assist and speed up the 

CANDU 3 research and development. 

 

I'm not, for the moment, adding in the additional, which could 

be put in the same category, jobs which flow from the 

academic, scientific research -- more related to nuclear 

medicine and university work.  So those are roughly, and 

probably very roughly, although I have some figures now.  I 

should correct this -- they say 270 direct jobs on the two 

uranium jobs, not 400, but 270, times your spin-off factors.  

And then I've made the points with respect to AECL. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  What you were 

talking about was dividing this up into the mining sector, the 

reactor side -- you didn't make any comment on further areas of 

the nuclear industry in which one could get involved.  I am 

interested in, specifically, how you see the province of 

Saskatchewan being involved in this industry. 

 

Do you see expanding the nuclear industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Do you have a target for the contribution that 

could be made, both short term and long term, of the nuclear 

industry and the uranium industry in Saskatchewan?  I do want 

to make some comment because I know that you have spent, 

what we would call, political moments in here trying to make 

reference to the fact that I'd like to have a reactor -- I think if 

the quote is correct -- on every street corner of Saskatchewan. 

 

Part of what I have been most interested in is ensuring that 

what we do is target the areas in which we can be the best and I 

think that Saskatchewan can be the best as far as a centre of 

excellence for energy that could compete with all different 

places in the world. 

 

One of the concerns I've always had is why it is we would 

consider to sell raw uranium to people who would then process 

that uranium, then who would ship it off to be used in reactors 

that may be considered significantly unsafe, and act as though 

somehow we have no responsibility for that, when we could in 

fact be in the driver's seat since we have the purest, one of the 

best, uranium to be found in the world.  I'm wondering why it 

is that this wouldn't be targeted as an area in which we could be 

best in Saskatchewan. 

 

So if you wouldn't mind commenting please, Mr. Premier, on 

what your government's commitment would be to this area and 

particularly if you've targeted it; if you've targeted it for the 

kinds of contributions that it could make and where you see it 

going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Perhaps the member could be a little 

more specific about what she refers to when she uses the words 

"this area" in the nuclear industry.  I'm assuming that you mean 

by this area, mining, refining, and/or processing, generating, 

and waste disposal. Is 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

that what you mean? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think perhaps one of the things that we're 

trying to determine here is, are we going to be the best at 

something?  Are we going to take full responsibility for it?  But 

what I find most interesting, Mr. Premier, is how . . . if indeed 

we're going to be going into spent fuel, has there been research 

done in the province of Saskatchewan?  Is this an area that your 

government has been committed to looking at -- all of the 

different aspects of saying, if we are going to sell raw uranium, 

then we are going to be responsible and look at all the different 

aspects of the uranium industry, of the nuclear industry in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

I asked a simple question of: is this an area that you have 

targeted as your government when we know that, as far as 

energy is concerned, that there are people on the other side of 

the world that will never use solar energy, will never be able to 

use fossil fuels readily, will never to be able to use wind?  

What they will have to do is rely upon the nuclear industry.  

What role do you see your government playing in this?  Are 

you committed to targeting the nuclear industry and its 

development for the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well again, I say this with respect to 

the member, because I do not understand what she's trying to 

get me to answer.  If I could get the question clearly put, I will 

try to give you, as clearly as I can, an answer to the question. 

 

Because you refer to the nuclear industry, this industry -- what 

is it that you're asking me about?  The one specific thing that 

you're asking me about is the question of what happens once 

the uranium leaves the ground. And the member should know, 

as every member in this House does know -- and I'm sure you 

do too, but I'll say it in any event; I don't mean this in any 

personal sense -- that those are bound by a series of national 

and international obligations of which the province . . . no 

province has any control. 

 

The Atomic Energy Control Board and the international 

monitoring regulatory agencies internationally with respect to 

what happens, with respect to Canadian uranium -- where it is 

used, where the spent fuel is subsequently used -- is subject to 

the international monitoring process.  And I have to have faith 

in that process.  I know this is certainly under some dispute by 

some people, but the process is an honourable one and that the 

Canadian authorities are doing the best that they can.  If the 

hon. member is suggesting that we should take on that 

regulatory function for the federal government and get involved 

in international arrangements, I can't do that.  She wouldn't do 

that.  No provincial premier could; no federal Prime Minister 

would permit it, and rightly so. 

 

Now I therefore have to ask the question: what do you mean?  

Do you want me to tell you what we think about mining, 

refining, reacting, and waste disposal?  Is that what you're 

asking me? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, my question is now 

repeated for the third time.  Has your government targeted the 

nuclear industry as an industry that you would want to see 

further development of in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now if I answer yes to you on that -- 

which I will do, I'll say yes -- and I say to you that I interpret 

the nuclear industry to mean mining, as I've described, and 

research.  My question to you is, is that enough, or do you want 

this government to be also targeting generation and waste 

disposal? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I find it most interesting, Mr. Premier, that 

here we are finally, finally, finally in Executive Council 

estimates, and you're choosing to ask me questions.  So all that 

it can do is provide me with a great deal of insight that, Mr. 

Premier, this is a question you don't want to answer. 

 

Perhaps we can go on to some other questions that you will 

equally have avoided answering.  I will move on to a 

completely different area here, and we'll return later to this 

issue, I'm sure. 

 

I am going to quote to you from a private member's motion that 

I put forward probably a good month and a half ago that did not 

reach this Assembly until two weeks ago tomorrow.  And it 

states the following: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to present its full 

gaming strategy including a full accounting of its projected 

revenues from gaming, all research and documentation held 

by government on the Saskatchewan gaming industry, with 

emphasis on the evidence showing that the gaming projects 

undertaken by the provincial government are sustainable and 

that all participants in the gaming industry such as volunteer 

and non-profit organizations, hoteliers, exhibition 

associations, the horse-racing industry, hospital foundations, 

local governments, aboriginal groups, and gaming addicts are 

being and will be treated fairly in the face of increased 

government involvement in the gaming industry. 

 

Mr. Premier, you may find it somewhat telling that the day that 

that was brought forward, not one of the 53 members of 

government, of your government, chose to comment on it.  The 

member from the official opposition from Morse did comment.  

He did discuss this issue that afternoon.  But this was 

something that I had tried for a considerable length of time to 

bring to this Assembly and have full discussion of.  It was 

something that your members chose not to discuss.  So I am 

most interested in your points of view on gaming, the 

expansion of gaming, as well as some more specific questions 

regarding some of the things that your government has 

undertaken. 

 

What I will do is pose a very specific question to you, Mr. 

Premier, with regard to your own constituency of Riversdale.  I 

want to know what communications you've had, not only with 

your constituents who are constituents at large but with those 

who do run businesses in your constituency of Riversdale, on 

the 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

whole issue of expanding gaming in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the hon. member . . . I'll say a 

couple of things first of all.  Don't take too much offence that 

we don't comment on every resolution that you advance, as 

brilliant as they are and as very competent as they are. 

 

I note that there are many resolutions and many Bills on which 

neither you nor any of your members of caucus comment.  In 

fact if I wanted to be very tough about it I'd say, not even here 

to vote.  So please don't apply to us a standard that you do not 

live up to yourself.  If we can get that out of the way then we'll 

understand where we're coming at. 

 

The second point is with respect to canvassing.  I am here to 

explain government policy, what my position is, what the 

government's position is.  How we arrive at that position I can 

talk to you in terms of a variety of approaches, and a variety of 

studies, and a variety of reasons.  I don't go around asking you 

who you consult in your constituency, and I don't think, with 

the greatest of respect, that it is your job to ask me who I 

consult within my constituency.  You want me to tell you what 

government policy is, I will. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you, Mr. Premier.  It is most 

interesting to see that you condone 53 out of 53 people in 

government having no comment to make on gaming and 

gaming expansion in the province of Saskatchewan.  Many, 

many people will be most interested this evening in actually 

hearing you say that, and for a gentleman who has been absent 

for about the last five weeks with the exception of three days, I 

find it most interesting that you would comment on my not 

being present to vote on different issues. 

 

I've been meeting with a wide variety of people in this province 

as I'm sure you have, and I wouldn't mind at all talking about 

the fact that I consult with people in my constituency. I consult 

with businesses in my constituency, and I'm sure that they 

would want me to relay, since I am their member, their issues 

in this Assembly when it comes to gaming in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What your government has done is to undertake something that 

can change the face of Saskatchewan.  And I would like to 

know what your stand is on, first of all, the massive 

introduction of VLTs in the province of Saskatchewan.  I want 

to hear what you have to say about the fact that $720,000 this 

year will go into your government's coffers from the small 

community of Assiniboia just from VLT revenues alone from 

their hotels. 

 

I want to ask of you, sir, what you think it's going to do to the 

constituency of Melfort to have $700,000 this one year going 

into government coffers from VLTs.  I want you to tell me, 

what work you've done to ensure that the way in which gaming 

in this province is being expanded, the proposed casino 

expansions in the province of Saskatchewan, that you've done 

your 

homework, because your minister in charge of Gaming has not 

provided this third party, nor the official opposition, with any 

credible evidence that in fact what you're doing is sustainable 

over a period of time, what the real projections are, how many 

jobs will actually be created.  There is no specific evidence that 

has been provided. 

 

And I want to know what your stand is, because you keep 

asking what mine is, and I've been on record not only this 

session, but in the first session.  I can name you the exact pages 

from Hansard.  In the second session I can name you the exact 

places in Hansard.  In the third session I can name you the 

exact places in Hansard, and the Liberal Party and myself have 

been consistent each and every time. 

 

We have the position that gambling has the potential of an 

industry but that the development has to follow a strategic plan.  

And since we've not been able to find out what the strategic 

plan is from the minister in charge of Gaming, perhaps we can 

find out what that strategic plan is from you, sir. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, why was it that not one 

of your caucus members saw fit to comment on our private 

members' resolution on probably the most important debate 

coming up in Canada right now, social security program 

review?  Will you tell me that?  Did the cat bite the tongue?  

What happened?  Don't get into this game about why people 

comment or don't comment.  Don't think that the Liberal 

resolutions are resolutions which are of such import that we 

must have people commenting on them. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Just answer the questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  You're saying that because you're 

decrying the fact that the members on this side haven't spoken 

to your resolution.  So what?  So what?  We have resolutions 

on income security and you don't even see fit to have any 

member of your caucus speak to this issue.  That's for you to 

decide.  But don't have the double standard.  Don't condemn me 

on something that you yourself are not prepared to follow.  

That's my point. 

 

Now on the issue of massive introduction of VLTs, I think that 

you have flip-flopped on this, and you've flip-flopped on it in a 

way which is absolutely confusing and contradictory. 

 

First of all, you say your position is clear.  Your position 

amounts to one word: moratorium.  Moratorium until all the 

studies that would satisfy you will flow on every issue.  

Moratorium.  You're not saying -- typically Liberal -- no I'm 

against VLTs, I'm going to take them out of every hotel and out 

of every community; nor are you saying, yes I'm going to 

expand them.  What you're saying is moratorium.  That is the 

easiest, non-answer political position for any opposition party 

to take and it is dishonourable.  It is, as my colleague the 

minister in charge of the Liquor and Gaming 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Commission, described in question period today as saying:  

some of my friends are for it; some of my friends are against it; 

I'm with my friends. 

 

I'll tell you where I stand on this issue. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Good.  It's about time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well good, about time, she says.  I've 

introduced the legislation; I've been saying this for the last two 

years.  I don't know where the member has been.  I mean I'll 

repeat it again.  We're proposing the policy for the people to 

decide so here I tell you. 

 

You tell me, because if you're not going to tell me I'm going to 

tell the hotels association what your position is.  Your position 

with the hotels association has got to be as follows: elect the 

Liberal Party and those VLTs are gone - 

_ and for the communities.  They're gone.  You were all for 

them, of course, in the debate that preceded this Hansard 

debate in estimates last year.  You were pressing us to do it 

very, very quickly.  Now it's moratorium.  You elect the 

Liberals, and struggling rural Saskatchewan is going to lose 

that money.  Then you say to me, how do you feel about 

$700,000 coming out of Yorkton from VLTs? 

 

I don't think gambling is a particularly honourable way or a 

good way to get money, but I'll tell you one thing.  It's a heck 

of a lot better, if people are going to be gambling, that that 

money comes to the provincial coffers of Saskatchewan to be 

used back to the education and highways and health care 

system for the people of the province of Saskatchewan than 

finding its way down to Montana and North Dakota and Las 

Vegas so that they can get better highways, schools and 

hospitals, and roads.  That's where I stand on it. 

 

Now what do you want to do about this?  Are you going to shut 

down the VLTs or not?  Tell us what you would do if you were 

in charge this particular day.  What is your policy in this area? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, what I've been able to 

conclude from your comments is that you haven't done your 

homework, as well as your minister in charge of Gaming.  The 

focusing of my questions and my comments since 1991 on 

gambling, and since being elected overall, has been to try to 

force your government to produce a solid plan.  That has been 

my approach.  And it would be just as irresponsible for the 

Liberal Party to say, we are going to do this and this and this 

with gambling unless we had the objective research material or 

at least the raw data with which to work. 

 

We've done our best to collect information and to request data 

from your government, but it has been very, very difficult to 

obtain.  And this is the response that we got from the minister 

in charge of Gaming, when trying to access even the definitive 

studies that his department is using as the basis for their 

decisions.  And I quote: 

The information you have requested seeking detailed 

financial and organizational information about Saskatchewan 

charities, organizations, businesses, and exhibition 

associations, including their contact people, revenues, 

expenses, and profits, is considered private information and 

is protected under the freedom of information and privacy 

Act. 

 

How can we consult thoroughly with the people? How can we 

evaluate trends? How can we compare what your government 

is saying is happening to what we believe may be happening, if 

we're denied information?  And I find it most interesting that 

what you would like us to do is to do precisely what you're 

doing, and that is basing your public policy decisions on lack of 

evidence and full information. 

 

The minister would not provide the research being used by 

cabinet to make its decisions, and he says, and this is another 

direct quote in a letter to me: 

 

 All other research being used by the government in 

developing the casino expansion policy has been undertaken 

for review by cabinet and its committees, and as such is 

exempt from release under The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, how are we supposed to develop a fair 

assessment of government policy, or an alternative policy for 

that matter, if we don't have any information?  And I find it 

interesting that you're stating that we have a moratorium on 

VLTs.  What I called for is a moratorium on the expansion of 

gambling in the province of Saskatchewan.  I think that is a 

reasonable thing to ask, Mr. Premier, when your government 

has not provided any full, accurate information, nor has it 

provided a full strategic plan at all. 

 

You're wondering where it is one gets off in being able to have 

concerns about this.  You, Mr. Premier, mention that how could 

we have the dollars that are going to be spent in Saskatchewan 

going elsewhere.  How nave are we in this province that we 

don't recognize that there are places in . . . $250 million 

casinos, two of them being built as we speak, in Nevada, in Las 

Vegas, Nevada. 

 

The very people who promote expansion of casinos are the 

people who are going to benefit from them, and there have 

been massive expansions of casinos all across Canada, all 

across the United States.  This hasn't had one impact on Las 

Vegas except that they have more casinos.  So when people get 

involved in more gambling, Mr. Premier, they are inclined to 

gamble more and they are very, very interested in going off to 

the city of lights. 

 

I think, Mr. Premier, what you should be doing is basing your 

commitment to gambling on full evidence, on good research 

that I'm sure you could get if your government so chose.  

Instead, we have not been provided with any objective 

research; we've been provided with some pieces of research 

where 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

people are either consultants for the gambling industry or they 

are people who are involved in gambling directly and may be 

beneficiaries in order to be able to . . . if in fact they're 

introduced in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Premier, if you have read the research done 

by Robert Goodman who is the director of . . . and has done a 

United States gambling study.  I am most interested, sir, if you 

have read this, because this, in fact, was funded by the Aspen 

Institute and the Ford Foundation, two different bodies, neither 

of whom have any vested interest whatsoever in gambling, 

unlike many of the groups who have done a lot of consulting 

and a lot of research for governments across North America, 

who have a very vested interest in casino expansion.  I am 

going to ask you if you've read this research which has come 

out in March of 1994, and I would be most pleased to send this 

to you this evening to have you read what, in fact, casino 

expansion and expansion of gambling has done in many 

communities, not unlike the ones in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it would be most interesting for you to base your 

decisions on real evidence, and the fact that Mr. Goodman, 

Professor Goodman, has done this research and has concluded 

that the majority of the research that's been done by 

governments throughout North America, including Canada, 

have been flawed pieces of research based on what 

governments want to hear -- unobjective research, unreliable 

research, non-valid research.  And I think that it's incumbent 

upon you, before you expand gambling in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to ensure that you have full information and you 

lay before the people your strategic plan. 

 

I do want to sit down and find out if indeed you have read this 

study, and if you have not, I will send it to you because the 

impact on Main Street businesses, the impact on restaurants, on 

car dealerships, on various forms of entertainment, are 

substantial.  And I think that this isn't simply being concerned 

about social costs which may be quite expensive in the long 

run.  This is also about the economic costs that can be involved; 

that you may be engaging, sir, on something which gives you 

short-term gain for very long-term pain, both socially and 

economically within the province.  So I am interested in some 

of the responses to my questions, Mr. Premier, and if you don't 

have a copy of this research, I'd be pleased to send it over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I will make a comment 

about the specific question about the Ford Foundation and I 

think Aspen Institute of Study that the member talks about in a 

moment.  But before I do, I want to emphasize again what I 

believe is another example of the unwillingness, inability, I 

don't know how to describe it, of the Liberal leader on this and 

other issues, but on this particular issue . . . how confusing her 

position is. 

 

Madam Member, four or five questions ago, you got up 

passionately asking me whether I had given any consideration 

to what the impact of VLTs, as currently 

structured, are in the various communities that you identified.  

The implication was, although the words weren't quite that 

way, that this is very destructive and very bad. 

 

When I responded on the moratorium, in your latest last 

question you get up and you say, uh, uh, but you're 

misinterpreting me, Mr. Premier.  I'm not saying anything 

about what we've got going now including VLTs; I'm saying a 

moratorium on future expansion, which immediately brings 

into my mind and in the public's mind, massive confusion as to 

where you're coming from. 

 

What was the purpose of the question about the VLTs, except 

by implication that they should be shut down because of the 

horrendous nature of their social and economic impact.  As I 

said, the hotels association and the communities where the 

hotels are struggling to survive, ought to know and they will 

know, that you are by implication -- I'm being as fair as I can -- 

saying that if you should be elected, they will be gone, those 

VLTs.  Now you're saying to me, no, anything that exists, it 

exists.  What you're saying to me is, it's future expansion of 

gaming that's at issue. 

 

So you might perhaps clarify this for me when I take my place 

in a moment.  Is it correct that the Liberal Party position is:  

that VLTs are structured; horse-racing as structured and 

operating; bingos as structured and operating; and the various 

other forms of gambling, and gaming that had been going 

heretofore as structured; that those are okay as far as the 

Liberal Party is concerned?  I want to hear the answer to that.  

But it's the moratorium on the casino that you want us to 

consider.  And at least we'll know with clarity where you stand, 

and then I can with clarity give you an answer. 

 

Now let me try to extrapolate from this confusing set of 

questions and contradiction to the specific aspect of the Ford 

Foundation-Aspen Institute report.  This report has three or 

four major recommendations, report argues that attention needs 

to be paid to the social cost associated with gaming.  We agree.  

That's why we've appointed an Advisory Committee on the 

Social Impacts of Gaming; that's why we're implementing a 

gambling addiction program, albeit in its infancy, but we agree 

that attention to social cost associated is a paramount concern, 

right from the report that you asked me about. 

 

Secondly, the report says government should be regulator and 

not a promoter of gaming.  We agree.  That's why this Bill 

which is currently before the House is a Bill which will be in 

effect a transition Bill or a Bill to establish the casino.  The 

regulatory function is going to be separated, a vehicle in order 

to achieve this aspect of the Goodman report or the Ford 

institute study. 

 

Thirdly the report says that the government needs a gaming 

plan. 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Now you won't buy it -- it doesn't matter what I say to you -- 

but we think we have a gaming plan. 

 

(2115) 

 

We think it's a balanced, incremental one, allowing only slow 

and controlled growth in our province.  Only two casinos if it 

comes out, one in Regina, one in Saskatoon.  That's slow and 

controlled.  Well you see you will not buy that.  I'm reading 

from the report that you're asking me to study.  I'm giving you 

the response pursuant to that report of your government, and 

you do not accept it. 

 

Fourthly the report cautions against dependence on gaming 

revenue.  We agree.  The reliance of many Saskatchewan 

charities on revenue from bingos such as those that have been 

promoted by a number of other people serves as a cautionary 

tale on this point.  That's why we've not targeted gaming 

revenue any one program. 

 

Now all I say to you is this.  This Goodman Report, from my 

reading of it, says this.  They're critical of the gambling 

free-for-all witnessed in the United States and the American 

states and American jurisdictions, and by and large I agree with 

them. 

 

But I say what is being structured in Saskatchewan, I will say 

to the Leader of the Liberal Party what is being structured in 

Liberal Nova Scotia is totally different.  Your colleagues in 

Nova Scotia and in other provincial jurisdictions where your 

Liberal Party is in power is totally different from what the 

Goodman and Ford Foundation report talks about.  We are 

having a program which is carefully limited, controlled, and 

with all of the social, regulatory, dependency and other aspects 

of Goodman as best as possible addressed.  There is the 

difference and our position. 

 

Now perhaps you'd be kind enough to inform the House 

whether or not I interpreted your position with respect to 

gaming to be correct, namely that you support everything as is 

now, or that if you don't, tell us.  But it's just the moratorium on 

the casinos which is what is at issue.  Is that your position? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, you definitely like to 

ask questions more than you like to specifically answer them. 

 

We have had a history of gaming in the province of 

Saskatchewan for decades, and it's been a very intricate and 

interrelated industry.  It has been made up of charitable 

organizations.  It's been made up of exhibition boards where 

monies have gone back into the community.  The charitable 

non-profit organizations, the monies have gone back into the 

community.  We've had the horse-racing industry which has 

had within it some of the most skilled aboriginal people who 

have rarely been on social assistance.  Many of them . . . this 

has been something that has provided them with a steady 

income, and they have an extraordinary amount of expertise in 

it.  We have had, as well, hospital foundations in recent years 

funded all of their equipment, high portions of their equipment, 

funded by break-open tickets. 

 

What has happened in the province of Saskatchewan 

under your administration, Mr. Premier, is to change the 

balance of what has been there previously.  Yes, casinos have 

operated, but they've operated under exhibition boards.  Yes, 

we've had bingos.  Yes, we've had all different kinds of gaming 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  And it has not been 

something where people have thrown their hands up and said, 

my gosh, this is going to create such terrible social ills in our 

province that we can't allow this to happen. 

 

And that has been because there has been an intricate balance.  

It has also not done things in terms of changing the face of 

Main Street, Saskatchewan.  And I guess if you're wanting an 

unequivocal statement from me, you're talking about what 

difference will it make to have a casino in Saskatoon and 

Regina.  Well I think we should know if it's going to make 

some differences. 

 

And what you're in fact saying . . . in fact, your minister of 

Gaming said today that the jurisdictional issue has not been 

settled with aboriginal people, so there may indeed end up 

being on-reserve casinos as well.  We know of statistics of 

what has happened in other places -- not simply the United 

States but even in Manitoba, Mr. Premier -- where people who 

have become involved in more casino gaming and in the 

province of Manitoba that the number of people who then leave 

the province of Manitoba to go and gamble elsewhere has been 

extensive.  It has gone up substantially. 

 

So we do have certain pieces of information already, Mr. 

Premier.  Ultimately the Liberal position is to view gaming as 

an industry whose potential must be measured accurately.  And 

it has to be measured accurately before you continue to proceed 

any further. 

 

One main concern . . . and obviously you take this very lightly 

since you laugh in jest.  It's not something that is taken lightly 

by those who are currently participants in this.  It's not being 

taken lightly by the charities, Mr. Premier.  It's not being taken 

as lightly as you would like to think from hoteliers in the 

province.  It's not being taken lightly by the hospital 

foundations, by the exhibition boards, by industries like 

horse-racing and bingo who already have a particular kind of 

net that they receive.  And they want to know whether or not 

that is going to change as a result of your government's 

policies. 

 

And I think that there's a way of providing them with 

assurances.  I think that there are ways of being able to ensure 

that after extensive meetings and genuine consultations, to 

assess what the trends have been since the introduction of 

VLTs, for example, they should be able to.  You as a 

government have a responsibility for taking the information to 

date, evaluating it, and having some way of determining what 

impact this is really going to have overall. 

 

And yes, I do think that we need a period of moratorium.  I do 

think that.  And I see nothing wrong with taking the time to be 

able to measure more accurately what has happened after one 

year of 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

operation of VLTs on all these other forms of gaming.  What 

has been the overall economic, net economic impact on the 

province?  I think that's important for us to have as information.  

And once we know what the impact is then we can decide if the 

policy is one to be continued, if it should be modified, if it 

should be abandoned, depending on the overall cost or the 

positive contribution to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I do not believe that one simply slams the door on 

gambling.  We've had gambling for years and years and years.  

I want to ensure what benefits were being derived prior to 

government competition against . . . that has been introduced, 

and are protected for charities, and I want to ensure that all the 

glitter really is gold.  And I don't think there's anything wrong 

with that because what may appear to be a tremendous 

opportunity to raise government revenues, what is obviously 

perceived as a tremendous opportunity for aboriginal people, 

these things have to be able to be evaluated appropriately and 

could indeed become part of something that could be 

detrimental in the long run. 

 

All I'm asking is the same sorts of things that I asked when we 

were looking at Rafferty.  Okay?  I said, let's make sure that the 

positives outweigh the detriments; let's ensure that we have 

enough information to make intelligent decisions here before 

Rafferty-Alameda goes ahead.  And I'm posing the same 

questions to you tonight, sir. 

 

The Liberal Party is committed to ensuring that the effects of 

gambling are measured objectively.  That is precisely, if one 

would read Hansard, whether it was discussion about VLTs, 

whether it was discussion on any area of gambling that we have 

put forward, we want to know what the specific strategic plan 

is, what has transpired in the province over the last year, the 

impact that it's had on this wide range of gambling that has 

already taken place in Saskatchewan.  Will the benefits 

outweigh the detriments?  And I want to know whether you can 

tell us that tonight.  Will the benefits outweigh the detriments 

to Saskatchewan people by the increase in gambling in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister 

responsible for the Liquor and Gaming Authority, the member 

from Prince Albert, has provided those numbers to the hon. 

member in question period and in speeches endlessly, 

endlessly. 

 

And what the member is saying in the best tradition of the 

Liberal Party, in the best words of Mackenzie King, gambling 

if necessary but not necessarily gambling.  That's the firm 

position of the Liberal Party.  What is it? We want to make sure 

that the objectives of gambling are measured objectively.  

That's your position.  Well you know, please, at least some of 

the Conservatives have got the courage to get up and say, look, 

we're against it -- if we get re-elected we're going to take away 

the VLTs; we're not going to allow the casinos . . . to go away. 

At least they've got the courage to say that.  I just wish the 

Liberal Party did. 

 

In any event, I can't add anything else to this other 

than what I've said.  The member from Prince Albert has 

provided numbers at every question period that I've attended in 

this area.  It has not convinced the hon. member to be any more 

decisive than she is today: gambling if necessary but not 

necessarily gambling.  I doubt that any repetition of those 

figures will shake her off that very firm, solid leadership 

position that she adopts. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well that's a most interesting stance that 

you've just taken in terms of avoiding discussion of this issue, 

Mr. Premier.  And I would suggest to you that any, any reading 

of question period would give you great insight. Perhaps it 

would do you some good to find out exactly how your minister 

of Gaming has chosen not to answer in question period both 

myself and the official opposition on this question.  It is one of 

the reasons, sir, why we have received equal amounts of 

questions regarding this, even from hoteliers, Mr. Minister of 

Gaming, equal numbers of questions on this as we have 

regarding labour standards and The Trade Union Act.  And one 

of the things that I find most interesting is how you would not 

stand in your place as the Premier of Saskatchewan, bringing 

about fundamental change to our province, and you'll not 

definitively state whether or not the benefits will outweigh the 

detriments in gaming. 

 

So, as is obvious from our several lengthy minutes of 

non-question and answers tonight -- there were questions but 

no answers -- what I will do is to defer to the Leader of the 

Opposition who can pose some questions to you now, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I think I would be very pleased 

to take the questions of the Leader of the Opposition. You were 

going to come back to the nuclear industry, and I'm sorry that 

you haven't.  But I will, just since because I want to come back 

to it.  In 1991, September 21, 1991, the Liberal Party policy, as 

reported widely and as published in this regard, was to create 

new jobs and wealth through nuclear power plants, nuclear 

uranium mining, and related manufacturing, and then goes on 

to talk about waste disposal and plant operation.  That is your 

position, and therefore it does not surprise me that you did not 

see fit to come back to that tonight because this is typical . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why not?  I've got pages to come back 

to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well you can come back to it.  I want 

you to come back to it because it's typical, the same thing with 

respect to gaming.  Obviously we think this is a matter which, 

on a socio-economic balance, benefits the province of 

Saskatchewan more than it hurts the province of Saskatchewan.  

We have done studies in this regard.  We hope we're right.  We 

think we're right. 

 

You have to make your judgement call as to whether you 

believe that they are right or not right.  You have taken a 

position which permits you -- I say this with the greatest 

respect -- to walk all sides of the street. 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

An Hon. Member: -- Give us the information, and we'll tell 

you what we think. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, you won't accept this because 

your line is, to this group: gambling if necessary.  And to this 

group: gambling, not necessarily so. 

 

So I mean it's the same thing with the uranium thing, the 

discussion that was given here today.  You know this is going 

to be an interesting game that you can play for the next two 

years, but believe me, believe me, people are seeing through it.  

You need to tell us where you stand on these issues in order for 

us to answer with any degree of clarity . . . hard to be clear on 

answers, when the questions are very, very foggy. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, all we have requested from 

your government is responsibility, and that is to be able to hold 

you accountable.  To be able to give appropriate kinds of 

responses to the people of Saskatchewan to the questions that 

they are asking is to have accurate information from your 

government.  That's part of our responsibility in holding you 

accountable in the decisions that you are making for the people 

of Saskatchewan.  All we have requested is information, and 

we have never received information.  We have not received any 

of the studies upon which your decisions are being made, 

regarding casino expansion and gambling expansion in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  We've had access to all of the 

studies that the minister of Gaming was going to send over, but 

not the ones upon which you are basing your decisions.  And I 

think that if what one wants to do is to have definitive 

responses, that it is responsible for me to want to base those 

decisions on full evidence. 

 

Since you are coming to the conclusion about expanding 

gambling in the province of Saskatchewan in the manner in 

which you are doing it, I'm sure that you would feel completely 

confident in sharing with us the basis upon which you are 

making that decision.  That has not happened.  That has not 

happened.  It has not happened in question period; it has not 

happened in other opportunities where I've had a chance to 

question the minister of Gaming; it has not happened here this 

evening in talking to you; it has not happened upon writing to 

the minister in charge of Gaming.  It has not happened, period. 

 

And I believe that our stand is a responsible stand, and while 

you may be saying, Mr. Premier, that the people of 

Saskatchewan are seeing through this, the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . one of the reasons we are ahead of you in the 

polls . . . well you may laugh, sir, but we have the evidence as 

well, and they're your polls.  One of the reasons why is because 

people do not appreciate the direction in which you're taking 

the province and that is something with which you are going to 

have to contend. 

 

All we are trying to do is to provide people who have requested 

information from us with assurances, assurances either that 

what is being done is being done correctly and is based on 

evidence, or that 

indeed we should be holding things up because we don't have 

the evidence.  And I find it interesting that after this 

opportunity for you to truly be on record for saying I think 

gambling is exactly the way we should be going, this is 

precisely what we should be doing, it has my 100 per cent 

support, I haven't heard that from you tonight, either. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know the hon. member has won 

the election already.  I congratulate her on it, would never, of 

course, accuse her of any arrogance in that regard because of 

the confidence, so there's no use in us proceeding for the next 

two years.  But I will ask you one thing, Madam Member. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Going to be two years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, it's June 1996.  You, Madam 

Member, has indicated . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon 

me? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Second Monday? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Third Monday in June. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why didn't you support my Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well maybe I will.  Introduce it again; 

we'll take another look at it.  I do want to ask the hon. member 

from Greystone, however, to do us a favour.  You have a hotels 

association study, you alluded to it a few moments ago . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Solicited by herself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- My minister says you asked for it.  

Will you please table that, forward them to me.  You were 

going to give me a copy of the Goodman study.  Please forward 

to me a copy of that study of the hotels association so that I can 

take a look at it, and maybe there will be some additional 

information.  Can we have that commitment from you? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, what I will be willing 

to do is to share with you some of the information that we 

received from hoteliers.  We will blank out where they're from.  

No, actually it's quite extensive and there are surveys that were 

done and there are people who have a lot of concerns that have 

been raised. 

 

And quite frankly, I think that the Premier of this province 

should be proud of some of its citizens who, even though they 

are currently making a small margin of profit from VLTs, have 

been the people who have come forward and indicated that they 

see some very, very serious ill effects of people in their 

communities, people who are very, very concerned about 

individuals.  Where they used to be able to say when they were 

spending the money on having alcohol, we just cut you off, 

don't feel that they're in a position of simply saying to 

somebody playing VLTs, we're just going to cut you off. 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

So I think that this is information that you should want to have 

in your possession; and yes, I would like very much to share it 

with you.  Did you in fact ask for a copy of the Goodman 

study? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- What I need to know is whether the 

member will give to me -- I want this on the public record -- a 

copy of the hotel survey which she solicited at public expense, 

taxpayers' expense, because the double standard, with the 

greatest respect, Madam Minister, doesn't apply.  You cannot 

be asking us to be tabling every report that we have while you 

keep your reports secret and confidential in this area. 

 

So will you give me the commitment that you will provide your 

studies that you have commissioned in this regard, in detail, in 

the interests of finding out all the answers so the taxpayers can 

make the appropriate decision?  I just want a yes or no to that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I find this most 

interesting -- your attempt again to turn the tables.  I am most 

willing to share with you the survey that was sent out.  We had 

a considerable response and I think that people have been 

astonishingly not only honest but very helpful and concerned in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What you have chosen to do is to change the face of the way 

Saskatchewan functions with the introduction of gambling in 

the way that you have in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

expansion of it.  And you have been unwilling to provide 

anything to the official opposition and ourselves upon which 

we can base any solid decisions regarding your decisions. 

 

So I find this most interesting this evening.  One of the things 

we will know . . . you should know is that, again, as with other 

pieces of information that comes out of this House regarding 

gambling, we will send it to concerned parties because they 

were wanting to know some of your answers to the questions 

that I posed tonight.  And in the end I guess we'll see where the 

average person in Saskatchewan comes down on this issue, 

won't we? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I want to say to the hon. member that 

we too will be contacting the charities and the organizations. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's about time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, oh, about time.  We've been 

doing this for two years but I'll . . . So we too will be telling 

them where you stand on all of those areas.  We'll be talking to 

the hotels association people and be telling the charities.  We'll 

be telling the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations -- 

mind you, you demonstrated that by your vote today.  We'll be 

telling all the people about the moratorium, the moratorium and 

how far it extends.  Don't worry about that. 

But I take it in the meantime, that what you've told me with 

respect to the report that you've done with respect to the hotels 

association, that your position is, I'll release it perhaps and 

perhaps I won't -- again, typical. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let's switch tack 

a little bit here, Mr. Chairman.  And while the Premier has his 

officials here, there's some things I'd like to know about inside 

a government.  Mr. Premier, I understand that each department 

must file a B130 form with the Department of Finance prior to 

budget preparations.  Would you please explain to this 

Assembly what a B130 form is and what its primary use is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, the very high number to that 

form, B10346, implies that there must be at least 995 others 

before it, so let me just see what kind of a form this is.  Or 

rather than playing hide and seek with me -- peek-a-boo -- and 

in the spirit of the Leader of the Liberal Party, send over a copy 

of this and see if I can be refreshed in that regard. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, the reason I asked the question 

is, is that we've been told by a former Department of Finance 

employee that this B130 form is used by all departments and 

they use it to justify their expenditures for the coming year.  

And we would like . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You mean in preparation for the budget? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- That's correct.  A copy of each year's form for 

Executive Council, for instance, and every other government 

agency, board, commission, that completes such a form.  And I 

would also ask: do Crown corporations complete the same 

form; and if so, would you provide us a copy with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I have to tell you 

frankly, I need to know what this B130 form is all about before 

I commit to this question.  And I'd also tell the member 

opposite that if it is a form which is a preliminary set of 

estimates of expenditures by departments in preparation for the 

budget-making process, I can almost tell you right off the bat, 

we're not going to make that public, because the budget-making 

process goes through a variety of rules, as the member himself 

knows, being a former member of the treasury benches, and 

ultimately the budget looks entirely different than what 

departments will request or not request. 

 

We need to have -- every government needs to have -- some 

level of confidentiality in order to be able to do the right 

decision making and the right judgements in this regard. 

 

But I'll check it out to see if there is something with this B130 

form that we can do to accommodate you; but as I say, if it's 

part of the budget-preparation cycle, you can forget it. 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I presume that your head  . . . the deputy 

minister to the Premier would know about such a form.  

Perhaps it doesn't exist then.  If I'm wrong . . . We were told in 

confidence that it did, that it wasn't budget material, that it was 

the justification which each department put forward for its 

expenditures in the coming year.  And the reason I lead with 

that, Mr. Premier, is that we've had a great deal of concern as 

you know -- we've raised it in question period a number of 

times -- about the level of patronage within your government. 

 

And one of the things that we have questioned is the way that 

your ministers and your departments are hiring people, the 

changes in salary level and that type of thing.  And we ask 

those questions in good faith because of some promises that 

you made in the last election campaign about you failing in 

your responsibility if you did not eliminate a lot of the 

patronage that was in government and how we should have 

independent commissions to do hiring. 

 

And I understand that in the beginnings of your administration 

some of the people that came on board, came on board because 

of your commitment not to indulge in a lot of political 

patronage.  And I think we've proven through the course of this 

session that not only have you indulged in it; you've 

institutionalized it far more than any previous government ever 

did.  So I would ask you, Mr. Premier, why in the face of the 

evidence -- and I have very, very long lists of individuals here 

with salaries and really quite astounding numbers of people for 

a two and a half year period of time at the beginning of a new 

administration -- why your government would so adamantly 

oppose some of the proposals put forward in this session 

dealing with things like all-party committees, as far as 

appointments to boards and commissions? 

 

We just had a very unsavoury example of the minister having 

to deal with the arts board, and that is a terrible travesty for that 

type of thing to happen in our province.  Those are all 

appointments of your government.  And wouldn't you think, 

Mr. Premier, that an all-party committee of this House with 

your members in the majority would be a far better solution to 

that type of thing than what we've seen here where you have 

virtually institutionalized patronage in a very structured way? 

 

Over 40 former NDP (New Democratic Party) MLAs (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly), MPs (Member of Parliament), 

candidates already on the public payroll in only two and a half 

years -- nearly double what the former administration in nine 

and a half years.  And don't you think that there would be a 

better solution?  And why this outright rejection of proposals 

brought forward to this House to let the public back in to the 

system and have confidence in what we do in here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I am going to 

resist my recitation of the . . . talking about patronage list 

instituted by the former government.  We start with the letter A 

and then work straight down 

to the letter Z.  I think Mr. Bob Andrew started with the letter 

A at the top of our list but let's leave that aside for the moment. 

 

In 1993-94 . . . Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who's the Z? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Who's the Z?  No, no . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I'll give it to you here.  No, we've got it; 

we've got it.  We've got Ralph Katzman and Myles Morin, 

Keith Parker, Paul Rousseau, Sandberg, Schoenhals.  But we'll 

leave that aside for the moment. 

 

In '93-94 there were 1,035 appointments, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition, of which 1,029 -- 99.4 per cent -- were hired by 

competition or under the terms of the collective agreement; 0.2 

per cent were order in council appointments; and 0.4 were 

section 7.23 appointments.  I'm not even sure what 7.23 

appointments are. 

 

Okay.  This is a power vested in the chair of the Public Service 

Commission to fill, in special circumstances, an aboriginal 

nominee or someone of that nature.  That's a pretty good 

record, I think -- 99.4 and only .2 of order in council.  You can't 

assume those are patronage either. 

 

Now your other question is the issue about an all-party 

committee with respect to appointments.  I think the idea . . . 

there's a germ of a good idea there, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition.  The problem is in its application. 

 

To give you the example, you and the member from Kindersley 

have been adamant, vehement, in your opposition toward the 

health boards, the interim health boards which we've 

established which have now been getting such rave reviews, 

not only in Saskatchewan but outside Saskatchewan.  And this 

is . . . I mean how would an all-party committee nominate a 

person to the board since you people, sight unseen, fought the 

health care reform? You are still fighting the health care 

reform.  How could it be said that the policy of the government, 

as represented by the majority of the House, can be 

implemented in that kind of a circumstance?  So you see, we 

have to have some area where there is appointment in this 

regard. 

 

And the hon. member will also acknowledge that there's no use 

us appointing people to some positions who do not believe in 

government policy.  I mean we have to appoint, at the very top 

levels, administrators and people -- not in every instance but in 

as many as possible -- who will be able to fulfil the overall 

government approach. 

 

So some of the ideas there have a lot of merit.  But the reason 

for the rejection is not because there isn't a germ of a good 

idea; it is their applicability.  We need to talk about this and to 

continue to talk about it and think our way through how we 

could yet further improve the tremendous reforms which we've 

instituted since November 1, '91. 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I was told to get into this because the Premier 

wanted to talk about things tonight.  If in 10 minutes we . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, but I'll make this final point, 

Mr. Premier, and we can leave it till we come again. 

 

One of the advantages that I have in asking you this question is 

that I had to campaign in 1991 after listening to you for four 

years in opposition, as leader of your party, condemn the 

patronage system of the previous government . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, and I have the list.  I have the list, Mr. 

Premier, and have gone over it very, very carefully and looked 

at the places that really, really irritated the public. 

 

One of the things that you should do when you lose, Mr. 

Premier, is learn some lessons from the beating that you take . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that's why I'm wondering 

why, in what we've seen today, why you are so reactive on this 

issue.  I mean the media pick it up.  People all over the 

province pick it up . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What media? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well the newspapers that you don't read. 

Okay? 

 

Lots of people are commenting on the fact that in two and a 

half years you have gone back on your word to Saskatchewan 

people over the issue of patronage.  And you say to me, well 

what about the health boards.  The only opposition that we 

have to them is that there seems to be a hesitation to meet the 

commitment of election.  But by and large most of the boards 

and commissions in this province, Mr. Premier, could be done 

by a committee of this House and they wouldn't infringe on 

your ability to influence anything. 

 

But the fact is that you have used a lot of patronage all the way 

through your government, and at very high salaries which you 

condemned in the past.  And I've compared those lists 

backwards and forwards and tried to come up with a solution, 

sir, that doesn't get us into a political morass but in fact puts 

some confidence back into the political system by the average 

voter. 

 

And I would have thought, with all of your experience and all 

of the promises that you had made, that you would be looking 

for a ready-made solution no matter who proposed it; that we 

could at least discuss the issue.  But every time one of these 

things is brought forward, your people just simply either refuse 

to talk about it, or they adjourn it or they simply push it aside 

because it is a Tory idea. 

 

Well for heaven's sakes, Mr. Premier, at least consider the item 

before you reject it out of hand because I do believe it is on the 

people's minds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'll just be a minute.  I say we do.  I 

say as legitimately and as sincerely as I can say it, 

we do. 

 

Every idea that is a good idea whether it's a fiscal idea, health 

idea, or democratic reform idea, we'll consider it.  But I want to 

say this as I take my chair.  Here's the Leader-Post; I hardly 

ever read it either.  But somebody dug it out just now as a 

matter of research and said Premier, you should take a look at 

this.  Dated November 17, 1993 the headline says, Mr. 

Chairman: "NDP praised for reform: Opposition leaders have 

additional suggestions." 

 

 In two years, the government has delivered on promises -- 

like passing a new MLAs conflict of interest act and 

implementing freedom of information -- the Devine 

government put off for nine years. 

 

 Opposition Leader Rick Swenson says the government's 

democratic reform record is positive. 

 

 "I congratulate Romanow . . . 

 

I think he means Premier Romanow, but it doesn't matter. 

 

 . . . Romanow for recognizing you simply can't turn the clock 

back. 

 

By the way, I accept your congratulations. 

 

 . . . if they want to talk about ways to meaningfully involve 

the Opposition in doing more of it, we're brimming with 

ideas." 

 

We're willing. 

 

 Liberal Leader Linda Haverstock agreed the government 

should be commended on its accomplishments. 

 

Well I mean . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well why get stuck in a rut then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Get stuck in the rut?  Mid-term report 

card you praise. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's old news. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's old news, less than a thousand 

days in office, you know.  John Kennedy says, those things we 

dream of we may not be able to accomplish in the first 100 

days or the first 1000 days, or even in our political lifetime, or 

even in our lifetime, but we're working.  And I tell you, we are 

making tremendous strides, tremendous strides, and we want 

your ideas. 

 

Look, I'm being . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- But your record doesn't prove it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well that's not what you said.  You 

said our record proves it, that it's positive. 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Did we adopt everything?  No.  Does it mean that we're not 

going to adopt some of your ideas? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Did you adopt any of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  Well give me a good idea, and 

we'll adopt it. 

 

Anyway the point is we've made good progress here, Mr. 

Chairman.  And I do say to the Leader of the Opposition, give 

us the ideas to look at.  I just give one example which I think is 

a tough one to resolve though.  I won't  repeat the arguments on 

this, but we like it very, very much.  And we know that you and 

the Liberal leader will continue to praise us in our reform 

movements. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Hours 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Rosthern: 

 

 That by leave of the Assembly, notwithstanding rule 3(1) that 

this Assembly shall on Tuesday, May 31, 1994, meet at 1 

p.m. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, by leave, I move we 

consider Bill 70 in committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (No. 6) 

 

The Chair: -- I recognize the minister responsible for Gaming 

and ask him to introduce the officials who have joined us here 

this evening for consideration of Bill No. 70, An Act to amend 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chair, with me tonight is Doug 

Moen, he is the executive director of public law.  Doug sits to 

my left.  And behind me is Darcy McGovern, the Crown 

solicitor for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

would just like to make a few comments before we move into 

the clause-by-clause sections of the Bill.  I think this exercise 

has been very worthwhile for members to embark on, because 

we have seen the 

government minister responsible and the Leader of the Third 

Party, myself, and as representatives of my caucus engage in a 

dialogue, in a dialogue that was pretty fundamental to the way 

this House operates because we've had a number of issues 

raised during the course of this session I think, that the public 

frowned on with a great deal of displeasure. 

 

Issues of how members deal with their expense allowances, the 

spectre of members of this House being charged with criminal 

activity because of the way that their monies have been spent in 

the past, and a whole area necessitated that we put our minds to 

a proper process for accountability with the public, but also that 

members of this House would have a system in place that they 

could use in order to seek out advice, and reach solutions about 

the way they conduct their affairs.  And all of this done in such 

a way that the public feels there is accountability and openness, 

and I would like to congratulate the minister responsible for 

looking at those various concerns, and amending where 

necessary to make sure that a process is in place. 

 

I think one of the biggest steps that we as members recently 

did, was to have a Conflict of Interest Commissioner put in 

place that would review all of our private dealings and have the 

ability to put those in such a way that we could have 

confidence that they would be dealt with in an upfront manner.  

And the fact that we've incorporated the commissioner into this 

process means I think that MLAs will have the utmost 

confidence that their private matters will be adjudicated, and if 

there is a problem, that there is a process for the Board of 

Internal Economy to ultimately stay on top of the issues at 

hand, as the public expects us to do now that we are an open 

forum with members of the media there, and any member of 

the public. 

 

(2200) 

 

So I am pleased with the way that the Bill has gone.  I would 

make the comment to the minister that the change to section 

67.1 I think is one that is going to require a lot of consultation 

because it does take out the formal approval mechanism in 

instituting the commission.  And I think the Minister of Justice 

has shown that if you handle this properly, as was done with 

the Ombudsman and the recent appointment, that there will be 

no problems.  But if we have the process that was used with the 

Electoral Boundaries Commission, then we will have trouble.  

So clearly it will be in the hands of the minister responsible. 

 

If the opposition is not going to have a veto, as this Bill 

proposes on the make-up of the commission, then I think it is 

going to be very incumbent upon whichever minister is 

responsible for this, to do his homework.  Because without that 

veto in there that means that you can, by order in council, 

appoint all of the members of the commission without the 

opposition having any say. 

 

And that is . . . I guess I'm warning the government of the day 

and governments in the future that if they 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

aren't prepared to listen in issues such as this where we are 

determining the remuneration of all members of this House, 

then we will have serious problems.  Other than that, I think 

this is a good piece of work and we'll wait to see how the 

amendments flow through, and I look forward to their passage. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I too 

want to take this opportunity to make some brief comments on 

Bill 70 which is An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (No. 6), and the amendments to that 

Bill. 

 

Since this Bill was given first reading in this Assembly, and 

that was on May 19, I think, just over a week ago, the minister 

and the government officials have been very accommodating to 

our caucus and very receptive to our input, and for that we are 

very grateful.  However, the Bill that is before us comes only 

after what I would best term, months of frustration at trying to 

get the government to sit down and discuss some of the issues 

that this important Bill addresses. 

 

One of the primary purposes of this Bill is to establish and 

enforce, in statute, the administrative role of the chairperson of 

the Board of Internal Economy, specifically as that role relates 

to the expenditures by members. 

 

I had some trepidation with the way in which the first draft of 

the Bill was proposed, how it had proposed specifically this 

role, but I am satisfied that with some amendments that were 

put forward not only by ourselves but members of the official 

opposition, and more importantly accepted by the government, 

for which we are very thankful, that the intent of the Bill is 

much clearer and stronger. 

 

By no means, though, does this Bill eliminate all of the 

problems currently facing the Board of Internal Economy.  The 

directives governing payment of some allowances are virtually 

unenforceable and that's because of their vagueness, whether 

that be deliberate or not.  There is much more work for the 

Board to do to fine-tune those directives, and I, as one member, 

really do welcome the task.  But I suspect that the Board will 

not be called again to resume our work on redefining the 

communication allowance guidelines that was left undone 

following our March 17 meeting because I think that it appears 

that we're now suddenly quite anxious to send all of these 

matters to an independent commission.  And after five months 

of urging this action, I for one welcome that announcement. 

 

Mr. Minister, I do have one question.  I'm wondering if you can 

advise us in the Assembly this evening what time frame that 

you have in mind for the selection of members to this 

commission, the time frame for their investigation and 

hearings, and finally, the time frame for them to report back to 

us, to the Assembly, from the Board . . . through the Board, 

pardon me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just 

want to thank the member of . . . the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party for their 

involvement as we went through this particular piece of 

legislation and discussed how it should be drafted and how it 

could work in the interest of the Legislative Assembly.  And so 

I want to say that I certainly do appreciate their input. 

 

I think what we have is we have developed some solutions to 

some concerns that we had as members of the legislature in 

terms of the process that we deal with members' directives.  

And I think that those, in the long run, will serve the legislature 

well. 

 

As well, the establishment of the independent commission to 

look at the way members deal with their constituency 

allowances, their communications allowance, what would be 

fair and reasonable remuneration in terms of pay for members 

of the legislature -- and I think all of these things are important 

-- that they be dealt with by an independent third party. 

 

I would want to say to the Leader of the Opposition and Leader 

of the Third Party that we certainly do intend to work with you 

as we put together these people who will look at the issues that 

I've raised with respect to the independent commission.  I can 

see that these consultations should begin shortly after this 

House adjourns, and if we can agree on the personnel, should 

be able to announce the make-up of the independent 

commission shortly after that.  I guess as negotiations go, it's 

difficult to put a time on it, but I think it's important that we 

establish the commission soon to have it get on with its work.  

And I look forward to the cooperation of the Leader of the 

Opposition as well as the Leader of the Third Party. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

The Chair: -- I believe the minister has an amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 15(2) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 3 of the printed Bill, by adding "there is no Speaker or 

that" after "Clerk is informed that". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

The Chair: -- I believe the minister has a number of 

amendments to clause 4. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chair, would it be appropriate 

to read in all of the amendments to Clause 4, rather than doing 

them individually?  Okay.  I move 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

then that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 50(4.1) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 4 of the printed Bill, by adding ", in the Speaker's 

capacity as chairperson of the board," after "the Speaker may 

conduct". 

 

And that we: 

 

 Strike out subsection 50(4.2) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 4 of the printed Bill, and substitute the following: 

 

  "(4.2)  If, after a review, the Speaker determines that a 

member's use of any allowance, disbursement, fund, 

payment, good, service or premises provided 

pursuant to this Act does or does not comply with 

the purposes for which it was provided or with the 

purposes of this Act, the regulations or the board's 

directives, the Speaker shall: 

 

  (a)  inform the member in writing of the determination; 

and 

 

  (b)  provide a copy of that determination to the board". 

 

I move that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 50(4.5) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 4 of the printed Bill, by adding ", to the board" after 

"the Speaker's determination". 

 

Let me: 

 

 Add the following subsection after subsection 50(4.5) of the 

Act, as being enacted by section 4 of the printed Bill: 

 

  "(4.51)  If the commissioner's written opinion differs from 

the Speaker's determination, the commissioner's 

written opinion prevails". 

 

And that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 50(4.7) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 4 of the printed Bill, by adding "the Speaker has 

given the member a written direction pursuant to subsection 

(4.6) and" after "if". 

 

And that we: 

 

 Add the following subsection after subsection (4.9) of the Act 

as being enacted by section 4 of the printed Bill: 

 

 "(4.91) subsections (4.1) to (4.9) apply only to a member's 

use, after the coming into force of those subsections, of any 

allowance, disbursement, fund, payment, good, service or 

premises provided pursuant to this Act". 

 

The Chair: -- The amendments to section 4 are a number of 

discrete propositions, but if the members are agreed to deal 

with them as one motion as the minister has moved.  Are the 

members agreed?  That is agreed. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 67.1(3) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 5 of the printed Bill by adding "if there is no Speaker 

or" after "Speaker as chairperson of the board or,". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we: 

 

 Strike out clause 6(a) of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

  "(a) in clause (1)(a) by striking out ', who is the chairman' 

and substituting 'or, if there is no Speaker or in the 

absence or inability to act of the Speaker, the 

Deputy Speaker'". 

 

As well that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 68.7(2.1) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 6 of the printed Bill, by adding "if there is no Speaker 

or" after "chairperson of the board, but,". 

 

I move as well, Mr. Speaker that we: 

 

 Amend clause 68.7(4)(a) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 6 of the printed Bill, by adding "if there is no Speaker 

or" after "the Speaker or,". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (No. 6) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I move, by leave of the Assembly, 

that Bill No. 70 be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:20 p.m. 

 

 


