




















































Hansard: March 25, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1151 

 March 25, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the Assembly on behalf of my 

colleague from the Nipawin constituency, 36 grade 4, 5, and 6 

students that are here from the Codette School.  And they are 

here with their teachers Ephrem Theoret and Christene 

Reynolds, 10 parents that are there as chaperons, and the bus 

driver Mr. Olson. 

 

I will be meeting with you, on behalf of the member from 

Nipawin, after question period and we'll have some discussion 

and drinks, and I'd like to ask my colleagues to welcome these 

students to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to 

you and through you on behalf of the member from Kinistino, 

36 grade 8 students from Bruno Central High and the Cudworth 

School seated in your gallery, on the west end of it.  I 

understand they have come down this morning, so they've had 

a long ride already.  I'm sure it was a very quiet ride to start 

with. 

 

They're joined today with their teachers Jake Jmaeff, Jim 

Bridgemon, and Arlene Julè.  I look forward to meeting with 

them later for photos, and they have a list of questions here that 

they want answered so we will try and do that for them. 

 

I ask all members to please welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

distinct pleasure for me this morning to introduce to you and 

through you to my colleagues in the legislature, two very dear 

friends of mine, Fred and Irene Schoenroth, who are sitting in 

the west gallery.  I've known these people for many, many, 

many years and they are just tremendously hard-working 

people in our constituency.  They have a dairy farm just south 

of White City.  And although they tell me that they're sort of 

retired, I know they work harder now than they ever did. 

 

They're going to spend some time in the building this morning, 

and I would ask all my colleagues to join me in giving them a 

very warm welcome to this building. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure this morning to welcome to the Assembly a group of 

21 students from grade 5 from the Elrose Composite School 

with their teacher, Donna 

Benjamin, and a group of chaperons. 

 

It's always a pleasure to have company from home, and I ask 

the members to join with me in welcoming this group of people 

from Elrose.  And we'll be meeting afterwards for pictures and 

drinks and have a chance to talk. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

also like to introduce and welcome the students from the Elrose 

Composite School in Elrose.  Elrose is located only a short 35 

miles from my home town of Eston.  There's always been a 

friendly spirit of competition in things like dance classes, 

hockey, and other sports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I recognize a few people in the gallery, the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, friends of ours.  And I'd certainly like to welcome 

Betty Mae Leavins and Mr. Trayhorne and Mr. Casey and 

some of the other friendly faces I see up there, and ask the 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming them as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan Outfitters Association Partnership 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker   As the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who represents an 

area with many, many outfitters, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure today to announce the recent partnership formed 

between our government and the Saskatchewan Outfitters 

Association. 

 

As we are all well aware of the outfitting and guiding industry, 

they play a major role in the success of tourism in our province.  

With this in mind, we must remember that tourism in 

Saskatchewan is on the rise.  Tourist inquiries to Saskatchewan 

are up 36 per cent from last year, while the number of U.S. 

(United States) residents visiting our province have increased 

13.7 per cent from last year. 

 

The goals of the partnership are to pursue common interests on 

objectives in managing fisheries and wildlife resources, to 

enhance the quality and range of services provided by the 

outfitting and guiding industry, and to expand tourism. 

 

Thousands of people outside of Saskatchewan and Canada 

know us because of their experience with industry 

representatives.  Millions of dollars annually come with them.  

An independent advisory council sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan Outfitters Association will be formed to advise 

government on outfitting and guiding matters and will examine 

and develop the concept of self-regulation by the industry. 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, it is through cooperation and communication that 

help make the outfitting and guiding industries flourish and 

reach their full potential.  We are happy to be working with 

them in trying to reach this goal.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Milestone Prairie Players 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to mention a group of 

people I'm very proud to be associated with.  In fact, some may 

say I began my political career by learning many skills with 

this talented group of people, the Milestone Prairie Players. 

 

This is their 10th anniversary and last evening, their opening 

night, they had a full, full house, and it was very successful.  

And just like tickets to Bruce Springsteen concerts, people 

lined up weeks ago for over 24 hours in line to purchase tickets.  

And it's a good thing too, because the productions are too good 

to miss.  They have sold out performances for all nine 

evenings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these actors are amateur in name only.  Their 

productions have entertained people at home, at the 

Saskatchewan Drama Festival, at the Regina Performing Arts 

Centre, and most recently, at the international drama festival in 

Ireland. 

 

They have received many awards and honours.  That is some 

accomplishment for a group of people who get together simply 

because they love their craft and want to share it with others, 

and in the meantime raise some money for worthwhile projects 

in our community. 

 

The entire community participates in this annual event, which 

puts on a fabulous meal and great entertainment.  The 

magazine, This Country Canada, has done a feature story on 

the players in the community of Milestone, to be released this 

spring. 

 

My congratulations to the community of Milestone and the 

Prairie Players.  Good luck in the upcoming drama festival in 

Weyburn, and break a leg. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gas Exploration in Lloydminster Area 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, out of 

the some dark corners here and there we still hear mumblings 

about the advantage of doing business in Alberta as opposed to 

Saskatchewan.  It struck me as interesting and suggestive 

therefore that a Calgary-based resource company recently 

announced its confidence in Saskatchewan.  Morgan 

Hydrocarbons Inc. announced its purchase of drilling rights in 

the natural gas land north of Lloydminster, in the constituency 

that I represent. 

 

The company has drilled and tested three exploration wells in 

this area and has plans for another seven wells before spring 

breakup.  As well, Morgan Hydrocarbons plans to drill 20 to 25 

natural gas wells 

on its Northminster pool property this year.  The company now 

controls a total of 57 sections of land in the immediate vicinity 

of the Northminster facility. 

 

Last fall, Mr. Speaker, Bill Trickett, president of Morgan, was 

widely quoted as saying that Saskatchewan was a very good 

place to do business, and this recent announcement shows that 

he is backing his words with active exploration and 

development in the area of Lloydminster and other areas which 

will be of interest to some other members. 

 

In late 1993 Morgan announced an oil exploration program for 

its Rutland pool near Senlac and also for its pool near Smiley, 

just north of Kindersley.  Good . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Heritage Languages Conference 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, today it's my pleasure to 

extend greetings to teachers of heritage languages from across 

the province who are attending the annual heritage languages 

provincial conference and to congratulate all of those involved 

in this organization. 

 

The conference, organized by members of the Saskatchewan 

Organization for Heritage Languages, will be held today 

throughout to Sunday in Saskatoon.  The title of the conference 

this year is: language learning, the competitive edge.  This is 

meant to reflect the relevancy of learning languages and the 

need for gaining knowledge about different cultures so that 

Saskatchewan can be more successful in trade with countries 

throughout the world. 

 

Learning heritage languages also plays an important role in 

understanding and appreciating the 95-or-so ethnic heritages of 

people who came from all over the world to Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also like to recognize the work carried out by the 

Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage Languages and its 

member organizations throughout the province in promoting 

the linguistic skills of many Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope the participants will find the conference 

rewarding and a very good -- doozheh dobreh, xharashov, 

mucho bueno, tres bien, koyeskmay dasun, gans goot -- 

learning experience. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Hog Operation 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a brief 

announcement about a new, interesting development project in 

my constituency.  All across Saskatchewan new things are 

happening in rural areas.  Diversification and economic 

opportunities are becoming the buzz word. 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

In a small town of Beatty, in my constituency, a group of 

people have come together to share expertise and to share 

resources.  This group of eight shareholders is preparing to set 

up a major commercial hog operation.  Their corporate title is 

Saskatchewan Farrowing Partnership Inc.  The partnership will 

begin construction this spring on a farrowing barn to house 640 

sows.  The dugout and lagoon are already in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the partnership has developed a practical and 

workable business plan.  The plan is to build on land provided 

by Triple E Farms operated by some of the partners.  The 

weanling business will be closed shop with all young pigs 

purchased by members of the partnership, thus eliminating the 

need for each member to operate a separate farrowing barn. 

 

They project 300 births a week to be distributed amongst the 

partners.  As well, there will be certain spin-off opportunities 

associated with this operation. 

 

This business is a fine example of corporate cooperation, of 

people banding together in their own interests and at the same 

time creating economic development in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Judges' Salaries Commission Legislation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, yesterday 

you introduced legislation which allows your government to 

break another legally binding contract, repeal valid legislation, 

and to break the law.  The Bill contained a very rare and 

seldom-used feature called a preamble, which in this case 

outlines an excuse for having to introduce such a Draconian 

piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, we are told that preambles are generally used by 

governments who are anticipating a court challenge to their 

Bills. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is there a preamble to this Bill?  Are you 

anticipating a court challenge to this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We are, of course, not aware of any 

decision by the judges, or anyone else, to mount a challenge to 

the Bill although they've been quoted in the media as saying 

that they're considering it. 

 

I want to tell the member, though, that the inclusion of the 

preamble was not drawn with the intention of helping the 

constitutionality of the Bill, but it was to give some context to a 

Bill which is an unusual Bill, an extraordinary Bill, quite out of 

the ordinary.  And we felt it our obligation to put the case on 

the record in the Bill itself, to put the context on the record 

within the Bill itself, against which this Bill is being proposed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, after reading the 

preamble to the Bill and reading the preamble to the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) Bill, something sure seems 

to be smelly in this area.  After reading the preamble, I would 

say that you have now institutionalized political rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you are not expecting a court challenge, and 

you are confident that your Bill will stand such a test, why have 

you included a clause which, like many of your Bills -- other 

Bills -- takes away the right of individuals to take you to court 

over this matter?  As a matter of fact, it's almost identical to the 

clause which took away farmers' rights to redress in the courts. 

 

Why do you, Mr. Minister -- and your government -- feel it is 

necessary to suppress any legal action against you?  Can you 

explain this to the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The decision in this case, as the member 

well knows, is whether or not we could pay the award; whether 

or not we could pay the 24 per cent.  If we're going to pay the 

24 per cent, we simply pay it.  If we are not going to pay the 24 

per cent, then certain things had to be done and that's what the 

Bill does.  The Bill does no more or no less than is necessary. 

 

Now it makes little sense, it makes little sense to pass a Bill 

voiding the award without at the same time sealing off the 

possibility of thwarting the decision of this Assembly to set 

aside the award, if you allow the same result to happen through 

legal action.  So we simply had to deal with the question of 

legal action at the same time as we were correcting the 

problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

the question here and the question regarding your Bill is the 

principle of law.  The other day you talked about law and 

justice.  Let me ask you a simple question.  If you say you have 

not broken the law, why do you need legislation which protects 

you from the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue that squarely 

faces this House is the question of whether or not you're going 

to pay the 24 per cent.  If you decide you're not going to pay 

the 24 per cent, you've got to go back and amend the 

legislation; there's simply no other way to do it. 

 

If you are going back to amend the legislation in order not to 

pay the 24 per cent, it makes little sense to leave open to the 

judges the avenue of coming through the courts and receiving 

their 24 per cent that way.  That would be irresponsible. 

 

We were very surprised to see you stand in this House 

yesterday and, in effect, support the idea that judges should be 

paid 24 per cent in this economic climate. 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

We're not . . . we don't share that view and we're moving to 

ensure that it doesn't happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

your Bill contains a section which says that every cause of 

action against the Government of Saskatchewan is extinguished 

-- extinguished, Mr. Minister -- with the stroke of the pen. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is simply frightening.  Not only are you 

saying that you can break the law at any time, you are 

proclaiming that the legal process cannot be brought to bear 

upon you and your government colleagues.  You have said that 

farmers are getting too much from GRIP so you break their 

legal contract and then use retroactive legislation to cover your 

backsides.  You are now above the law. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe you are a lawyer with a wealth of legal 

knowledge.  In fact, your Premier pushed for an inclusion of 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in the '82 constitution.  Do 

you not feel taking away individual rights to redress and 

breaking valid legal contracts goes against every oath and 

principle you have sworn to uphold?  Would you agree with 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now that's a very, very interesting 

question.  It . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the interruptions are too 

ongoing for us to hear the question or the answers, and I ask 

members please to give the questioner and the minister an 

opportunity to do their work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, implicit in the member's 

four questions to this point today is the fact that their party 

clearly believes that this award should be implemented.  That 

was also the position of the Liberal Party yesterday.  That is not 

the position of the government. 

 

Now is the member seriously suggesting, is the member 

seriously suggesting that we could go back and amend the 

legislation so that the award is not binding and leave ourself 

open to legal action to accomplish the same thing and wind up 

at the end of the day having to pay the 24 per cent?  Get real.  

The member should get real, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question here is whether or not we're going to pay the 24 

per cent.  We have decided we're not and so we have to ensure 

that at some point in the future some court doesn't tell us that 

we have to.  We don't think we should and we've introduced a 

Bill to make sure that we don't. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Private Members' Bills 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question's to 

the Premier this morning.  Mr. Premier, during this session of 

the legislature the opposition has introduced a number of 

private members' Bills dealing with legislative reform.  We 

have tried on numerous occasions to have these Bills debated 

and put to a vote.  So far your government has used its majority 

to block us on every occasion. 

 

Mr. Premier, we believe that all private members' Bills, those 

from our party, those from members of other parties, we 

believe there should be an opportunity to debate and vote on all 

private members' Bills that are introduced in this House. 

 

Regardless, Mr. Premier, of whether you support or oppose the 

Bills that are being brought forward, will you provide the 

democratic opportunity to at least talk about them?  Will you 

see that these Bills and all private members' Bills are debated 

and voted upon before the end of this legislative session?  

Would you guarantee that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I find the question 

very unusual, given the fact that in the Rules Committee 

meeting, at which your members attended, the opportunity was 

put forward by the members of the government caucus so that 

the very thing you're talking about could happen on a bi-weekly 

basis, or every other Tuesday.  We had a motion on the floor to 

bring that rule change to the Assembly, and it was voted down 

by the caucus that you belong to. 

 

Now rather than attack our government for the fact that that 

rule change isn't in place, go back and check the minutes, 

because they're printed minutes from the Rules Committee, at 

which time our members offered to you that every other 

Tuesday we would deal with private members' Bills, and your 

members refused it. 

 

Now this is a little bit confusing when the Leader of the 

Opposition stands in his place and says we're blocking your 

ability to bring the Bills forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I once again 

would address my question to the Premier because it was the 

member from Riversdale who led the New Democrats into the 

1991 election campaign, and I presume was the individual 

taking responsible for a document called Democratic Reforms 

for the 1990's. 

 

Mr. Premier, I've carefully read that document and it says, and I 

quote: 

 

 In a further effort to expand and enhance the role of 

Private Members and allow public input to the policy 

making process, all-party select committees (of the 

Assembly) should be used frequently to inquire into 

substantive public issues and government programs. 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

I agree, Mr. Speaker.  After reading that, I thought, Mr. 

Premier, that you would support expanded use of party 

committees to review things like utility rates, and make 

appointments to boards and commissions.  Maybe if there'd 

been an all-party commission in place to appoint your judges 

commission your government wouldn't be in the glue, as it is 

today, on this issue. 

 

Mr. Premier, why do you oppose, why do you oppose these 

initiatives, given your party's stated commitment to expand the 

use of all-party committees?  Why is that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, this gets stranger and 

curiouser as we go along here. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition . . . 

who's desk mate -- the member from Morse -- was at the Rules 

Committee meeting at which time the proposal was put by 

government members that you would be able to bring your 

Bills forward, he voted against bringing that resolution and 

motion to the Assembly.  You might tap him on the shoulder 

and ask why he voted that way. 

 

When you talk about all-party committees, the Rules 

Committee is an all-party committee.  You have members on it.  

The member from Rosthern; the member from Morse are on 

that committee.  They voted against the rule change that would 

have allowed you to bring private member Bills forward. 

 

So what you might want to do rather than demand that you 

yourself go through that list of questions is just tap the member 

from Morse on the shoulder, who's sitting beside you, and ask 

him why he voted against it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I believe the 

Government House Leader, the member from Elphinstone, is 

talking about the meeting where the government members 

wanted to propose drinking Beep in the House and doing those 

type of very substantive government reform. 

 

What we're talking about here, Mr. Premier . . . and I address 

the question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, another Bill we have 

introduced in this House is one dealing with the idea of free 

votes.  And that isn't unique to the Progressive Conservative 

Party; that's been talked about by many parties.  This would 

enable members on both sides of the House to express 

themselves freely in this Assembly on very substantive issues. 

 

It would mean that we wouldn't have the spectacle that we saw 

yesterday where we had the member from Regina Albert South, 

former chief Crown prosecutor, province of Saskatchewan, 

having to run out the door . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member 

knows that that is out of order and I wish he would not refer to 

members being either in the House or out of the House.  Order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You people were proceeding to bring in a Bill that would break 

the law.  And obviously members feel very strongly about that 

type of thing. 

 

Now I believe, Mr. Premier, that the extended use of free votes 

in situations like this would allow all members the freedom to 

stay in this Assembly and vote their conscience and the will of 

their constituents rather than having the spectacle we saw 

yesterday.  Don't you agree, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, if I may, I find, as my 

House Leader has said, that this question period, especially 

from the very first question but as it goes on, in the words of 

Alice in Wonderland: gets curiouser and curiouser and 

curiouser. 

 

He says, the Leader of the Opposition says, in order to allow 

members to express the wishes of their constituents, allow the 

free vote.  And what does the Conservative and the Liberal 

caucuses do in this legislature with respect to the 24 per cent 

increase to judges who are getting paid $90,000 a year now?  

They get up and they stand up against the intent of their 

constituents, and they apply the will . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Forty-three per cent raise for a person in 

your office . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the turncoat member from this 

caucus to the Liberals is chirping from his seat, having taken a 

37 per cent increase from the Liberal Party.  No wonder 

Liberals and Conservatives take the 37 per cent and fight for 24 

per cent for a group in society that would make $90,000, and 

this member's got the audacity to get up and to say that he's 

speaking in the interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If you were speaking in the interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan, you'd be standing up for the single mothers and 

for the farmers and for the working people, and for all of those 

who are doing the job of bringing your debt, wrestling it, to the 

ground.  That's what you should be doing, rather than applying 

the whip.  Try a free vote there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think by the 

Premier's reaction, he and I both know what the problem is.  

The problem is that I guess I and a lot of other people in this 

province, Mr. Premier, give your back-benchers too much 

credit.  Because I honestly believe that some of these people 

that you have in here would be intelligent enough to sit on an 

all-party committee and review things such as utility rates. 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

I honestly believe that some of them -- or I did -- have the 

ability to sit down and look at a simple Bill, a piece of 

government legislation, and come to some conclusions on it.  

Because that's what I'm talking about, Mr. Premier.  And I 

guess you know them better than I do, Mr. Premier.  I guess 

that's why you don't want to give them that ability.  You don't 

want to give them that ability.  You must know them better 

than I do. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, why don't you take the leash off them 

because I think, if given a chance, some of them do have some 

credibility.  Let them represent their constituents in this 

Assembly.  Let them sit on some committees and decide what's 

going on in this province, Mr. Premier.  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again, the line of 

questioning is curiouser and curiouser, beyond any credibility.  

This caucus that we have on this side of this House, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly as the Leader of the Opposition has 

described it.  It is intelligent and it is independent.  And it 

debates its issues in caucus and presents its roles in the 

committees of caucus, and in the committees of the legislature. 

 

You've got a Crown Corporations Committee that is 

functioning fully.  You got a Public Accounts Committee 

which is functioning fully.  The various committees of the 

legislature functioning fully.  Now there is an argument about 

whether or not you should have a committee dealing with the 

public utilities review committee. 

 

One of my colleagues says, what did you do with PURC 

(Public Utilities Review Commission)?  You did away with it, 

just summarily like that.  And I might add you did away with it 

after the Court of Appeal said that what it did -- PURC did -- 

was right and you should not do it.  You did it summarily.  I'm 

not sure whether you did it retroactively or not, but . . . oh yes, 

you did it by the same legislation, the very thing that you're 

criticizing the Minister of Justice for doing now on the 24 per 

cent salary increase. 

 

Look, why don't you people get real?  Why don't you start 

speaking for the ordinary guy, the little guy?  The person who 

is sacrificing to make this province a better province for 

tomorrow for his children and their children.  Don't stand up for 

those who've got $90,000 a year and want 24 per cent on top.  

Stand up for the farmers and the workers.  Stand up for the 

people.  Then we'll talk about . . . (inaudible) . . . for 

democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Establishment of Group Home in Regina 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question is 

for the Minister of Social Services.  The government has plans 

to establish a youth group home in a Normanview 

neighbourhood in north-west Regina.  Mr. Minister, would you 

tell us what 

consultations were conducted before a decision was made to 

make an offer to purchase a home in the neighbourhood? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of 

Social Services is not here, and I know this is an issue that he 

will want to report to you on, I'll take notice of the question and 

get back to you on it. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We've been taking 

notice on a lot of questions in which we have not received 

information, and I think there's questions that need to be 

answered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on March 10 the Social Services minister met 

with four representatives of the neighbourhood where this 

group home is to be located.  Would the minister tell the 

Assembly what concerns were raised by the residents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding is 

that the minister has met with this member on this very issue.  

And while I'll take notice of the question, my understanding 

was that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The minister has taken notice. 

 

Effects of Taxation 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'll shift my questions to the Finance 

minister.  Numerous studies have been conducted which show 

that the areas with higher taxes tend to have lower economic 

well-being.  Businesses are more likely to set up in low tax 

areas and people are more likely to move out of high tax areas.  

Higher taxes mean less spending and investment by taxpayers 

in local businesses. 

 

Madam Minister, what plans do you have in place to relieve the 

tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan to encourage them to 

stay in the province and improve their economic well-being? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would welcome an 

opportunity to answer the member's question. 

 

If there's one rule of thumb on taxes, the rule of thumb is this: 

the highest taxes in Canada are in Liberal provinces.  The 

highest basic income tax rate is in the Liberal provinces in the 

Maritimes; the highest gas taxes are in Liberal provinces; and 

the highest sales tax, by far, are in Liberal provinces -- l0 per 

cent, 11 per cent in the Maritimes on all goods and services. 

 

Now I'm not about to stand here and be lectured by Liberals 

about taxes.  If you'll look at the governments in Canada that 

are tax-and-spend governments, they're Liberal governments.  

And if you look at the most recent budget of the Liberals in 

Ottawa, again although saying there would be no tax increases, 

there were tax increases on seniors. 

 

So to the member opposite I would say, before she starts 

talking about what we do, look what Liberals do 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

elsewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, this is the 

province of Saskatchewan and this is about your economic 

policies. 

 

The current Economic Development minister was quoted in 

Hansard in June of 1991 as saying: 

 

 We've indicated many, many sources where we would see 

the government saving the kind of money that would make 

these kind of massive tax increases unnecessary. 

 

Madam Minister, since your government took power, spending 

has increased.  Even SaskPower and SaskEnergy bills came in 

separate envelopes last month.  Tell us today what those 

sources are where you could stop the massive tax increases you 

have inflicted upon the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the 

tax burden in this province for business.  Despite our very 

difficult financial circumstances, we have reduced the tax rate 

for small business by 20 per cent.  We have taken the E&H 

(education and health) tax off inputs for manufacturing and 

processing. 

 

But the Liberal Party has to start coming clean with the 

electorate of the province.  They can't have it every way.  They 

want to reduce the deficit; they oppose our cuts.  They have 

spent over $300 million since this session started, and they 

want to lower taxes.  This is not credible. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And give judges 24 per cent. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And give judges 24 per cent.  We 

have to be accountable to the electorate; we have to be coherent 

and consistent.  It's the obligation of opposition parties to be 

coherent, consistent, and accountable as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In 1992-93 the tax 

increase per family of four was $1,211.  In 1993-94 it was 

$878.  Madam Minister, it is the middle class families of 

Saskatchewan that are feeling the brunt of your tax grab.  Only 

23.4 per cent of Saskatchewan income tax filers earn over 

$30,000 a year; however they pay 72 per cent of the total 

income tax. 

 

Madam Minister, will you be fair and relieve the tax burden on 

Saskatchewan's middle class so they'll stay in the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The member has to look at this issue 

in perspective.  You would think that it's only the province of 

Saskatchewan that is faced with fiscal difficulties and it's only 

the province of Saskatchewan that's raising taxes.  It is simply 

not true.  The truth is that the tax increases that have been the 

highest 

increases have been in Liberal provinces. 

 

But again, I'm asking the member to have some coherence here.  

She supports lowering taxes, they support reducing the deficit, 

they support more spending, and they support a 24 per cent 

increase for judges and a 37 per cent increase for their own 

caucus. 

 

The electorate of Saskatchewan has to start asking them 

questions.  Does this picture fit?  They have to be accountable 

to taxpayers, just as we do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Shortage of Grain Cars 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Agriculture or . . . well perhaps 

the Acting Minister of Highways and Transportation. 

 

Mr. Minister, officials at CN Rail (Canadian National Railway 

Company) are refusing to move grain cars through the Bodo 

rail line.  That's near Unity, Saskatchewan.  Now there are two 

elevators on that line which are full of grain.  And because the 

CNR is not running their cars through that line, farmers in the 

Reward and Cactus Lake areas are having to store their grain 

on the ground, and they haven't been able to get their products 

to market. 

 

Now as you know, farmers are desperately in need of some 

cash flow for spring seeding.  Now, Mr. Minister, are you 

aware of this situation and have you made any submissions to 

CN Rail and to the federal Liberal government to get these 

people off of their chairs and working for the grain markets in 

that area? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the area the member 

talks about is one of the many areas in rural Saskatchewan right 

now that is in need of cars from both CN and CP (Canadian 

Pacific).  And to that end, the Minister of Agriculture last week 

wrote to the federal minister, and I believe actually wrote to 

Mr. Goodale, our Saskatchewan cabinet minister, our Liberal 

minister, to identify for him the severe shortage of railway 

rolling stock needed to move the vast volume of grain in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we are aware of the issue and I'm pleased that the member 

brought the question forward.  I would also offer, Mr. Speaker, 

in the spirit of cooperation, that if there were a motion put by 

the members opposite to urge the Liberal government to 

urgently get cars available for moving Saskatchewan grain, we 

would certainly support that kind of a motion today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Act, 1980 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would move first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

and to enact certain other provisions 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 1994.  

Earlier this week I announced the government's intention to 

introduce this Bill.  It will repeal the legislation that requires 

the government to implement the recommendations of the 

Provincial Court Commission, recommendations which would 

result in a 24 per cent salary increase for Provincial Court 

judges. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it is important for the people of 

Saskatchewan to know a little about what brings us to this 

point.  As Saskatchewan's Provincial Court was created in 

1978, by the legislation creating it, the salaries of the judges of 

the court were set by order in council.  In other words, by the 

government of the day. 

 

For a number of years the determination of judicial salaries was 

not a source of controversy.  But in the early 1980s it became 

an issue of growing concern for the judges of the court.  As 

they debated issues involving salary and benefits with the 

previous administration, they became more and more 

concerned about the fundamental issue of judicial 

independence.  One of the essential ingredients of judicial 

independence is that judges have financial security. 

 

To meet this threshold, the Universal Declaration of the 

Independence of Justice states that the compensation paid to 

judges must be, and I quote: 

 

. . . adequate, commensurate with the status, dignity and 

responsibility of their office, and be regularly adjusted to 

account fully for price increases. 

 

In 1989, then Justice Minister Lane, when threatened by a 

lawsuit over salary, provided Provincial Court judges a $10,000 

increase.  In addition, the government of the day established the 

Schmeiser Commission in 1990.  This was an independent 

commission which was appointed by statute.  While the 

recommendations of the commission were not legally binding, 

Justice Minister Lane indicated at the time that he believed that 

in virtually all cases the recommendations of the commission 

would be accepted by the government and the legislature. 

Ultimately, the Schmeiser Commission recommended a salary 

increase of $14,000, or 15 per cent.  Mr. Lane came to the 

conclusion that such an increase was, and I quote: not in the 

cards. 

 

The Schmeiser recommendations were not implemented 

because they were out of line -- because they were out of line 

with the salary increases Saskatchewan citizens were then 

enjoying. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is the situation which this government 

inherited in 1991.  We inherited a Provincial Court where the 

judges were frustrated and bitter after years of discussion on 

this issue.  Without wishing to sound partisan, it was just one of 

the many problems we inherited from the previous 

administration. 

 

The judges of the court were hopeful that our government 

would act on the recommendations of the Schmeiser 

Commission. 

 

We looked at those recommendations, but in 1992 had to tell 

them that a 15 per cent salary increase was simply too large, 

considering the financial circumstances in which we found the 

province.  So we said no to Schmeiser. 

 

The judges saw this continuing frustration over salary as a 

threat to their judicial independence.  They suggested a process 

of binding arbitration to settle the matter.  Now there is a 

history of binding arbitration being used to settle salary 

disputes here and in other provinces for police, for fire-fighters, 

for physicians, and for others in the public sector.  But this 

approach had never been used with respect to judges. 

 

(1045) 

 

To accept this process therefore carried certain risks.  On 

balance we decided that we were prepared to accept those risks 

because of the unique difficulties associated with the setting of 

salaries of judges. 

 

So in February of last year we formally agreed to go this route 

and we brought Bill 88 to this House.  The legislation provided 

for an independent commission with the power to make binding 

recommendations on judges' salaries and benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this debate you will hear from both of the 

opposition parties that a binding arbitration process never 

should have been entered into in the first place, that we should 

have foreseen the problems we face today.  Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that those who claim perfection in hindsight should 

have had the ability to show some foresight on the record in 

this Assembly when this process was first proposed. 

 

I note that the Leader of the Third Party did not even 

participate in the legislative debate on Bill 88, and did not even 

bother to be present to vote on the Bill.  When it comes to the 

official opposition, while they at least showed enough interest 

to speak to Bill 88, never did they say: don't do this, it's too 

risky.  Nobody stood in this Chamber and voted against this 

process.  If it is the 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

judgement of the opposition parties today that this process was 

flawed from the beginning, I simply ask, where were they a 

year ago? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 88 was assented to on June 22 of last year, 

and the independent commission held hearings in August of 

last year.  My officials presented a detailed brief to the 

commission on behalf of the government.  In that submission 

we took the position that Provincial Court judges were already 

amongst the highest income-earners in the province.  In fact 

less than 1 per cent of Saskatchewan income-earners report 

incomes of $90,000 a year or higher. 

 

The salary of Provincial Court judges is approximately double 

the average income of Saskatchewan families.  The 

government's submission noted that there is no shortage of 

well-qualified candidates ready to assume office as Provincial 

Court judges in Saskatchewan.  Clearly the current salary of 

$90,000 a year is not a deterrent to those seeking judicial 

office. 

 

Finally, the government's brief suggested that the independent 

commission consider two points in addition to simple salary to 

help determine proper compensation for the members of the 

Provincial Court. 

 

First, the benefits provided to judges must be considered.  

Provincial Court judges have a generous pension plan, 

disability benefits, and life insurance benefits. 

 

Second, they have an additional benefit enjoyed by no other 

sector of society: a constitutional guarantee of security of 

tenure.  While it is difficult to put a dollar value on security of 

tenure, it must be recognized that judges are guaranteed their 

salary until retirement or resignation and a pension thereafter.  

No other group in society enjoys such a benefit. 

 

Our submission to the Provincial Court Commission also 

stressed that judicial compensation must be determined in the 

Saskatchewan context.  After all, the judicial salaries in 

question are those of individuals living in Saskatchewan.  They 

are serving a Saskatchewan institution.  The financial resources 

of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay their salaries. 

 

This principle was recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada 

in the Beauregard case.  In that case, Chief Justice Dickson 

stated that, and I quote: 

 

 Canadian judges are Canadian citizens and must bear their . . 

. share of the financial burden of administering the country. 

 

For more than two years this government has asked the people 

of Saskatchewan to make numerous financial sacrifices to help 

restore the financial integrity of our province.  For many the 

sacrifices have been difficult.  But everyone has been asked to 

share in the effort.  We took the position before the commission 

that that must include Provincial Court judges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we put this clear argument to 

the independent commission, we were as shocked and 

disappointed as anyone to see that its report recommended a 24 

per cent salary increase.  We asked the commission to 

reconsider its award.  They refused.  The government was then 

faced with a difficult choice: to accept a 24 per cent salary 

increase as recommended by the commission; or to reject the 

increase, and thereby be forced to change the very law we had 

introduced in the House just a year ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we attempted a third option -- we asked the 

judges to accept a lesser award in the public interest.  We asked 

and they refused.  Our options were then, pay the 24 per cent or 

change the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a general principle, this legislature should be 

prepared to live with the consequences of the law that it has 

passed even when those consequences are difficult.  However, 

when the application of those laws leads to an unconscionable 

result, governments and legislatures must have the courage to 

act in the public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one should think that this decision was an easy 

one for any one of us.  As I said in my ministerial statement to 

the House a few days ago, we were faced with two conflicting 

principles: to honour a law we had ourselves passed, or to 

honour our promise to the people of this province to restore 

Saskatchewan's financial integrity in a fair and just way.  At the 

end of the day we had to choose -- pay the 24 per cent or 

change the law.  We chose to change the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I came to this decision as the representative of the 

constituency of Saskatoon Fairview.  It is largely a 

working-class constituency.  Many times over the last two 

years my government has asked my constituents to sacrifice in 

their daily lives for the greater good; to sacrifice today so that 

our children might enjoy a better tomorrow. 

 

And my constituents -- single mothers and their children, 

potash miners, students, senior citizens -- have all contributed a 

great deal to turning around the finances of this province.  I've 

sat around many kitchen tables and talked to my constituents 

about just how difficult some of these sacrifices have been for 

them.  My fundamental commitment to each of them has been 

the same: the burden of restoring our financial integrity will be 

shared equally by all.  That is only fair, that is only just. 

 

Each of my colleagues has made the same commitment to their 

constituents.  And, Mr. Speaker, in the end, that's how we as a 

government came to our decision.  It was that commitment to 

fundamental fairness and to justice.  How could we give some 

of the highest-paid citizens of this province a 24 per cent salary 

increase and ask everyone else to do with less?  Introducing 

this legislation is the only just and fair thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Provincial Court Act and to enact certain other provisions. 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, once 

again we see a government bringing in legislation, a 

government out of control.  A government that once again has 

decided to trample on the rights, the individual rights, and 

people's rights in the province of Saskatchewan.  A 

government, Mr. Speaker, that does not believe in law and 

order or justice.  A government that does anything for its 

friends, like Jack Messer or like MAs (ministerial assistant), 

but if it doesn't suit their purpose, it'll do anything in its power 

to get its way, Mr. Speaker.  And we've seen that in many 

occasions in the past and now we see it in this legislation once 

again. 

 

A government that is prepared to give its friends like Jack 

Messer $20,000, but takes away the rights of others like the 

farmers in the GRIP legislation, the civil servants, the Co-op 

upgrader.  And now we see, Mr. Speaker, in this legislation, in 

the preamble . . . full of reasons to justify its actions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The former minister of Agriculture and the current Minister of 

Justice, and I say current because I don't think he's going to be 

the Minister of Justice for much longer, Mr. Speaker, have a lot 

in common when it comes to this issue.  He lost his job, he lost 

his job over the GRIP debate, Mr. Speaker, and I predict that 

this minister will lose his job as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they put a commission in place.  The Premier was 

going to set the pace for all of Canada.  That was his goal, Mr. 

Speaker.  Be the holier-than-thou Premier and the hotshot 

lawyer for all of Canada and set up an independent commission 

for the people, his peers, the judges of this province, and set out 

a process for an independent commission to set up 

compensation packages. 

 

But it failed by one measure, Mr. Speaker.  It didn't meet the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) political agenda -- didn't meet 

the political agenda of the NDP. 

 

One little consideration you forgot in the whole process and 

that was it.  You never for a moment thought that somebody 

might suggest and do something that you hadn't anticipated.  

The politics of the debate never were considered.  And that's 

strange coming from a government that lives and dies like you 

people do on the altar of political expediency. 

 

The same type of legislation as the GRIP.  Absolutely the same, 

Mr. Speaker.  If you look at the GRIP legislation of 1991, I 

believe it was, it takes away the action, the opportunity for 

anyone to take them to court.  Exactly the same type of 

legislation, almost word for word as the legislation that we see 

before us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Almost word for word, with one notable exception.  In this 

legislation, they've had to include one more little thing.  They 

wanted to make sure that no one can even take the members of 

Executive Council to court.  Not only the Government of 

Saskatchewan, but they want 

to make sure that no member of the present or former 

Executive Council . . .  I guess that would protect the Minister 

of Justice right now, when he loses his job, so that they can't 

take him to court. 

 

It absolves them of any responsibility whatsoever, because they 

fear the court system so much, Mr. Speaker.  They realize this 

is unjust.  They realize this is against every principle of law and 

order and therefore that is the reason why they bring forward 

legislation of this type, to absolve themselves of any kind of 

responsibility at all. 

 

If it doesn't suit your purposes, change it.  Simple as that.  If it 

doesn't suit the political agenda, change it.  The machiavellian 

Premier of Saskatchewan -- whatever it takes, it doesn't matter, 

do it.  Just make sure the politics are, in their judgement, right. 

 

That's the way they approach all things, Mr. Speaker.  A group 

of lawless people, Mr. Speaker -- lawless people -- occupy the 

front benches of this government.  Above the law; that's what 

they feel.  Above the law, ready to break the law, betray even 

the judges of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

Betray even the judges of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Last May the Justice minister quoted the Supreme Court, 

saying that it was necessary to take the veto power away from 

government in regards to deciding salaries, pensions, 

allowances, etc., for judges.  And at the time, Mr. Speaker, the 

Justice minister said: 

 

 . . . the focus of (his) amendments (were) to ensure that 

benefits for provincial court judges and the method of 

determining those benefits adequately respect the 

independence of the court and the (justices) of that court. 

 

In Hansard May 25, of 1993, Mr. Speaker.  And that: 

 

 The fact that an independent commission with the ability 

to make binding recommendations will be considering 

matters of judicial compensation will help (will help, Mr. 

Speaker) to ensure that judicial independence will indeed 

be preserved. 

 

Again May 25 of 1993, Hansard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice even quoted from the 

Supreme Court in his second reading speech. 

 

 The essence of such (financial) security is that the right to 

salary and pension should (not) be established by law and 

not be subject to arbitrary interference by the Executive in 

a manner that could affect a judicial independence. 

 

Again from Hansard, May 25, 1993, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government then found themselves at that 

time being warned -- being warned by the official opposition, 

primarily the member from 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

Moosomin, Mr. Speaker.  Primarily the member from 

Moosomin was the spokesperson for the official opposition; 

warned the government about the veto power.  And once again 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet?  

By his desk, and the Speaker doesn't know whether he wants to 

get the attention of the Chair or . . .  I think he did. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, the official opposition warned the 

government about the veto power and once again the NDP 

chose to ignore that advice.  We questioned the minister as to 

the possible presence of lawyers on this commission and the 

minister said: 

 

Lawyers are in a bit of a compromisable position because 

they are members of their firm, appear before Provincial 

Court Judges from time to time. 

 

In Hansard, June 9, '93. 

 

Then appointed lawyers to the commission anyway.  They were 

warned about it, even acknowledged the warning, Mr. Speaker, 

even said themselves at the time that they felt that people in the 

legal profession maybe should not be on that commission; that 

they may find themselves in a position of being in a 

compromised position, Mr. Speaker. But they did it anyway. 

 

What happens now that the recommendations aren't what the 

NDP say, Mr. Speaker?  Well we'll just have to change the law.  

We'll just have to break the law.  We'll just have to do 

whatever's necessary. 

 

Just as the member from Rosetown-Elrose did in the GRIP 

debate, if you recall, Mr. Speaker.  He said, we'll get around it 

somehow.  We'll just have to get around it; we'll do whatever it 

takes.  Doesn't matter, we'll break the law if necessary.  We are 

above the law.  We can write the law.  We can change the law.  

We can do anything we want with the law.  But is that, Mr. 

Speaker . . . does that uphold the principle of justice?  And I 

say no, it doesn't, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ordinary citizens cannot pick and choose which laws they 

choose to follow, Mr. Speaker, and which ones they choose to 

ignore, Mr. Speaker.  Ordinary people, the people that the 

Premier of Saskatchewan always stands and says he is the 

greatest defender of in the province of Saskatchewan, ordinary 

people, he thumps his desk and says.  But the ordinary people 

of Saskatchewan cannot break the law, Mr. Speaker.  Only the 

member for Riversdale and only the member . . . the Minister 

of Justice, Mr. Speaker, can break the law in the government's 

view, Mr. Speaker, and get away with it.  Because they're 

above the law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Familiar words from the members opposite.  What about other 

situations -- the GRIP contracts, Jack Messer, upgrader, civil 

servants, provincial sales tax exemptions on the border, Moose 

Jaw Woolco decertification, MA pay raises?  Some up to 40 

per cent 

in additional pay raises this year. 

 

And I want to touch on that a little bit, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government, they wrap their whole case, they wrap their whole 

case around 24 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  And yet on one hand 

they feel that that's too much; on the other hand they've got 

MAs, people working in political jobs in the offices of the 

Premier and the Minister of Justice and other ministers of the 

Crown, Mr. Speaker, and they give them 42 per cent raises in 

some cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And somehow or another, the people of Saskatchewan are 

supposed to accept that, Mr. Speaker.  Somehow it's okay for 

members of the NDP Party and political hacks to get big, fat 

raises.  But when it's the other folks, the ordinary folks or 

anyone else, the ordinary folks like the farmers, Mr. Speaker, 

it's somehow different. 

 

When it's the ordinary folks like the people that work at the 

upgrader, when it's the ordinary folks like other civil servants, 

or the ordinary folks out at Moose Jaw that want decertification 

votes, Mr. Speaker, when it's those ordinary folks, it's different. 

 

When it's ordinary folks . . . there's ordinary folks that they 

believe in the NDP philosophy and then there's the rest of us, 

Mr. Speaker.  And if you fall into that latter category, you're 

not so ordinary any shape or form any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the future of binding arbitration in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  What about the future of binding 

arbitration in the province of Saskatchewan?  Who's next?  

Who's next, Mr. Minister of Justice and the Government of 

Saskatchewan?  Who's next?  Who next do you feel that you 

have to take from them what is not rightfully yours, this 

government feels, Mr. Speaker.  Who's next? 

 

Will we go after the education system?  Will we go after civil 

servants again?  Will we go after the farmers again?  Will we 

go after . . . who next, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the effects such decisions will have on 

future investment or those looking to do business in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  What about the effect on that?  

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, anyone wanting to come to 

Saskatchewan, knowing full well that they can sit down with 

the Government of Saskatchewan and sign a contract, and then 

the next day if necessary, the next day if necessary, if this 

government deems it's necessary, they will take that contract 

and rip it up and thumb their nose at them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's what they've done to the judges; that's what they've done 

to farmers in Saskatchewan.  That's what Jack Messer has done 

to all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  That's what they did to 

civil servants, and that's what they continue to do to the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to things like Jack Messer 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

there's no problem.  When Jack Messer has a fly problem, 

there's no problem.  The Government of Saskatchewan can deal 

with that; they can deal with that all right.  Slip him a nice little 

cheque for $20,000 and everything's fine, Mr. Speaker.  Do 

whatever's necessary and then almost . . . It astounds me at the 

way this government operates, Mr. Speaker.  Slip Jack Messer 

a cheque for $20,000 and almost the next day bring in 

legislation to stop anybody else from doing something similar, 

through the changes to the agriculture Act or nuisance of odour 

legislation, or whatever it was called, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Whatever it takes, if it's Jack Messer, it's fine; if it's MAs, it's 

fine; if it's everyone else, we'll do whatever we have to do suit 

our own purposes, Mr. Speaker, to suit the agenda of the NDP. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, I think what happened is, they did 

one, simple little thing.  They got the party apparatus together, 

went out and did a little quick polling.  We know that they did 

some polling, Mr. Speaker.  There was lots of people called our 

office and asked about it, told us what the questions were, all of 

that sort of thing. 

 

And the political consideration outweighed anything else.  It 

didn't have anything to do with the amount or anything else.  

The political consideration was the only consideration, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And they know that 24 per cent is excessive, and the people of 

Saskatchewan agree that 24 per cent is excessive.  And so the 

politics dictates the action, Mr. Speaker, even if it means, even 

if it means breaking the law, Mr. Speaker.  Even if it means 

that.  A government that's above the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder, as a lawyer, as a lawyer in the province 

of Saskatchewan, how the Premier feels about this decision.  

How the Justice minister, who's a lawyer in the province of 

Saskatchewan, feels about this decision.  How all of the other 

lawyers feel about the decision to break the law in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know very well.  Your back-benchers have 

told us, Mr. Speaker, that there was tremendous and heated 

debate within your caucus.  This wasn't a cabinet decision.  

This wasn't the Minister of Justice's decision.  Each one of the 

members of the NDP caucus had input into this law-breaking, 

Mr. Speaker.  Every single one of them sit in their places, in 

their caucus office, and they had an opportunity to stand and 

speak on this issue.  And there was heated debate.  And then 

they voted. 

 

And I'd like to know the outcome of that vote, Mr. Speaker, 

because I understand it was close.  Real close.  But my guess is, 

at the end of the day, the political consideration was the only 

consideration that was taken into account, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the response to their action, Mr. Speaker, has 

been swift and it's been strong and it's been nothing but 

condemnation for the Government 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lawyer representing the judges, Si Halyk, said: 

 

Contracts and laws appear to be of no effect if the 

government decides they no longer suit their own purposes 

(Mr. Speaker). 

 

And I agree with him, Mr. Speaker.  I think that was the 

consideration.  I think that was the consideration. 

 

And Mr. Si Halyk went on to say: 

 

The principle of government having to follow its own laws 

was sacrificed on the altar of political expediency . . . (Mr. 

Speaker). 

 

That's exactly what happened.  And the judges understand that 

and the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to understand 

that, Mr. Speaker.  And the academics in the province of 

Saskatchewan are agreeing, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Halyk went on 

to say . . . 

 

. . . the justice minister has breached a contract with the 

judges' association and ignored the government's own law 

. . . 

 

. . . provincial court judges have solid grounds for a 

lawsuit against the government. 

 

"I am surprised.  I think above everyone else, (the Justice 

Department of Saskatchewan) should show some 

leadership in upholding the law." 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that's what Mr. Howard McConnell said from 

the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), Mr. Speaker. 

 

He said that of anyone in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

one that should be standing up and setting an example for 

everyone should be the Minister of Justice.  He should be the 

one that follows the letter of the law every single time, Mr. 

Speaker.  It should not be him that sets the example of breaking 

laws in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  But yet 

that's what he's chosen to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Everyone else has to obey the laws, Mr. Minister.  We're all 

going to be going home here this afternoon sometime, Mr. 

Speaker, as the week ends, Mr. Speaker.  We'll all be travelling 

the highways of our province, Mr. Speaker.  What happens to 

us as ordinary people, Mr. Speaker, if we decide to travel the 

highways of Saskatchewan at an excessive speed?  We are 

stopped, we are fined, we go to court, and we pay, Mr. Speaker.  

That's exactly what happens. 

 

There's no way of changing that, Mr. Speaker, unless the 

Minister of Justice now feels that maybe that's appropriate that 

we bring speeding tickets to him or we bring other little 

nuisance problems we have, parking tickets, and he'll fix them. 

 

Maybe that's what he is, now.  Maybe he's prepared to 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

fix anything that gets in the way, little nuisance things for 

members of the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  Anything that gets in 

the way of the business of the government of Saskatchewan, 

maybe he's prepared to fix it.  Probably wouldn't fix for the 

opposition.  I wonder if he'll fix it for the back-benchers of his 

caucus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government is above the law, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government should not be above the law, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government should obey the law.  They set up this thing, they 

made the mess, they were warned about the situation, and now 

they have to live with the situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I agree with the Leader of the Opposition when he says 

that the minister should resign, Mr. Speaker.  And I think 

academics and political columnists all over this province agree, 

Mr. Speaker.  The minister should resign.  He made the mess, 

he did what he felt was the right thing, but unfortunately he 

broke the law in doing that, Mr. Speaker, and he should resign, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is such an important question I think that a lot 

of people want to have input into this.  There's people all over 

the province of Saskatchewan that are calling and writing and 

all of that sort of thing, Mr. Speaker.  People feel very strongly 

about the principle of law in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And I think it's important that we have an opportunity for as 

many people to have input into this legislation, this Draconian 

type of legislation, Mr. Speaker.  And for an opportunity to 

allow that debate to go on, Mr. Speaker, and for people to have 

input into that debate, Mr. Speaker, I move that the we now 

adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1115) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I'd like to first introduce the officials with me.  

Sitting next to me is the deputy minister of Finance, John 

Wright.  On my left is Bill Jones, the associate deputy minister 

of treasury and debt.  Behind John is Craig Dotson, associate 

deputy minister, budget analysis division.  And next to Mr. 

Dotson is Larry Spannier, executive director, Treasury Board 

branch. 

 

Before I move my motion, I'd like to say just a few words about 

the process that we are about to engage in. 

 

One of the highest principles of democracy is the idea that 

elected representatives have the sole right to determine how our 

tax dollars are spent.  That's the reason we bring a budget into 

the legislature and allow all parties in the legislature, through 

the estimates process, to debate the budget in a line-by-line, 

very detailed way.  And I want to 

emphasize the fact that it is during estimates that the detailed 

debate on the government spending occurs. 

 

I'd like to make a comment as well about timing.  One of the 

commitments of our government is to bring in timely budgets.  

This budget which was brought in to the legislature February 

17 was one of the earliest budgets to be laid before the 

legislature in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- One of the purposes of bringing in 

an early budget is it gives the opposition the opportunity, if 

they so desire, to pass the whole budget before the year end, 

which is March 31. 

 

But we are still debating the budget in the legislature through 

the estimates process, but the year end for 1993 is occurring.  

The year end will be March 31, 1994, and we will not have 

legal authority to pay out money to groups like health care 

groups, educational groups, social services groups.  So as of 

April 1 the government will have no legal authority to pay out 

money to hospitals, schools, and other organizations. 

 

So all this process is doing is giving leave to the government to 

pay out one-twelfth of the budget, to pay out the spending for 

the month of April, to ensure that these groups get their 

required funding and so that we can continue the process of 

debating the budget in a more detailed way through the 

estimates and eventually passing the budget. 

 

So with that introduction, Mr. Chairman, I would: 

 

Resolve that a sum not exceeding $358.423 million be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 1995. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

as is usually the habit, we would like to have a list of the 

various agencies of the departments and branches of the 

departments that are going to be paid.  And we'd like to have a 

copy of that over, and I'd appreciate very much if I could have 

that.  And then we will begin to discuss some of the areas that 

we want to get into in relation to this appropriation resolution. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm sending the 

lists over. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, there are a number of areas 

that I'd like to talk about.  You raised the point of why you 

brought the budget forward early.  And I'm going to point out 

some of the reasons why I think you did.  They're not exactly 

the same as what you suggested.  I think that it was good of 

you to have brought the budget as early as you did so that we 

could talk about it during the whole part of the session; I think 

that that's credible. 

 

I want to say also that there are a number of other reasons why 

you brought the budget forward early.  The big headlines in the 

budget said: no new taxes, no 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

new taxes.  But underneath, Madam Minister, there were many 

new taxes.  Underneath there were taxes imposed last year.  

Underneath there were impositions of taxes that are ongoing 

and that as we speak, Madam Minister, these taxes are being 

applied in an ever-increasing amount. 

 

Saskatchewan becomes the highest-taxed province of 

individuals in Canada.  And you're going to go back to your 

book and say, oh, these people here earn this amount of money 

and they have this many taxes to pay, and you will pick and 

choose every one of these and say, well we are the least-taxed 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

However, Madam Minister, in reviewing all of the taxes, 

Saskatchewan people and the people in this province pay taxes 

to the governments, whatever stripe they are, the longest period 

of time of any people in the country of Canada.  We pay taxes, 

we pay . . . into the middle of July we pay taxes, so that the 

people of this province can . . . well their income is reduced, 

their capacity to make investments is reduced. 

 

All of these things, Madam Minister, are the actual facts.  The 

facts of the matter are that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan pay taxes longer than any other province in 

Canada.  Madam Minister, we go till the middle of July before 

we get done paying the taxes in this province.  That's the 

tax-free day.  That's the day that we finish paying taxes.  And 

that isn't the only thing I want to point out. 

 

I have a pamphlet here that comes from Peat Marwick, and I 

went through some of the items that deal with taxation and the 

volumes of dollars that taxation draws and will draw to this 

province because of the federal budget . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And now the member from Rosemont wants to 

get in.  Why doesn't he leave the room if he wants to talk to 

somebody and allow me to speak to the Minister of Finance? 

 

The area, Madam Minister, the area that we need to deal with 

is:  how many taxes were imposed by you indirectly through 

the role of the federal budget?  The federal budget came out 

after yours and the real reason why you wanted to have the 

budget early is to get ahead of the federal budget so that 

nobody would realize that you had piggybacked tax increases 

on the federal budget.  That's the real reason. 

 

And I can list some of them.  One is the change in the $100,000 

tax on the capital gains exemption.  It's gone or reduced and 

going to be gone and that, Madam Minister, is going to increase 

the volume of taxes paid to Saskatchewan.  Madam Minister, 

the employer-provided life insurance benefits are going to be 

taxed.  That's going to increase the taxes paid to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, the age credit for those over 65 is also going 

to increase the cost to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that cost is going to be giving you more 

income in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  The home-buyers plan is also going to increase 

the volume of dollars that this province is going to collect.  

Madam Minister, the meals and entertainment . . . now I agree 

with the federal government cutting it back, but what is it going 

to do?  It is going to reduce the capacity of businesses to use 

that as a deduction and that, in turn, is going to increase the 

taxes paid to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, the debt forgiveness for write-offs that have 

occurred -- that's going to increase the amount of dollars paid 

to this government in taxes.  And, Madam Minister, that is one, 

two, three, four, five, six -- I've listed six different places that 

the Government of Saskatchewan is going to increase the tax 

grab on the people of the province of Saskatchewan because of 

the federal budget.  You're going to get more taxes from that 

and the reason, I believe, that you put this budget ahead of the 

federal budget is that so you would have the people perceive 

that there were no new taxes, Madam Minister, but they're 

going to be caught.  And that's six. 

 

Going on from there, the investment tax credits, mining 

reclamation -- all of these are going to impose new taxes, 

Madam Minister.  And that's the reason why you brought the 

budget in ahead of all of the other budgets.  That is the real 

reason, Madam Minister, because you didn't want us talking 

about the tax increases that you were going to impose because 

of the federal budget.  So you brought it in ahead of the other.  

And now we know the rest of the story, Madam Minister; that's 

the real reason why you brought this budget in ahead. 

 

What we're going to find out in our estimate questions from 

you, Madam Minister, is what all the benefits are going to cost 

the taxpayers and what you perceive to be benefits to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and in the comments of no new taxes, 

is not legitimate to say to the people of this province, Madam 

Minister. 

 

We're going to ask you the questions on every one of these.  

How many dollars are you going to receive as beneficiaries of 

the federal budget?  And that, Madam Minister, is going to be 

fairly, fairly significant. 

 

And we will want to know what those dollars are.  That's the 

real reason, that is the underpinning, that's the real reason why 

you brought this budget in at the time that you did -- early -- 

because the federal government were going to tax and remove 

this.  And so you are going to get the benefits of these 

increased taxes. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is the real reason why you brought 

this budget in early.  Not that it was going to convenience some 

of the opposition to pass the budget before March 31.  No, 

Madam Minister, that wasn't it at all. 

 

And I wonder if you would have some response to us on the 

real reasons why you brought this budget forward, not the one 

that you mentioned earlier. 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd be very pleased to 

answer some of the comments made by the member opposite.  I 

think a government that brings in an early budget should not in 

any sense feel apologetic.  The earlier the budget gets into the 

legislature, the more time there is to debate the budget before 

the year end occurs. 

 

If there was any other reason besides our commitment to 

democratic reform and ensuring that budgets are brought to the 

legislature as early as possible, the other pressing reason this 

year were the health boards.  This is the first year in which 

funding will be paid directly to the district health boards out 

there.  And I certainly had representations from them that they 

needed to know their numbers, not just for this year, but any 

numbers that we could give them in this budget with respect to 

the next year, as early as possible. 

 

So we wanted to be very responsive to their desire to get their 

planning under way as soon as possible. 

 

Now I'd like to make a few comments about no new taxes in 

the budget.  What we said last year when we brought out the 

balanced budget plan for the province was, this is the plan that 

we need to put in place in order to balance the budget of the 

province.  The plan includes all of the major cuts and all of the 

major tax increases required to achieve that goal.  Now some of 

these changes announced last year came into effect this year, 

and we've made that clear.  We did not hide that from people 

last year -- last year. 

 

I'd like to say a word though about the tax load in the province 

of Saskatchewan because members opposite go on and on 

about the tax load using information that is not reliable.  One 

member opposite -- I don't know if it was this member or the 

Liberal member -- went on about Saskatchewan has the highest 

tax load in Canada.  This information comes from the Fraser 

Institute, and I want to really point out the methods used by the 

Fraser Institute.  When they talk about the tax load in 

Saskatchewan, what they . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I didn't talk about the Fraser Institute. 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well they're the people who 

determine what tax-free day is.  What they use, the Fraser 

Institute, in determining taxes, is not just the education and 

health tax and income tax.  They include all resource revenue 

that is levied in the province of Saskatchewan.  I don't think 

anybody believes that resource revenue is a tax burden on an 

individual; it's a corporate tax. 

 

I'd also like to point out another group that we checked very 

carefully into what their methods are -- the Association of 

Saskatchewan Taxpayers.  They came out with some figure 

about the tax load on Saskatchewan families has increased by 

some dollars.  What they did was even more incredible.  They 

took all of the revenue coming into the government of 

Saskatchewan and divided it by the number of people in 

Saskatchewan.  So what they were including as taxes was not 

only resource revenue paid not by individuals but by resource 

companies, corporate taxes paid not by individuals but by 

corporations; they were including transfers coming from the 

federal government, equalization payments, other payments to 

support education and health care. 

 

What I would say about taxes is this: nobody likes to raise 

taxes, but all governments in Canada, because of their fiscal 

situation, have been forced to do this.  And as I pointed out in 

question period, it's the Liberal governments that have the 

highest tax rates across the piece. 

 

But there are certain sorts of taxes which we do not have in 

Saskatchewan.  Alberta says they didn't raise taxes in their 

recent budget.  What they did instead was increase health care 

premiums.  Well from my point of view, taking a health care 

premium from an individual is the same as taxing the 

individual.  We do not tax essentials in the province, like 

children's clothing.  We have the narrowest tax base of any 

province that has a sales tax.  We tax the fewest number of 

items.  And we do not have payroll taxes, as do many other 

provinces. 

 

And I would like to read into the record the fact that for a 

family living in Saskatchewan, the $25,000 a year income, this 

is the second cheapest place in Canada to live.  For a family at 

$50,000 this is the fourth cheapest place in Canada to live.  For 

a family at $75,000, this is the fifth cheapest place in Canada to 

live. 

 

And I would refer the member opposite as well to the Manitoba 

budget in which they compare cities across Canada.  And the 

income level there they're looking at is a family with an income 

of $40,000.  And Regina turns out to be the third cheapest city 

in Canada in which to live. 

 

Final comment here about taxes.  When you look at taxes you 

have to look not only at the taxes levied by the province, but 

the impact of provincial taxes on city taxes.  I notice the city of 

Saskatoon recently putting out an ad saying one of the 

attractive features of living in the city of Saskatoon is its very 

low tax rates.  Its tax rates were already lower than Calgary or 

Edmonton. 

 

And what occurred to me is if the city of Saskatoon already has 

low tax rates, what's going to happen three years from now 

when the Government of Alberta will be entirely phased out of 

providing any revenue sharing, any grants to those cities, to the 

major cities in Alberta.  Surely the local taxes in those two 

cities are going to go up even further. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I would conclude by saying we make no 

apologies about bringing in an early budget.  We're quite proud 

of the fact that we bring timely budgets to the legislature.  We 

believe that every government in Canada -- and particularly, as 

I say, the Liberal governments have a troublesome record here 

-- have raised taxes.  We believe that our taxes 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

are as fairly distributed as a province can distribute them.  It's 

the federal government that has to talk about reforming or 

making the tax system more fair. 

 

And with respect to the federal budget, any gains that we made 

on the tax side are offset by losses on the unemployment 

insurance side.  If you look what's happening across Canada 

now where people are beginning to protest the federal 

government's changes in unemployment insurance, it's because 

it is very adversely affecting many, many people in Canada.  

And sadly, some of those people who are now on 

unemployment insurance are going to end up on our welfare 

rolls and our costs will unfortunately be going up. 

 

So with that introduction, I'd be pleased to answer any other 

questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to point out to me, Madam 

Minister, all of the areas where you did not have one-twelfth, 

where it was a variation from the one-twelfth of the . . . for this 

Appropriation Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I'd be pleased to 

answer that.  There are no variations.  They're straight 

one-twelfths. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well under Executive Council, the electoral 

expenses, there is none being paid out.  Is there a reason for 

that?  Are all of the rest one-twelfth or under?  Is that what 

you're trying to tell me? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, member 

opposite, I'd be pleased to answer that.  What it is, is you have 

to take out the amounts that are statutory; that is, there's a law 

in place which says you have to do that.  Then once you take 

that out, it's one-twelfth of what's left. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So you take the statutory part out, then you 

divide by 12, and it will all be that or less. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, it will be that.  It 

will be one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to respond to your reference to the 

personal taxes and charges for people with income of $25,000, 

for those people with incomes -- family's income -- of 50,000, 

and families' incomes of 75,000.  Well, Madam Minister, 

there's some things that maybe for statistical purposes should 

be constant, but for real people, what you're doing is you're 

saying that a family of 25,000 drives the same kind of car as 

the one that has a $75,000 income; a person with . . . or a 

family with a $25,000 income has the same sized house as a 

person with a $75,000 income.  And that, Madam Minister, is 

what you've done in establishing the average. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, says to me that if you take that 

straight through and put the $75,000 family with the same sized 

house and the same sized car . . . And I would imagine, Madam 

Minister, as I was campaigning down in Regina North West 

where I saw three-car garages as almost a norm, that there 

wasn't a 

1987 Caprice Chev standing in one of those doors.  There was 

probably a space for every one of those doors to occupy a car.  

And that, Madam Minister, is the reality of what you have to do 

with statistics. 

 

And as I see what you've done here, is you've just made a 

blanket statement that an '87 Chev is what everybody's driving, 

and that, Madam Minister, gives you the capability of making 

those kinds of statements, when in reality, that is not what there 

is and that is the truth, Madam Minister. 

 

Now I think in order to deal with this in a fairly flexible 

manner, from our side of the House, we have not got any more 

questions that we're going to be asking.  We're prepared to let it 

go in view of the fact that what we're going to deal with in the 

Committee of Finance are the real questions about all of the 

areas that I've touched on earlier today. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- 

 

Resolved that towards making the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1995, the sum 

of $358,423,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I move: 

 

That Bill No. 48, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1995, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By leave 

of the Assembly and under rule 51(2), I move that the Bill be 

now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, 

the Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 36 -- An Act to 

amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

this is an interesting piece of legislation.  If you look at the Bill 

itself, it's a very small, two-page piece of legislation that the 

government has brought forward, but it does have some 

impacts that need to be considered. 

 

The first portion of this Act, Mr. Speaker, deals with water, and 

water is a very important commodity in Saskatchewan.  And as 

we know, throughout our history at times it can be a very 

contentious commodity.  But this Act deals with permitting of 

changes to water bodies to the shores and the boundaries in 

which water bodies reside.  It deals with the streams and rivers, 

the creeks that run through our province. 

 

(1145) 

 

This Bill will deny anyone who doesn't have a permit the 

opportunities to have any impact on a body of water.  If you 

happen to have a slough or, say, your dugout in which you have 

your water supply, this Bill could have an impact on that.  If for 

some reason you wish to dredge your dugout which you have 

your farm water supply in, you may need a permit to do that 

because the Bill reads: 

 

. . . No person shall, without a valid and subsisting permit 

authorizing the activity . . . 

 

 (c) remove aquatic vegetation from the bed, bank or 

boundary of any river, stream, lake, creek, marsh or other 

watercourse or body of water". 

 

And I guess the determination all comes down, Mr. Speaker, as 

to what is the meaning of the term, body of water?  How deep 

does water have to be before it qualifies?  How wide, how long, 

how broad?  All of these types of questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We've received phone calls from across the province of people 

who are concerned about this, because they need some more 

clarifications, Mr. Speaker.  They need some more 

opportunities to look and see what this means; what impact it's 

going to have on their operations. 

 

Now we also know that management of water is quite a 

contentious issue in Saskatchewan.  We have the situation 

presently out at Langenburg where people are trying to bring 

into place a conservation and development area which will 

manage water in that area; that will allow drainage.  It will 

allow the movements of water from one point to another. 

Now when this kind of drainage is done legally, in the proper 

manner, that's well and good, Mr. Speaker.  But when it's not 

done legally, indeed there is a problem.  And part of this Bill, I 

would have to assume, Mr. Speaker, is trying to deal with that 

aspect -- the illegal drainage of water. 

 

If you're the neighbour living downstream from this illegal 

drainage, you have a problem.  And if the law is in place to 

prevent illegal drainage, then the person doing it also has a 

problem.  But when the law interferes with the legal operations 

of a person, such as the maintenance and cleaning of their 

dugout for their farm use, then you have a problem, Mr. 

Speaker, with the legislation. 

 

And this is one of the areas in which there's going to have to be 

very close scrutiny as to what the government means by this, 

and what kind of regulations they're going to put into place to 

deal with what is brought forward in legislation. 

 

How is this going to impact on RMs (rural municipality) when 

it comes time for them to deal with their own duties -- the 

maintenance, say, of roads.  They may have a road going 

through a creek or a slough or whatever the case may be.  How 

is this Bill going to impact on them and what are the additional 

costs going to be related to this legislation when it affects 

them?  These are all important questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second part of this Bill also deals with the impacts on the 

general public, and in particular it deals with the impact on 

mining in this province.  The minister here is talking of 

providing a mechanism by which reclamations and 

decommissionings can take place in which the mining 

operation will pay for that decommissioning. 

 

Now I don't believe there's anyone in the province who 

disagrees with the fact that the people who take the ore out of 

the ground, who make the profit on it, should not have some 

responsibility for the clean-up.  But it's a matter of how you do 

that and the time frames in which you do it. 

 

A mine that's been in operation for 20 years in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, are they going to be asked to put up front the day 

this legislation is proclaimed, a certain sum of money to pay for 

the reclamation which may be 20 years down the road?  We 

don't know.  In some cases, that reclamation may be a year 

down the road, and in some cases it may be 50 years down the 

road.  And this is the type of thing, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister needs to make clear as to what they're going to do. 

 

If you have a new mine being proposed and you put in place 

that they have to put up the total sum for their reclamation and 

decommissioning at the beginning of the operation, you're 

putting a terrible financial burden on that operation because all 

of a sudden, before they make a cent out of that mine, they 

already have to put up front a huge amount of money. 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

Again I say, no one disagrees with that a mining operation must 

do proper decommission and reclamations, but they need the 

time frame in which to accumulate the capital, the assets 

necessary to pay for that, Mr. Speaker.  And that will be a very 

important part of this legislation -- is the matter of how it's 

implemented and how it's going to be regulated. 

 

Because regulations . . . the government, when they bring 

forward a piece of legislation, they allow themselves the power 

to set regulations after the fact.  They may even discuss with 

industry and provide the Assembly with a copy of regulations 

as they will affect this piece of legislation the day it comes into 

force.  But there's nothing to say, Mr. Speaker, that a week later 

they don't change those regulations to have a very onerous 

impact on the people that it's affecting. 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, is an assurance that we will need from 

the minister that this type of thing will not be happening, that 

when the minister is talking about security being put in place 

by mining operations for decommissioning and reclamation, 

that it has to be fair and that it has to be within a time frame in 

which the mining companies can deal with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think these are the questions that the minister must take a look 

at and be prepared to deal with when it comes up in Committee 

of the Whole, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed a 

pleasure to speak to this particular legislation, Bill 36, An Act 

to amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 

inasmuch as it brings to public policy provision to protect 

public resources -- and public funds, I should also add -- that 

currently are not protected under existing legislation. 

 

And I want to speak first of all about the protection of public 

resources.  With these amendments we are not talking about 

sloughs on farms, as the member opposite has indicated.  We 

are talking about public waterways, rivers, shore lines, and the 

sort, where mining companies or other companies might be 

disturbing fish habitat and fish-bearing, fish-rearing waters, by 

virtue of their activity. 

 

The federal government has long regulated these kinds of 

activities that might disturb fish-bearing waters.  And now, 

with changes to the federal legislation, we need to take action 

here in Saskatchewan to bring our Environmental Management 

and Protection Act up to date so we can ensure that, with the 

transferral of responsibility for protection of waters, it can take 

place on the strength of provincial legislation.  And that is what 

will happen with this legislation. 

 

Saskatchewan currently issues some 700 permits annually to 

allow waterways, lakes, shore lines, streams, to be disrupted in 

some fashion by development activities.  This legislation will 

allow for departmental staff to ensure that the activities, 

development activities, that are taking place are appropriate and 

do not unduly harm or disturb the 

waters -- therefore the provision included in the amendments to 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act.  This 

incidentally brings Saskatchewan in line with other Canadian 

jurisdictions in this regard. 

 

The second major provision of this legislation has to do with 

sureties for mining operations, to ensure that a proper 

environmental clean-up can take place once a mine is closed or 

abandoned in Saskatchewan. 

 

Presently we have a situation where if a mining company 

closes down, goes bankrupt, or fails to perform clean-up, the 

burden of that clean-up falls on the public purse.  There 

presently is no mechanism available for clean-up other than at 

expense to taxpayers in the event of such bankruptcy. 

 

We feel that that's not good enough.  There needs to be changes 

to the legislation to ensure that Saskatchewan taxpayers are 

protected, but more than that, that the Saskatchewan 

environment can be protected.  I myself, a number of years ago, 

was up to Uranium City and saw the old, abandoned uranium 

mines on the shore of Lake Athabasca.  And what a sight it was 

to see these mines that had been mined out decades ago, still 

standing without clean-up, without reclamation, without 

decommissioning. 

 

And that's because there's no provision in the legislation for 

financial sureties to be in place prior to the start-up of mining 

operations to ensure that such clean-ups on the back end can be 

taken care of.  This legislation is addressing that situation. 

 

It's a cooperative approach with the mining community.  They 

have been extensively consulted in the preparation of this 

legislation and they recognize the partnership they have with 

government in terms of providing public policy that protects 

the environment and future generations, both with respect to 

the resource and financial exposure of taxpayers. 

 

And I think I want to say at this point that, as a member of the 

legislature responsible for public policy, I very much appreciate 

the cooperation that the mining community has given in terms 

of working with the government on this legislation to address 

this problem.  It's a cooperative approach that bespeaks a good 

future for mining in the province and for protection of the 

environment. 

 

Basically the time to deal with decommissioning of mines, 

mine sites, is not on the back end alone.  We believe, on this 

side of the House, that those issues need to be addressed on the 

front end before the mine opens, as the mine is being developed 

and operating, to ensure that a portion of funds from the 

operation are set aside to ensure that regardless of the financial 

solvency of that particular operation there can be appropriate, 

proper decommissioning and reclamation of the mine site once 

the mining operation is finished, that the environment is 

protected and that taxpayers are protected. 

 

And that's why I'm very pleased today to support these 

amendments to The Environmental Management and 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

Protection Act.  They bespeak a serious attempt by the 

government to get beyond words about protecting the 

environment, to take concrete, practical steps to ensure that the 

environment is protected both with respect to mining 

operations or other developments that interfere with waterways 

and also with respect to mining operations and their 

decommissioning and to ensure that future generations are 

inheritors of an environment at least as good as what we have 

right now. 

 

So with that I want to applaud the mining community for their 

cooperation and their comment on this legislation.  Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1200) 

Bill No. 37 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 37 -- An Act to 

amend The State of the Environment Report Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's very 

interesting that the minister would propose this legislation after 

the environment has come forward and been such an important 

part of public policy in the last number of years.  Environment 

has been on our minds significantly, and people want more 

information about the environment.  They want to know that 

the government is protecting the environment to the best of its 

ability. 

 

And yet this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, changes a report 

from the government which was legally set out to be reported 

every year on the state of the environment.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is important to a large number of the people in the public, 

people who are particularly interested in the environment.  And 

yet the minister is trying to change that with this piece of 

legislation, to move away from reporting every year to 

reporting every second year.  And indeed at this particular 

space in time, the minister is moving that this report, which 

should have been prepared for '93-94, be moved off till '95.  So 

you'll have a period of actually three years in there, Mr. 

Speaker, without the report. 

 

And I would think that when the environment is indeed such an 

important aspect of public policy, that the minister would have 

presented his report on the state of the environment and have 

preferred to present that report on a yearly basis, so that people 

can judge how legislation, how business, how farming, how the 

general public is impacting on the environment. 

 

And yet the minister is saying no, we don't need to present this 

report as outlined in legislation every year, but rather we should 

change it and only report it every second year. 

And I know that the minister will likely suggest that other 

jurisdictions in Canada report perhaps only every five years.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government boasts about being on the 

leading edge, the cutting edge of environmental legislation, and 

yet here they are regressing backwards into . . . What they're 

saying is not as progressive as their own pieces of legislation 

across the country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister is taking a wrong turn 

here in moving to every second year of reporting on the state of 

the environment rather than every year, as legislation now is. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly 

stand to support the amendment to the state of the environment 

report.  As the hon. member opposite indicated, most other 

provinces do this annual report every two to five years on the 

state of the environment.  And by extending it to two years 

instead of one year, we're able to prepare a more 

comprehensive report and perhaps focus in on some real issues.  

Not to mention the cost of doing the report will be somewhat 

less if we do such a report every two years. 

 

The real issue though, Mr. Speaker, is not whether there's a 

report every year.  It's what we do and our policies and how the 

public and everyone else looks after the environment.  And in 

fact the environment should be a part of our everyday 

decision-making process.  And that's what really counts.  It's 

not an annual glossy report with nice words which makes us 

feel good.  It's what we do. 

 

And undoubtedly during the course of a year a number of 

environmental concerns are raised, and it is far more important 

for the government to act and work cooperatively with the 

business sector and the public in dealing with these concerns. 

 

So I certainly support the amendments to the state of the 

environment report.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I simply want to say a 

few short words about this matter, and that is that there is no 

magic to one year, whether it be a report every six months, one 

year, or two years.  I listened very carefully to my friends and 

colleagues speaking just before me and I very much agree with 

and wish to attach myself to their statements. 

 

There are some very good things going on in the environment.  

Indeed early next week there's going to be a release of a Save 

our Environment booklet put together by four radio stations, 

two major ones in Regina and two in Saskatoon.  I look 

forward to the launching of that Save our Environment 

booklet.  And in that, which I've had the opportunity to look 

over, it's very clear that we must be thinking globally but acting 

locally. 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

It's what we do as individuals that will really impact on the 

environment.  And of course what we do collectively has an 

effect too.  But we each have to take responsibility. 

 

I think that going to a two-year report from the minister on the 

state of the environment will allow for the report to do more 

in-depth work in some areas, and I think that all of us will 

benefit from that.  And the fact that there may in fact be a small 

savings in not having to print a report every year, that of course 

will help the fiscal cause of our province. 

 

So I'm in support of this measure.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I must admit that 

on first blush when I saw this legislation, I was concerned.  I 

thought, my goodness, what are we doing delaying the 

reporting of environmental matters, delaying it from one year 

to two.  On second thought, it's a good idea.  I really began to 

understand and appreciate the logic for this.  The member for 

Regina Albert North just indicated that it will save money.  

That it certainly will do.  Taxpayers will be interested to know 

that that's one of the rationales for this.  But it's not the only 

rationale alone. 

 

It's the intention of the government to do a better job of 

environmental reporting through this legislation, to be able to 

focus on certain environmental issues and deal with them in 

more detail rather than having to commit departmental time and 

effort to annually cranking out a pro forma state of the 

environment report. 

 

The thought is that given two years, the department can focus 

annually perhaps on a different issue.  One year talk about the 

state of the environment, but maybe focus on forestry.  The 

next year . . . two years later, rather, talk about the state of the 

environment in general, but focus on fisheries.  Two years later 

maybe focus on air quality, on water, on municipal waste, and 

so forth. 

 

So that the public doesn't just have a bland, watered-down, 

generalized state of the environment that anyone could 

basically give off the top of their head, but maybe has a more 

soul-searching, informative, factual state of the environment, 

particularly with respect to forestry and that resource in the 

province that can provoke some public debate about forestry 

issues or air quality issues, because people can focus on the 

state of our water resource or the state of our handling of 

municipal waste. 

 

So on first blush I had some concerns about this legislation.  

Thinking about it, I'm fully convinced this is the way to go.  It's 

the direction other provinces are going and it helps us to get 

beyond mere words to public action, and focusing public 

attention on serious environmental issues, sector by sector.  

And that's why I support it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 21 -- An Act to 

amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I only 

have a few comments on this Bill. 

 

As we all are aware who've been in this Assembly for awhile, 

that the rural municipalities and the Acts surrounding them 

have their legislation amended on a fairly regular basis.  And 

it's been historic that no matter who the government in this 

province is that they do a consultation process with them.  And 

most of these things are fairly straightforward because our local 

level of government is probably our most effective and efficient 

when it come to administration of taxpayers' dollars.  And I 

think most people in our province are fairly confident with the 

level of administration they get at that level. 

 

On this particular Bill we have contacted SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and other 

interested groups to see if they have any concerns, and I would 

say that a lot of what concern they did have has been addressed 

by the government. 

 

There's a few areas, though, that I would like to point out to the 

minister that I think need to be looked at a little bit more.  And 

before this Bill comes back in committee, I think they are 

important questions that rural people do have some worry 

about. 

 

The purpose of the Bill, as the minister said in her remarks, 

were to broaden the options, the range of options that rural 

governments have and how they want to sort of govern 

themselves in the future. 

 

And the question of hamlets, we all know that hamlets in the 

province of Saskatchewan are under a lot of pressure.  We've 

had cases where hamlets have applied to disband themselves 

and move into rural municipalities. 

 

The area of resort and resort communities, whether those 

communities should form their own jurisdictions or whether 

they should remain in the rural municipality.  And the minister 

has given the assurance that these types of issues are available 

to rural ratepayers whether they be urban or rural. 

 

It also permits the rural public utility boards to be put in place 

to establish water distribution systems for rural residents who 

are not now served by water.  These are voluntary associations 

using water network technology and supply water to rural 

people.  And we just had a report, Mr. Speaker, whereby much 

of the dugout water in Saskatchewan, for instance, has been 

deemed to be unfit for human consumption, and it has degraded 

over the last 10 years particularly, in a significant way. 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

This is the result of run-offs associated with, in many cases, 

farm chemicals, fertilizers, and other things in our environment 

that are affecting groundwater, therefore it's very important that 

potable water be supplied to our farms and rural communities 

in a very cost-effective way. 

 

I think given what we have seen from the government so far, 

there are some glaring examples of where that isn't happening, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I won't dwell on the Melfort pipeline 

situation today, but obviously that is an ongoing disaster for the 

government, and it means that there has to be lots of diligence 

applied to any of these projects in the future to make sure that 

the mistakes that were made with the Melfort line aren't made 

in the future; that communities don't get themselves drawn into 

very expensive undertakings where they then are held at 

ransom by the provincial government because of some foolish 

policy where they have to go to union-only tendering or 

something like that.  And I think it's incumbent upon 

government to do their consultation on these issues so that that 

type of mistake isn't made. 

 

And the third key feature of the Bill is the authority for rural 

municipalities to provide fire protection and emergency 

response services.  Rural RMs will now be able to issue fire 

orders and supply emergency response services and then enter 

into cooperative arrangements with urban municipalities and 

Indian reservations to provide joint fire protection. 

 

(1215) 

 

When members of the current government start talking about 

emergency response teams, Mr. Speaker, rural residents get a 

little bit squeamish, because unfortunately we've seen the 

example of the health care initiatives by these people and what 

form they've taken, where the government comes through with 

wide, sweeping policy changes. 

 

Instead of having first response ambulance capability in place 

before you make these sweeping changes and knock out a 

bunch of hospital services all across Saskatchewan, we've had 

the reverse situation.  And it really has put fear into the hearts 

of many rural people because the hospital and its capability is 

gone. 

 

Services have been cut back through budget cuts and the first 

response is only coming along many months later.  And to 

people in rural Saskatchewan, whether they be in our smaller 

urbans or out on the farm, it's a scary situation to find yourself 

miles and miles from the capability of life-saving equipment 

and people. 

 

So I would suggest to the minister, given that these people 

worry about offloading, they worry about the proper funding 

regimes being put in place ahead of time and on a very well 

scheduled regime, that I would suggest that these issues be 

explored with the people that represent rural government and 

that they be able to give the proper assurances in the committee 

of this Bill that would say that no, we've thought about that; 

here is the solution. 

The solution will be in place before there are any dramatic 

changes that occur on the legislative side which would preclude 

rural people from having access to those types of things and 

rural people being able to control at the end of the day their 

destiny, as they have done so successfully over the history of 

our province. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would allow others to enter debate. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the Minister of 

Environment and Resource Management to introduce the 

officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce to you 

my deputy minister, Mr. Michael Shaw, on my right, the 

deputy minister of the Department of Environment and 

Resource Management; on my left, Bob Blackwell, the 

associate deputy minister in charge of management services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, we had quite a discussion at our last session dealing 

with underground storage tanks.  And I continue to receive 

quite a number of phone calls from people concerned about the 

underground storage tank issue. 

 

I notice in Regina that there is a situation developing with an 

underground storage tank where a company is trying a new 

method of reclamation.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you have 

looked into the various types of reclamations that are available 

to solve the problem of a leak of gasoline or diesel fuel 

underground, other than the removal and spreading it on the 

surface and allowing for evaporation. 

 

Have you looked at and considered any other types of process 

which would allow . . . which would perhaps even be less 

expensive and do the same or better job, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, my department has a full 

range of the alternatives under examination. 

 

I just want to correct the member in his statement.  I want to 

correct the member in his statement that soil is being spread on 

the land just for purposes of evaporation. 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

The process that's being engaged in is called land farming.  

And while some evaporation may take place, the purpose of 

doing that is to allow the micro-organisms in the soil to work 

on the hydrocarbons and to break them down.  And this is to 

date the most cost-effective method of reducing to an 

acceptable level the contaminants in the soil in cases where 

gasoline tanks have leaked. 

 

There are certainly other processes that involve soil removal 

and treatment in bioreactors and other processes that involve 

leaving the soil in place, and by steam and other processes, 

extruding from the soil the contaminants. But these are all very 

much more expensive processes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, if a person or a corporation 

that has an underground tank that is leaking and they wish to 

use one of these other methods, you know, perhaps it's less 

expensive for them to, say, use this steam treatment that you 

mentioned.  Is that an acceptable form of process to recover the 

pollutant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- If there are any technical solutions not yet 

analysed by our department which would be more 

cost-effective, I would first ask my department to do an 

assessment of the process.  But certainly if it was as effective or 

more effective than existing processes, there would be no doubt 

that they would be approved. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in Regina there is a 

service station site where some type of recovery method is 

taking place which doesn't include soil removal.  And I'm not 

sure if they're injecting air or if they're injecting steam or what 

it is.  Would this type of a solution be acceptable and be 

permitted under the current regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't answer specifically 

whether current regulations would permit it exactly, and I'll 

take notice of that question.  But I will say that the intent of the 

current regulations -- and if they did not allow such a thing to 

happen, they would be all amended to allow it -- the intent of 

the current regulations is to mean a certain standard of soil 

cleanliness as a result of a spill.  And any method that could be 

used to achieve that end and it could be demonstrated to 

achieve that end would very quickly be allowed by regulation if 

the current regulations did not allow it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If a site is in a 

class A soil site . . . I wonder if first, when you respond, if you 

can define what a class A soil site is.  But if they're in a class A 

soil site, if they haven't provided you with a response by April 

1 as to what method they will use to do their recovery and 

protection, what are the consequences of that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The class A soil sites have tanks installed 

in sandy soils that are located within 500 metres of a water 

well, 150 metres from surface water, or 150 metres from a 

major underground structure. 

With respect to class A sites that have not met regulations by 

April 1, our department's approach would be to immediately be 

in touch with the person in violation of the regulation to 

determine a method by which they could come into 

compliance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What did you 

mean by a major underground site? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Something like a parkade, for example -- 

near a structure to which leaking fluids could migrate and cause 

a public health and safety risk. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So would this include a residential 

building that had a basement, or is it something more major 

than that?  I'm just wondering, you know, what . . . A parkade 

is a fairly substantial building.  And I'm not sure if you're 

talking underground parking or if you're talking above open air 

parking.  Can you give a few examples of what a major 

underground site would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, I don't have the 

exact definition of where the threshold is on size in this 

definition of a major underground structure, but we'll forward 

that information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have 

some other questions dealing with underground tanks, but I'll 

leave them for another day.  I know the minister wants to talk 

about something other than underground tanks in these 

estimates. 

 

Okay, Mr. Minister, I do have a test for your employees today.  

Last year you put out a couple of test sites for waste disposal 

across the province -- one up in the Humboldt area I believe; 

and one Shaunavon, Climax, Val Marie -- somewheres in that 

area.  I wonder if you can give us a report on that project, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

(1230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I don't have a recent 

communiqué from either of the two projects which are 

operating, but I do know that in the grand plan that they 

proposed in each case they, in their five-year period -- and 

they're now entering the second year of that period soon -- will 

be doing . . . planning and studying alternatives for location of 

sites, how to handle specific waste streams for recycling, how 

to handle special products.  And if I were to just reflect from 

casual information, that they are still in the planning stages and 

have not yet implemented any specific projects to test some of 

the various opportunities there are in waste management. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Mr. Minister, they're actually not 

doing any of the collection and separation at the present time; 

they're not collecting from the larger communities around their 

area, so they're still . . . it's all in the planning stage at this 

point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  Each of them of course is still 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

engaged in their own waste management system that they had.  

And it may well occur, as it often does when people sit down at 

a table together, that they may have already engaged in some 

cooperative exercises that are different than the practices they 

used to use, just because they're sitting at one table now.  So it 

would surprise me in fact if some of that had not occurred. 

 

But I think in terms of laying out a larger plan and testing some 

new initiatives, I would say that those would not yet be under 

way. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I'm surprised, Mr. Minister, that it's 

taking so long to implement this.  A number of the 

communities in my area and neighbouring that area were very 

interested in becoming a part of this pilot project because of the 

waste disposal problems in their area where sites had reached 

their life expectancy.  And they're waiting for the information, 

for one thing, that would be generated by these projects, and 

they had looked forward to being able to participate in these 

projects, but other sites were chosen. 

 

I know that the communities in my area were prepared to go 

ahead as quickly as possible because of their need for waste 

disposal.  And if the people of this province whose disposal 

sites have reached their life expectancy are going to have to 

wait for a couple of years for the results to start coming in, I 

think that's perhaps too long of a time frame, Mr. Minister. 

 

And it would be important that these sites perhaps make a 

yearly report, rather than two-year report or a five-year report 

at the end.  And it would be important that the sites around the 

province who have reached their life expectancy, whose RMs 

are now very concerned with waste disposal on their tax base 

because they're going to be environmentally responsible for it 

at some time, if some more information can be passed on to 

them to allow proper assessment and proper decision-making 

processes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite raises 

a very good point, and we'll be communicating with the pilot 

projects about some more formal mechanism to report back to 

others who are interested. 

 

What I would also though want to recognize and encourage 

more of is the very fact that you . . . the very point that you 

make about the municipalities in your area.  Because I know it's 

also true in the municipalities in mine -- and I've met with them 

to talk about this -- that they actually begin to think, as their 

existing facilities begin to become filled, that they look at 

alternatives in managing waste streams; if they were going to 

site a new disposal site that they might do it collaboratively. 

 

And what I know they have free access to do, and if we need to 

facilitate the communication, is as they're thinking about what 

they might do, to contact these two pilot projects to update 

themselves with the thinking of those two pilots at this point.  

Because I think the work that the pilots are doing is excellent 

work in terms of looking at alternatives, but I know that 

municipalities are not waiting, as municipalities in our area are 

and the ones you describe, they are beginning to do some 

thinking and some planning. 

 

And I know in one of the urban municipalities, not in my riding 

but immediately on the edge in Outlook, the town council has 

recently begun its own recycling centre where they have now 

begun to collect even household plastics and found a market for 

those.  So they are going to be dealing with reducing their 

long-term waste disposal problems by recycling more and 

more. 

 

And I think as the communities that aren't involved in the pilot 

project initiatives do their thinking, if they could keep in touch 

with the pilot projects, even to ask them some questions that 

those pilots might explore for them, I think that gets to be the 

best cooperative mechanism for moving forward. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Another issue.  

I had some correspondence with you late last summer 

concerning a place called Enviroclean which was up in the 

north-east part of the province, towards that direction. 

 

I'm wondering what happened with that site, Mr. Minister.  

What was the end result of concerns there that were raised by 

the owners, by the Environment department, and by myself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question of 

the member opposite. 

 

The circumstance that followed from the exchange of letters 

that you and I had was that the company in question did not 

respond to the opportunities the department gave them to deal 

with the environmental hazard that was accumulating because 

of their not dealing with the substances on their property.  It 

resulted in eventually me issuing a ministerial order which was 

not respected; and the department, as a result, hired consultants 

and firms to come in and do the clean-up and so the site has 

now been cleaned up and the company responsible will be 

billed for the costs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When we're 

dealing with reclamation of solvents, paint thinners from auto 

body shops, there seems to be a real lack in this province of 

facilities to handle those types of procedures, particularly the 

paint thinners out of the body shops, the auto body shops.  A 

number of them, I believe, have their own recycling units on 

site which can handle a small amount of the product -- and that 

is in the larger auto body shops where they have a fair amount 

of paint thinner.  The smaller auto body shops don't have access 

to this equipment, Mr. Minister, and there needs to be in place 

in Saskatchewan someone who does look after these products 

and does recycle them. 

 

Now has the department given any consideration to that type of 

permit that would allow this type of reclamation, Mr. Minister?  

And is there anyone in the 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

province who is doing it on a larger scale other than just the 

auto body shops who are doing their own products? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, again I appreciate the 

question.  There is no comprehensive system in place to 

provide the kind of collection the member opposite speaks 

about, and I think this does offer an opportunity for someone in 

Saskatchewan to do that. 

 

The question always is the framework within which it happens.  

What I did a year ago -- and I'm expecting a report soon -- is 

ask a group of interested public people to examine the question 

of used oil management. 

 

And I'm expecting a market . . . an industry-based solution to 

be recommended to me, where the cost of collecting used oil 

will be part of the price of the product in the end.  This is the 

best form of environmental management, when the full-cycle 

cost of a product is represented in the purchase price; because 

when all the environmental impacts are considered in the 

purchase price, then when you're making your market 

decisions, you're making an environmental decision as well.  

So that's the object of the consultation that's going on with 

respect to used oil. 

 

We are going to follow then, and hopefully the deliberations 

that are going on in used oil will give us some clear signal 

about which direction we might want to go with tires and 

batteries.  And clearly the issue you raise about solvents and 

paints is another issue that needs to follow on that path of 

substances which need to be dealt with, and need to be dealt 

with in a way that properly reflects the public cost and ends up 

with a public safety process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, ultimately indeed the 

public will pay for whatever types of environmental laws we 

put into place, because if it deals with a commercial operation 

it becomes a direct cost to them, and they in turn will pass that 

on to their consumers. 

 

But within the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, the 

problems of solvents and paint thinners has been a problem for 

a long period of time.  The Enviroclean situation that I 

mentioned earlier that you responded to, was an attempt to try 

and recycle these products.  This was one Saskatchewan 

individual who was trying to take an interest in that opportunity 

and yet was disallowed from doing so because he couldn't get 

the necessary permits from the Department of the Environment.  

If the necessary permits . . . and, you know, things need to be 

done properly indeed, but the permits also need to be spelled 

out in a manner that's clear enough for the individual to be able 

to plan and proceed through logically step by step. 

 

This individual did have a fair amount of product stored on site, 

I believe, and was trying to get permits through to process it 

and that was where the problem seemed to develop, was in 

getting the permits through to process the product to take care 

of the solvents and 

the paint thinners. 

 

He had an agreement in place with a commercial disposal site 

in Alberta to dispose of the heavy metals that come out of the 

paint thinners.  When you dehydrate the paint thinners, you 

remove the heavy metals out of it and that's the major pollutant 

in that product.  And he had a . . . not a permit; he had an 

agreement with an Alberta company for proper disposal but it 

was the problem of doing the process, getting the permits to do 

the process, and then transporting it from the site in 

Saskatchewan to the site in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Minister, what have you done in the past year to look into 

this problem of those kind of solutions to recycle, to rehydrate 

the product, to extract the heavy metals and the pollutants and 

then be allowed to transport them for disposal at another site. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

opposite for raising that issue.  The question of how to handle 

hazardous substances of that sort is dealt with under regulation 

in the province; sometimes under a number of regulations.  For 

example, they might come under hazardous goods 

transportation regulations, they might come under fire 

regulations, they might come under some other . . . health and 

public safety, occupational health regulations. 

 

What we have tried to do in a couple of areas in the last year is 

to harmonize our regulatory processes within the province, but 

also then with the federal government who have their own 

series of regulations. 

 

And so what we have attempted to do with respect to farm 

chemical handling, for example, and the underground storage 

tanks, as you mentioned before, we've tried to bring together a 

number of regulatory influences into a simpler process. 

 

In order to facilitate that, we've established in the last year a 

hazardous substances advisory group which examines those 

issues with us to examine the public policy questions for 

government with the industry and the public sitting at the table 

to advise us on that. 

 

So the question of whether the proponent you talk about had 

difficulty becoming permitted may be a question of him simply 

not being able to meet an existing regulation. 

 

(1245) 

 

Another official has joined me, Mr. Victor Chang, who's in 

charge of that area.  I'll consult with him, and if I can add 

anything else to the specifics of the case you raise, I'll respond. 

 

Yes, there is nothing to add to what I've said.  There is a 

regulatory regime that has to be met in order to be able to do 

these kinds of things and clearly the proponent was not able to 

meet one element of them.  If the member opposite has a 

specific concern, or the proponent does, with respect to the 

regulations being 



March 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

insensitive in order to achieve the objective here, I'd appreciate 

him communicating with that, or the proponent communicating 

it, back to my office just to determine that we are protecting 

public safety but also doing it in the least intrusive way 

possible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well the person in question did have 

some concerns, at the time, of being able to get through the 

process; that it wasn't necessarily perfectly clear and the steps 

weren't all laid out quite nicely for him to proceed through.  He 

thought he had in place the necessary requirements to meet 

that, and yet couldn't get the permits. 

 

What happens with the products that are currently being 

collected from the recycling processes of paint thinners and 

solvents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question.  

The range of substances we're talking about here is quite wide 

and, depending on what the substance is and what the 

contaminant is . . . if they were, for example, old paints, there 

would be a lead issue; otherwise they might just be solvent 

issues where redistillation might be appropriate. 

 

There are commercial facilities within Saskatchewan to deal 

with some substances, but with others the owners of them have 

to find a disposal site outside of Saskatchewan where there isn't 

one here.  And clearly this continues to be an opportunity for 

environmental businesses to consider -- that there are more and 

more products that we are aware of that have a negative 

influence on our environment that have to be dealt with that we 

could build industries around here to maximize the 

employment in the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When 

solvents and paint thinners are distilled and the by-products, the 

heavy metals, are extracted from them, what happens to them 

currently in Saskatchewan?  Are they disposed of here?  Are 

they shipped out?  What happens to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There are no opportunities for disposing of 

sludges that have hazardous substances remaining in them here.  

They would either have to be sent out of province to a disposal 

treatment facility or to a secured disposal where there is a 

specific form of storage of the substance to ensure that there is 

no leakage into the environment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, how many secured 

disposal sites do we have around the province where this 

product will be collected into?  And how much product of all 

sorts are being stored on those sites? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We have no secure landfills in the 

province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I think we've reached a 

point of concern here then, if there are no secure land sites, 

disposal sites. Obviously we have storage sites around the 

province for toxic materials such as PCBs (polychlorinated 

biphenyls).  I believe 

SaskPower stores a fair amount of PCBs on some of their sites.  

Are you telling me today that those sites are not secure?  I 

think, Mr. Minister, we need to seriously look at this situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, this is obviously a question 

of the usage of the English language here.  A secured landfill is 

a particular definition of a place where a defined procedure is 

used to place into a particular form of storage, whether it's a 

particular clay body or whatever it is -- I don't know the 

technical detail of how that is then constructed on the landfill 

site -- for disposal of certain degrees of wastes that need certain 

kinds of storage. 

 

Then there is the question of chemical storage facilities or 

hazardous substances storage facilities -- not landfills. We're 

not talking about landfills remember, secured landfills -- not 

landfills -- but now the hazardous substance storage facilities or 

chemical storage facilities. 

 

And you're aware from our discussions around the same 

regulations that affect gasoline, the underground storage tanks, 

that that whole discussion has taken place in the province about 

the degree of safety that's used in the construction of a variety 

of sort of chemical storage facilities, many of which would be 

farm chemicals. 

 

Then as we talked about the hazardous substance, now you 

elevate the need for public protection one more time.  Now you 

might get into a place, for example, where you need to store old 

farm chemicals, farm chemicals that are no longer safe to be 

used, or farm chemicals of unknown chemical composition 

because the label may have come off. 

 

And now you're talking about the kind of facility that 

SaskPower has at Boundary dam, where they for their own 

purposes for storing PCBs have established under very strict 

guidelines, storage regimes which are constantly monitored and 

constantly watched, whereby a variety of kinds of hazardous 

substances can be stored in the long term. 

 

The final stage in that regime is then when you have an 

opportunity to dispose of this in final form, for example, at a 

place like the Swan Hills facility in Alberta.  Now you can 

move some of these chemicals from storage into a financially 

feasible form of final disposition by high-temperature burning 

in the case of the Swan Hills facility, where the emissions from 

that are non-contaminating. 

 

So while we began with talking about sludges that would need 

to be in a secure landfill, that is the piece that we don't have in 

Saskatchewan.  We do have good regulation and many good 

chemical storage facilities.  We have a very good hazardous 

substances facility in Saskatchewan at Boundary dam.  And we 

don't have a final disposition sort of mechanism that Swan Hills 

has in Alberta, but we have an agreement between environment 

ministers in western Canada to work cooperatively on those 

matters. 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1994 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 


