




















































Hansard: April 11, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1439 

 April 11, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

number of petitions here to present from the Environmental 

Fairness Association.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved in digging up underground storage tanks and 

replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations called for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have proven to 

be leaking, cost-sharing or other alternative agreed upon by 

all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Radisson, Hafford, Dubuc, Estevan 

-- across the province, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to present them 

now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well would like to 

present a petition.  And the prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost-sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by individuals from Watson, Leroy, 

Goodsoil, Pierceland, Lloydminster, and Sturgis.  I so present 

them. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce Bill 

Albert and other members of the Environmental Fairness 

Association who are seated in the west gallery today.  I would 

ask that members welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you, as well, the foursome from 

the Saltcoats constituency, Barb and Bill Albert, and Mr. and 

Mrs. Greg Rushka from the town of Saltcoats.  They're in town 

on official business.  And I'd like to welcome them.  And have 

a safe trip home, would you please.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

a great pleasure to introduce a very special guest to our 

Assembly today to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, Dr. George Gedvaninshvili, from the 

Georgian Republic. 

 

The doctor is a cardiologist from the Georgian Republic health 

care organization and regional management care department.  

He is visiting Saskatchewan to get a better understanding of 

how we provide health services here in the birthplace of 

medicare. 

 

Toward this end, he will be meeting with various health 

officials, visiting some of our health facilities, and having 

discussions with some district health board staff and 

representatives.  And I look forward to meeting with the doctor 

later this week. 

 

Members will be interested to know that the Republic of 

Georgia is also in the process of reforming its health system. 

 

Hence, I would invite all members to join with me in 

welcoming the doctor here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very 

pleased this afternoon to boast that the city of Yorkton will be 

hosting the 1994 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards on 

April 29 and 30.  This, Mr. Speaker, is the fifth annual country 

music award.  And not to be outdone by any of the previous 

host communities, our local radio station, GX94, their staff, 

along with dozens of volunteers, are busy making the fifth 

annual a weekend to include on your calendars. 

 

Saskatchewan is of course very rich in history and talent in the 

field of country music.  Commencing on Friday evening at 8 

p.m., the Saskatchewan Country Music Association's fifth 

annual award show will get under way in the Ann Portnuff 

Theatre where the Johner Brothers will be hosting several 

Saskatchewan entertainers. 

 

Saturday morning will feature a Saskatchewan country music 

round table discussion on topics on country music opportunities 

with guest speakers like 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

Ralph Emery of TNN (The Nashville Network) and entertainer 

Blake Emmons.  The awards banquet on Saturday evening will 

feature Ralph Emery as the guest speaker, and the cabaret will 

see Poverty Plainsmen performing. 

 

At this time I'd like to congratulate the bid committee for 

bringing the Country Music Awards to Yorkton.  Yorkton has a 

long tradition of being a great host and we look forward to 

seeing country music entertainers and fans from across the 

province in our city. 

 

So I invite all of Saskatchewan to join us in Yorkton for a great 

country music weekend.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Esterhazy and Langenburg Arts Council Productions 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On Friday I 

boasted about the artistic excellence found in the community of 

Stockholm in the Saltcoats constituency.  There is so much 

talent throughout my constituency, that today I have to 

combine two more towns into one statement.  I apologize in 

advance for having to rush. 

 

The Esterhazy Arts Council recently sponsored its second 

annual talent show with special guests.  The show had a 

country flavour, which was obvious from its title, "Kicking 

Country."  There was a baker's dozen of local acts which kept 

the audience's toes tapping and hands clapping.  As well, there 

were special appearances by the Parkland Fiddlers and by 

Dorothy Greenbank. 

 

On October 26, the Esterhazy Arts Council will be featuring 

Saskatchewan's Connie Kaldor at its next function. 

 

Not to be outdone by Stockholm's dinner theatre, the 

Langenberg Arts Council recently staged its own show, also 

written, directed, produced, and performed entirely by local 

people.  This was the Langenberg Arts Council's first attempt at 

dinner theatre, and according to the review in The Four-Town 

Journal, it was a highly successful production.  And that 

reviewer, Mr. Speaker, is a notoriously tough critic. 

 

The show was called "Fifties Frolic" and is about a time I am 

too young to remember.  But I hear they got it right. 

 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to see these kinds of 

activities take place in Saltcoats and across the province.  They 

are fun, they raise money for worthwhile projects, and most 

importantly, they show that our communities are vibrant, alive, 

and proud.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Retirement of Earl Grey Fire Chief 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I 

want to pay tribute to the volunteers of Saskatchewan, the 

people who give freely of their time and effort to make this a 

better and a safer place to live.  But I want to especially pay 

tribute to one in particular, a Mr. Karl Glass of Earl Grey, 

better known as Charlie. 

 

Charlie has just recently retired as fire chief of the town of Earl 

Grey and the RM (rural municipality) of Longlaketon after 37 

years of dedicated service.  Charlie has always kept his 

fire-fighters up to date on new and improved fire-fighting 

techniques and equipment. Charlie has also always put safety 

of his fire-fighters first and has worked very hard to achieve 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to again congratulate and thank Charlie for 

37 years of excellent and dedicated service as fire chief of the 

town of Earl Grey and the RM of Longlaketon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Wildlife Week 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This week, the week of 

April 10 to 16, is National Wildlife Week in Canada.  In 1947 

the federal government established National Wildlife Week to 

honour the late Jack Miner, the father of wildlife conservation 

in Canada. 

 

Each year we celebrate National Wildlife Week during the 

week encompassing April 10 which was Jack Miner's birthday. 

 

It is particularly appropriate that we celebrate this week in 

April, as throughout Canada there is an awakening of life with 

the spring bird migration, mammals becoming active after a 

long, cold winter, and the renewal of plant and insect life. 

 

The theme of National Wildlife Week this year is:  biodiversity 

works for wildlife; you can too.  In other words we can all do 

something for wildlife.  Landowners can protect habitat on 

their land, urban residents can plant trees and shrubs in their 

backyards for wildlife, and feed wildlife, especially in winter, 

and many teachers and volunteers work with our youth 

teaching and involving them in wildlife conservation. 

 

As in the past years, concerned citizens and conservation 

groups in Saskatoon and Regina are pooling their resources and 

expertise and hosting a variety of wildlife week activities for 

the public in their cities.  For many years Saskatchewan has 

been a leader in wildlife conservation.  Our achievements are 

commendable, but much remains to be done right here at home.  

We can, and should, work for wildlife.  The results are most 

satisfying and rewarding.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Commonwealth Games Baton Relay 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, today the Queen's baton relay 

begins its journey across Canada, as it is officially received by 

Governor General Ray Hnatyshyn in Ottawa.  Since leaving 

England, the baton has made stops in Kenya, India, Barbados, 

St. Lucia, and Australia.  The baton will visit each province and 

territory before the August Commonwealth Games in Victoria. 

 

The Queen's baton is a symbol of unity between all 

Commonwealth nations as they come together for fellowship 

and competition at the games.  The baton carries a message of 

welcome from the Queen which will be read at the opening 

ceremonies of the Commonwealth Games by her son, Prince 

Edward. 

 

SaskPower has the privilege of sponsoring the Queen's baton 

on May 9 and 10 as it makes its way across our nation.  On 

Monday, May 9, the Lieutenant Governor will welcome the 

baton in Victoria Park after a relay from the airport.  Premier 

Romanow will launch a relay from Saskatoon to Victoria Park 

to the Kiwanis Park shell the following day.  The public will 

enjoy these events to welcome the baton and have the 

opportunity to show their support for our Saskatchewan 

athletes attending the Commonwealth Games. 

 

I encourage all sports and community groups to participate in 

the relay and be part of this historic sports event.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I just want to remind members that even in 

their statements by members they should not refer to the proper 

name of individuals in this House. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Extended Health Services 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again we'll be 

devoting most of our time this question period to questions 

submitted to us from members of the general public. 

 

Before I start, however, I'd like to extend a note of 

appreciation.  We have received a tremendous volume of calls, 

letters, through the "Mr. Premier, I want to know" program, 

and we probably won't have time this session to get through all 

of them.  As well, many of the questions and concerns we get 

are of an urgent personal nature such as health, social 

assistance.  For these reasons we have been sending some of 

these questions directly to the office of the appropriate 

minister.  We have sent letters to several ministers but we 

would like to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe that there is nothing in 

our rules that permits the member to make a statement on 

question period.  If he has a question, I would ask the member 

to please put his question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

commend the Minister of Social Services for his effectiveness 

and promptness in answering the questions, and I want to say 

that he has done better than most of the others. 

 

My question today is this: Mr. Premier, I want to know, why is 

there such a lack of services in the extended health care field?  

We have a four-year-old that is . . . his family doctor feels 

should have been assessed for ADD (attention deficit disorder) 

which is attention deficit syndrome.  We have been referred to 

Saskatoon.  There's a 12- to 18-month waiting period for this 

service.  The service was available in Swift Current two years 

ago, and now the public health department tells us this position 

has not been filled.  Why?  We have also checked out mental 

health; no one can help us.  We have been told the sooner that 

these children are helped, the better advantage they have of 

reaching their full potential.  Where is our help? 

 

And this letter comes from Laurie Schultz from Leinan, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to thank Ms. Schultz for the question and I do think that 

she has made a very good point in her question.  There is a 

tremendous amount of work that has to be done in the area of 

extended health services and community-based services. 

 

In the past what the government has done, under the former 

regime, was concentrate on hospitals and physician services.  

What health reform is trying to do is re-priorize some of our 

priorities in the health care, and re-channel money into more 

community-based services. 

 

The specific problem that she points to is one that has been 

brought to my attention and that I have asked the Department 

of Health to take a look at vis-a-vis provincial policy, and to 

urge district boards to start analysing what services are needed 

in their district to meet these needs.  This is exactly the kind of 

problem that we want to be able to deal with in the future 

through our district health boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Conference 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today comes from Craig and Marilyn Kurz from 

Central Butte, Saskatchewan; and they would like to ask a 

question of the crop insurance minister. 

 

We would like to direct our question to Mr. Cunningham 

regarding his so-called surplus in the crop insurance program 

that was spent on a party for paid employees.  We were 

wondering if our premiums for the crop insurance are going to 

go down to reflect this surplus; when we see how he visibly 

wasted $100,000, we really hate to think how he is really 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

running our crop insurance program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture has commented on this before.  This was a 

convention held in the normal course, and these things are held.  

I think if the members want a lot of detail about precisely what 

was happening, a more appropriate forum would be estimates 

rather than question period.  But the minister's commented on 

this and pointed out this was a routine meeting. 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

from David Danyluk from Fox Valley.  If education is a 

priority in Saskatchewan, then when will the chopping of 

schools and teaching staff stop?  Will personal taxes for 1994 

increase another 5 per cent, and how much more do you think 

the ordinary taxpayer can be squeezed, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to thank Mr. Danyluk for the question. 

 

As all people in this province know, this government was 

greeted with a $15 billion deficit when we took office in 

November of 1991.  We have been able to reduce our 

provincial deficit by over $1 billion with the help of all of the 

people of our province, including Mr. Danyluk. 

 

There is no question that there have been funding reductions to 

help us accomplish that task in both health and education.  But 

the Minister of Finance announced in her February budget that 

there would be no further funding reductions to education come 

next budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Student Employment Program 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Delbert Chicoine of Storthoaks who 

writes: 

 

 I have participated regularly through my business in the 

partnership program for students.  The deadline for the 

program this year was April 6, but I received no notification 

of this and didn't hear about it until it was too late.  Was any 

advertising done to tell people that this deadline was coming?  

Why don't you set up a mailing list and notify people who 

have participated in the past?  In light of these problems, will 

you extend the deadline for this program? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the gentleman for his 

question.  There was a press release issued.  Obviously it was 

not covered in his local newspapers.  We have received literally 

hundreds and hundreds of applications.  I'm not quite sure what 

the auditor would say about extending the deadline, Mr. 

Speaker, because you can get into difficulties with these kinds 

of situations, but certainly I will see what I can do on 

behalf of the gentleman to see whether or not we can 

accommodate him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Financial Accountability 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question to the Premier comes from Elaine Jackson from 

Rocanville and she says: no one seems to be responsible for 

money misspent or misappropriated as indicated by the 

auditor's report.  Each department should have their budgets cut 

by the amount wasted.  It's time bureaucrats were held 

accountable.  Doesn't anyone in government have to be 

productive? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the 

individual is this:  some of the most positive comments made 

by auditors have been made by the auditor in Saskatchewan 

with respect to the accounting practices of this government.  He 

said recently that Saskatchewan has gone from having amongst 

the weakest financial statements in Canada -- and the members 

opposite know when that was -- to having amongst the 

strongest financial statements in Canada.  So we are open and 

accountable with the public. 

 

When a government does thousands and thousands and 

thousands of transactions, there obviously are occasions in 

which the transaction or the issue is not handled in the best 

possible way and the auditor does a good job of pointing these 

out to us.  And we do hold civil servants accountable because 

we ask them to act immediately to correct the problem and they 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Board of Internal Economy Powers 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the member of the government who is designated 

to answer for the Board of Internal Economy.  Last week, Mr. 

Speaker, the official opposition, as you know, introduced 

legislation which would allow the Board of Internal Economy 

to function as it was originally intended -- not only to make the 

rules that MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) use . . . 

the funds that MLAs use, but also to enforce those rules, Mr. 

Speaker.  We even supplied the government with an advance 

copy of the Bill several days prior to introducing it, so that we 

could work together in working out a meaningful solution. 

 

To the member responsible, does your government support 

simple legislation empowering the Board of Internal Economy; 

or is it your intention to oppose this solution as you have 

opposed and blocked every other avenue that the opposition has 

proposed to deal with this particular matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

thank the member for the question.  And I would like to 

indicate to him that government members on the Board of 

Internal Economy and the 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

government will work towards democratic reform and 

reforming the directives and the way these issues are dealt with, 

as we have since we were elected in October of 1991. 

 

The member, instead of playing politics, if he would be 

interested in working with government members on the Board 

of Internal Economy, I'm sure that we would have much more 

effect in terms of reaching our objectives. 

 

I bring the member back to the last Board of Internal Economy 

meeting when instead of working with government members, 

both him and the Leader of the Third Party were attempting to 

play petty politics when we were trying to bring together 

through the Clerk, and we've requested of the Clerk that she 

would bring together . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member must know that he 

cannot bring the staff into the discussion that happens on the 

floor, and I think he has to refrain from doing so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

aware of that rule, and I apologize for that.  But let me say that 

we have asked that information be brought to the Board of 

Internal Economy with respect to how we may handle 

enforcement of directives and we intend to pursue that through 

the Board of Internal Economy which is what we believe to be 

the most appropriate vehicle for handling these issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

think the member . . . the minister well knows, and I'm sure all 

members have had the opportunity to read the verbatim of the 

last Board of Internal Economy meeting, that that simply wasn't 

the case at all; that the problem is, as has been identified in the 

House and at the board, that the board does not have the power 

to enforce its own rules. 

 

So I say to the member again, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that 

everyone is recognizing that there is a lack of credibility in the 

process surrounding the Board of Internal Economy, will you 

and other members of this Legislative Assembly support a 

legislated solution to the problems that the board have?  And 

will you stop blocking those proposals and get on with 

rectifying the solution so that once again the public will have 

the confidence that we as elected members can govern our own 

affairs? Will you do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say in answer 

to the member's question that he would recall, and I would 

hope he would recall, that it was this government that opened 

the Board of Internal Economy to public scrutiny so that the 

public will be aware of how members govern themselves and 

how they govern their allowances.  And I want to say that I 

have had a close look at the legislative proposal which you put 

before this House and, at first blush, it would 

appear to me, and I do believe that it is frankly rather narrow in 

focus. 

 

I would want to say that I look forward to some debate with 

respect to issues relating to members' directives and I want to 

say that government members are committed to reforming 

some of these directives.  As we know that they do require 

some form of amendment.  But I want to say to the member 

that rather than playing petty politics, we intend to gather 

information from other jurisdictions as to how they govern 

themselves and how they handle themselves.  We will then 

bring it to the Board of Internal Economy, which we believe to 

be the appropriate place where there can be some debate and 

some meaningful discussion. 

 

I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 

committed to reform of the system.  We have shown that in a 

number of ways.  And I want to say that we will continue on 

that path, as we have since we were elected in October of 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Final question to 

the minister.  Mr. Minister, we can wonder about other 

jurisdictions all we want.  The simple fact is that the Board of 

Internal Economy in the province of Saskatchewan does not 

have the legislative power to govern itself and equate the issues 

that come before it. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have the power in this Assembly to enact 

legislation and rules to govern all members of society.  What 

we're asking from you today is a commitment that a Board of 

Internal Economy meeting can be held as soon as possible, and 

that we as members of the Saskatchewan Assembly sit down 

and design the rules that will give the public the confidence in 

this Assembly to govern its own issues.  Mr. Minister, we don't 

have to worry about anyone else. 

 

Can you commit to that today, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I can commit to 

is the process that we have embarked upon.  And I want to say 

to the member, he knows full well what kind of information 

that we have asked officials of the Legislative Assembly Office 

to generate for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been in touch with officials and I have 

been in touch with your office with respect to this information 

and when in fact it will be brought forth.  I'm awaiting that 

information.  Once we have received it, we will put in place a 

process through the Board of Internal Economy where in fact 

there can be open and meaningful discussion with respect to a 

solution to the problem that the member raises. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that some of those directives 

have been amended no less than four times since 1988.  We 

recognize that there are problems but 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

what we want to do is see a long-term solution.  And we're not 

going to do it helter-skelter, we're going to do it in a planned 

and a managed and a staged process, through a staged process, 

that will work and serve members in the long term. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, people have had enough of helter-skelter 

politics. The member sat in cabinet during the years from 1982 

to 1991 when there was no planning, it was all crisis 

management and it resulted, frankly, in a $15 billion debt and, 

Mr. Speaker, we're committed to repairing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Bankruptcy Legislation 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, today a 

Saskatchewan farm family is in desperate need of your help.  A 

major bank has advertised their land for sale and has served 

them with an eviction notice. 

 

Hundreds of other Saskatchewan farm families may soon suffer 

the same fate.  There is a loophole in The Farm Securities Act 

because it allows lending institutions to repossess the leaseback 

rights of farmers.  Mr. Minister, for months you've been aware 

of this flaw. 

 

Mr. Minister, you could have prevented what is happening 

today.  You could have stopped the bank from evicting this 

family.  Why has your government failed to amend the 

legislation to protect the leaseback rights, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, this problem of the 

interpretation of the statute by the Court of Appeal was drawn 

to our attention in late February.  And since that time the 

Department of Justice, together with the Department of 

Agriculture, has been working urgently on the solution to the 

problem which we believe has to be resolved in some way. 

 

We have asked for the assistance of the federal government in 

correspondence to the federal ministers asking for a change in 

section 48, I think it is, of the Bankruptcy Act that would cover 

this situation and they seem agreeable to that, although the 

wheels move slowly in Ottawa. 

 

We are still considering the matter with a view to bringing 

something before this legislature this session and we're working 

towards that timetable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Justice 

minister claims that his government has known about this since 

the beginning of February and has been working to urgently 

correct this, yet we see nothing before the legislature to prove 

that this be the case. 

 

Mr. Minister, the bank has lit a fuse under one farm 

family and their land may have already been sold out from 

under them as we speak.  Tomorrow I will introduce a Bill to 

amend The Farm Security Act to prevent this from happening 

to other farm families. 

 

Can I have your assurance that you will move immediately to 

save these farms by committing to support the changes we are 

introducing to amend The Farm Security Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I won't give this member 

any assurance of anything at all.  What I told this member is 

that since this matter was decided by the Court of Appeal in 

late February, we've had it under urgent consideration.  It's a 

tricky area, because bankruptcy is a subject that falls entirely 

within the jurisdiction of the federal parliament, and it's the 

federal parliament who should be moving to act on this thing. 

 

We are considering though what we can do within the limited 

jurisdiction that we have over these matters to amend our 

legislation to try and cover the situation.  I warn the member 

while he's coming forward with his politically grandstanding 

Bill, that it's a tricky area constitutionally, and he should be 

careful how he drafts his so-called legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Justice 

minister claims that we're dealing with tricky legislation; 

however, he's brought in some Bills that are enormous and take 

a great deal of effort just for an opposition party to get through 

them. 

 

What is tricky, Mr. Minister, about protecting farm families?  

What is tricky about your government, for once, standing up 

for people? 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has used its majority to 

overturn legislation to suit its political agenda.  The Farm 

Security Act is faulty legislation which has direct and 

immediate implications for hundreds of families who are facing 

bankruptcy as their only hope to rebuild their life on the farm. 

 

Mr. Minister, will your government commit to put this issue at 

the top of your agenda, behind all other issues?  Can the 

Liberals count on your support to deal with this crisis without 

further delay or danger to these farm families? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have said, Mr. Speaker, that I won't 

give this member assurances of anything at all.  I would 

suggest to him that the best thing he could do would be to 

contact his counterparts, his colleagues in Ottawa, Mr. Manley 

and Mr. Goodale, and talk to them about changes to the 

Bankruptcy Act which could be rushed through parliament, 

which began to sit this morning, and would be a perfect answer 

to this problem. 

 

We in Saskatchewan will be able to fashion a solution, I think.  

It will be imperfect and it will be constitutionally suspect.  It's 

not a question of it being 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

a tricky area to protect farmers.  It is a tricky area, though, to 

try at the provincial level, and the member should listen to this.  

The member should listen to this: it's a tricky business trying to 

legislate in respect of something which is within the primary 

jurisdiction of the Parliament of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Indian Celebration Debts 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for Indian and Metis 

Affairs.  Mr. Minister, last summer a number of aboriginal 

groups held an indigenous peoples celebration in Moose Jaw.  

Unfortunately, this powwow has left about $200,000 in unpaid 

bills to many local businesses, the city, and at least one bank. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this comes as quite a blow at a time when 

many Moose Jaw businesses are already struggling to survive.  

There are many questions about these outstanding debts, and 

few answers.  In fact, Mr. Minister, no one seems to know who 

exactly is responsible for these debts or if the creditors can ever 

expect to be paid. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know that you've been requested to look into 

this matter.  Can you tell us what you have done with regard to 

this serious problem and what assurances you can give Moose 

Jaw businesses that they will in fact be paid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for that question.  

This is a serious question, and it's one over which we can't offer 

any constructive advice.  The organization that organized the 

function that the member refers to is not one that we're familiar 

with nor one that we have any contact with.  Furthermore there 

was no provincial money of any kind in this particular function, 

so we were bystanders just as the hon. member was.  The 

function was in effect privately organized, privately run, and 

we have no ability to do anything about the situation. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, this question was also 

raised by the Member of Parliament for Moose Jaw with the 

federal Indian Affairs minister and the federal minister told him 

at that time that it was a provincial matter.  Obviously no one 

was willing to take any responsibility for this débâcle and it is 

the local businesses in Moose Jaw and the Moose Jaw 

taxpayers who will end up paying the price. 

 

Mr. Minister, the spokesman for the local businesses feels that 

an inquiry should be conducted into the whole affair and that 

the government should determine who was responsible for 

these unpaid bills.  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think we can do that.  It is quite likely 

at the officials' level that we have a good deal of information 

about who did organize it and who the bill should be sent to. 

 

I don't understand the answer of the federal minister,  

because there is no basis for saying it was in any way put on by 

or guaranteed or underwritten or even contributed to by the 

provincial government.  We had literally nothing to do with it. 

 

And so while I feel a lot of sympathy for the Moose Jaw 

businesses for the debts that they've racked up, I have no 

budget from which to pay those debts nor any particularly 

constructive suggestion to make except, as the member 

suggests, we will look into it and try and clarify to whom the 

bills should be sent and who should be looked to for payment. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again to the minister: 

Mr. Minister, as you know, there is a controversy surrounding 

the possible misuse of funds by the Metis Council and the 

Gabriel Dumont Institute.  And quite appropriately, your 

government has decided to freeze all provincial funding until 

this matter is sorted out. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you considered taking a similar course of 

action in this case?  Now you've told us that really you're not 

that familiar with . . . or aware of the fact of the circumstances 

here.  What I would suggest, Mr. Minister, is that you approach 

the federal minister on behalf of the Moose Jaw businesses and 

all the creditors that are left out in the cold and ask the federal 

minister if indeed it's his responsibility, but take your 

responsibility as the Justice minister in this province to pass 

that on and ask for the federal government at this time to look 

into this matter as you have done so in the province of 

Saskatchewan with regards to the Metis Council and Gabriel 

Dumont Institute. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll undertake to the 

member to contact the federal minister and have a conversation 

along the lines that he suggests.  I repeat that the provincial 

government did not put any money into this function nor do we 

have any plans to make any grants to this organization so we 

can't freeze any funding, there being none.  But I certainly will 

have the conversation with the federal minister that the member 

suggests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

minister:  Mr. Minister, are you saying that none of the 

organizations involved in the Moose Jaw powwow receive any 

funding at all from provincial agencies of any sort?  Are you 

saying that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, none that I'm aware 

of; certainly none from my departments.  And I'm not aware of 

any provincial funding being involved in that project at all. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder if I might have leave to 

revert to introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Since introduction of guests, the Chamber has been honoured 

by the presence of the president of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour, Barbara Byers.  Seated beside her is 

Larry Kowalchuk, who is a lawyer and who has shared the 

work and the struggle of the trade union movement. 

 

And in your east gallery is the executive assistant to the 

president, Don Anderson.  I know all members will want to 

join with me in welcoming these people here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Trade Union Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to, according 

to the section 14(b) of The Provincial Auditor Act, table the 

1993 fiscal year Report of the Provincial Auditor.  I here so 

table. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, if I could have the 

assistance of one of the pages, I would table the response to 

question 55. 

 

The Speaker: -- Answer for question 55 is . . . Order.  The 

answer to question 55 has been tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting Fisheries 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  After 

my remarks I will be moving second reading of the new 

Fisheries Act for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's fish resource is cherished by the 

people of the province.  In order that the citizens of this 

province may obtain maximum benefit from and at the same 

time protect this valuable resource, it has been necessary to 

change legislation that has been in existence for more than 40 

years.  With cooperation from the federal government and 

intensive consultation with northern people, fishing 

organizations, industry, and the public, The Fisheries Act for 

Saskatchewan has been revised to meet the needs of the 1990s. 

The basic premiss of this new Act is that protection of 

Saskatchewan's fish resource depends upon the cooperation of 

all who benefit from it.  What will the new Act do?  It will 

incorporate licensing and fee powers, some of which are 

currently under federal regulation, into the provincial 

legislation.  It will provide the authority to allocate fish to our 

many resource users through various types of fishing licences. 

 

It will allow us to control importation or stocking of fish, 

classify fish or water bodies according to fish quality and 

public health criteria.  It will also permit the establishment and 

enhancement of fish populations on public lands, either directly 

through cooperative projects with our many fish and wildlife 

groups, or through individual agreements with landowners on 

privately owned properties.  And it will determine the 

circumstances in which fish harvested from Saskatchewan's 

waters may be delivered or marketed. 

 

Some of these matters are currently contained in federal 

regulations but rightfully belong in provincial legislation as the 

province has public trust responsibility for management, policy 

making, and licensing of the fish resource and stakeholders 

under their purview. 

 

This new Act will also pave the way for new regulations to deal 

specifically with conserving and managing the province's fish 

resource.  There are a number of benefits in the new Act which 

I would like to briefly summarize. 

 

Firstly, the new Act will reduce Saskatchewan's dependency on 

the federal government and allows the province to design 

regulations and enforcement regimes which meet our needs. 

 

Secondly, it will strengthen the partnership between the 

government of Saskatchewan and stakeholders in regards to 

meeting legal requirements, and attaining goals aimed at 

providing a lasting food source and recreational fishing for 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Thirdly, this new Act will ensure a continuing flow of 

economic and social benefits to the province, as the provincial 

government can work cooperatively with commercial 

fishermen, outfitters, anglers, and other resource users to 

regulate resource utilization in ways that maximize economic 

benefit for both the province and the resource user. 

 

This new Act recognizes the benefits of multiple uses of fish 

resource that support recreational, commercial and subsistence 

activities.  It is important to note that this Act will not affect 

existing treaty rights.  Existing treaty rights are guaranteed 

under The Constitution Act, 1982, and federal legislation takes 

precedence over this Act. 

 

The new Act acknowledges that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has the responsibility of protecting, conserving 

and enhancing the fish resource for public 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

benefit.  It also recognizes the importance of a strong 

partnership between government and anglers, commercial 

fishermen, outfitters and related businesses to work together in 

managing the resource.  These partnerships provide great 

opportunities for maintaining and improving the fish resource. 

 

(1415) 

 

For these partnerships to be effective, however, we need a 

framework of respective responsibilities and authorities.  These 

responsibilities and authorities are contained in the new 

Fisheries Act for Saskatchewan.  They will ensure the future of 

Saskatchewan's fish resource for the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of the new statute, 

The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as at first 

glance looking through this Bill, we think that the intent of the 

Bill is good, but I believe that we're going to find -- and will 

find -- that there are numerous problems with detail.  And I'm 

sure as we enter into the debate and the adjourned debates on 

this Bill, and certainly in Committee of the Whole, we will 

have a lot to say about the Bill as we enter into the discussion. 

 

It would seem to us that the intent of the Bill is to replace the 

previous federal Bill that regulated fisheries in the province.  

Mr. Speaker, there seem to be numerous problems and delays 

in receiving federal approval for fisheries matters that were 

basically under provincial jurisdiction.  And I understand that 

this Bill attempts to deal with the problem, and in a sense, 

repatriate fisheries legislation to Saskatchewan.  This, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe would be a positive step and should be a 

positive step.  However, we feel that the Bill falls down in 

several areas and that more consultation should have been 

done. 

 

As a result and as usual, Mr. Speaker, we find that the 

government likes to talk a lot about how they have consulted 

extensively with individuals and groups.  Yet as we've found 

time and time again this session, and particularly in reference to 

The Labour Standards Act that is currently before this 

Assembly, when you check into the matter you find that even 

though the government and the minister has taken great pride 

and deliberately tried to inform us or indicate that there was a 

long period of consultation, that when you really looked into 

the depth and looked into the matters a little more closely, you 

will find that the consultative process may not have been that 

broad-ranging; or that certainly there were many groups whose 

concerns have not been taken into consideration in forming this 

legislation. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the very obvious factors about 

whether or not people . . . or whether the government has 

listened to groups, concerned groups, is the environmental 

question that has . . . And we've got a Bill before this 

Assembly, but there's an 

ongoing debate regarding some of the environmental issues.  

And there are many people who have been speaking out with 

some concerns, especially regarding underground fuel tanks; 

and it seems that the government is bode to go ahead regardless 

of what the public are saying. 

 

And I think in the same case, we find here that the government 

tends to decide when it wants to listen and when it doesn't want 

to listen; whether or not it really wants to pay attention to the 

concerns that are raised. 

 

We've received extensive concerns from the Saskatchewan 

Outfitters Association.  Although, Mr. Speaker, this 

organization is generally in favour of this Bill, they feel that 

there are still some areas that have yet to be addressed. 

 

The general complaint we've heard about this Bill is that it is 

too preoccupied with enforcement and punishment and not 

enough with positive fisheries policy.  There are some major 

questions that we must enter into as we get into Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

It seems that outfitters feel that many areas of the Bill are 

potentially in conflict with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

And this, Mr. Speaker, I think would be a serious charge and 

one which the government has an obligation to investigate.  

And we trust that . . . and even as I raise some of these matters 

right now, we trust that the minister will take the time to raise 

some of these concerns, as we're bringing them out in second 

reading, with the department and indeed review the legislation 

and see that it doesn't interfere with the basic rights of 

individuals under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms which 

the Premier of this Assembly worked so hard to have enforced 

in the 1982 constitution. 

 

The Bill creates as well a number of situations of legal reverse 

onus on outfitters and other fishers.  Although reverse onus is 

necessary in some cases, it is an obvious offence to the premiss 

of being presumed innocent until proven guilty. 

 

Again the government should show caution before getting into 

this questionable legal area.  And we have seen, and there are a 

number of Bills before this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, where 

there are some very major issues regarding the legality of some 

of the legislation that is coming forward.  And one Bill that is 

before this Assembly that there are some major concerns as 

well regarding legal concerns is the Bill that addresses the court 

and the judges issue. 

 

This area of legal concern is of special concern to the outfitters 

who fear that they may be held liable for their clients whose 

actions, in many cases, are beyond the outfitters' control.  And I 

believe the outfitters do their best to provide an environment 

where their clients would come and give them an opportunity 

to get in some excellent fishing.  At the same time I'm sure that 

all the outfitters across this province are very diligent in 

recognizing the environmental problems that may arise and 

trying to make sure that they run 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

their camps in a way that fall well within the guidelines and 

certainly continue to enhance environmental issues and the 

environment in this province. 

 

The Act on the whole provides for sweeping powers for 

fisheries officers, in many cases going far beyond the powers 

normally allowed to police officers.  As well, it is virtually 

silent on the issue of training for officers on topics such as 

search-and-seizure law.  And, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to 

me this should be the very least that should be done to ensure 

that the officers do not abuse their powers. 

 

The Act is also silent on the issue of privately owned lakes or 

other fishing resources that do not fall under the direct 

authority of the minister or the Act.  This again is a great 

concern of the outfitters, which the government has chosen to 

ignore. 

 

And one would wonder when we have such a large industry, an 

industry that draws a lot of revenue into this province, as 

people come here for leisure, whether it's fishing or hunting or 

whatever the process, that the government, I believe, and the 

minister and the department should at least be listening to the 

concerned citizens and the people that are providing the 

service. 

 

Because we do not want to chase away the revenue that comes 

into this province by people who . . . in fact right now I believe 

the province of Saskatchewan and the Department of Tourism 

has a major ad campaign bestowing the virtues of holidaying in 

Saskatchewan and what we have to offer -- the environment 

that we have to offer, the beauty of the natural lakes, and 

whether it's in fishing or just coming up and taking the time to 

holiday in this province. 

 

Finally we see, Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides for sweeping 

powers of discretion for the minister on everything from the 

granting and conditions of licences, to the actions of officers, to 

the management of lakes. 

 

Any time such powers of discretion are granted to a minister, 

one has to wonder how they impact on the rule of law.  One has 

to wonder about the recourse citizens will have from arbitrary 

decisions.  One has to wonder if the minister will be at all 

constrained to consult with the people affected. 

 

None of these issues are addressed in the Bill, but they should 

be.  And I think they should be, in view of the fact that the 

minister responsible for this Bill happens to be the minister 

responsible as well for the environmental questions.  We 

passed a Bill last term on the environmental question that gave 

the minister very discretionary powers.  And we certainly want 

to raise those concerns with the minister and bring them to his 

attention. 

 

Time and again this session and last, we have seen the 

government extend its powers of discretion at the expense of 

the rights of ordinary citizens.  We have seen them intrude 

more and more into the 

administration of private boards and organizations. 

 

And we ask, where will this empire building by the government 

stop?  Why does the government feel such a compulsion to 

extend its control over the day-to-day lives of its citizens? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is reminiscent of the series of assaults on 

the rights of citizens and on the rule of law that we saw last 

session.  And I just want to bring to the attention of this House 

some of the changes that were made last time in the assaults on 

the rule of law. 

 

And these include the following Bills from the last session:  

Bill No. 3, An Act to Amend the Environmental Management 

and Protection Act, allowing government employees to enter 

private property without a search warrant.  Bill No. 14, An Act 

to Amend the Child and Family Services Act, allowing the 

minister to divulge personal records to the public, NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party members, or anyone else a cabinet 

minister chooses. 

 

Bill No. 13, An Act to amend The Adoption Act, allowing the 

minister to forbid a court of law from hearing or receiving 

evidence held by a government employee that might be 

relevant in determining a person's innocence or guilt. Bill No. 

10, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, allowing the 

minister to retroactively increase taxes on oil, gas, or mining 

companies. And on and on.  We have seen this government 

assault the very foundations of our democratic society. 

 

Ministerial discretion is a very dangerous tool for the 

government to use.  Surely with the resources the government 

has, and the bureaucracy, and the judiciary, this is unnecessary.  

With discretion being held by the minister, what avenue of 

appeal will ordinary citizens have?  What standard for justice 

will be followed?  What guidelines in general will the minister 

be required to follow?  What accountability will there be that 

these guidelines are in fact followed? 

 

All of these questions in this as in other Bills, have remained 

unanswered.  Mr. Speaker, given all these difficulties, and 

given that we will have to go back and consult further with the 

public on this Bill as the government has once again clearly not 

done, I move that debate on this Bill be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 

to outline the purpose and the major provision of this Bill to 

amend The Education Act. 

 

The amendments fall into two main categories: amendments to 

eliminate the barriers to the voluntary amalgamation of urban 

and rural school divisions; and there are a variety of 

administrative and housekeeping changes which have been 

identified as appropriate to help keep the Act up to date. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

Mr. Speaker, The Education Act is structured on the premiss 

that there are two distinct types of school divisions in our 

province:  rural divisions which encompass several towns and 

villages and substantial rural area; and urban divisions whose 

boundaries are the same or almost the same as the boundaries 

of one urban municipality. 

 

The current Act sets out different principles and structures for 

these two types of divisions in terms of the election of school 

board members and the form of school-level governance 

bodies.  The Act does not accommodate a school division 

consisting of a larger urban centre plus a larger rural area.  This 

being the case, the present legislation serves as a barrier to 

existing school divisions which might voluntarily want to 

amalgamate into a new school division of this type. 

 

Members may be aware for example that in Prince Albert and 

Melfort the urban and rural boards have been seriously 

discussing the concept of voluntary rural-urban amalgamations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has stated clearly that we have no 

master plan for any province-wide restructuring of school 

divisions.  On the contrary, we have indicated that our intention 

is to proceed with a small number of voluntary amalgamations 

on a pilot project basis only. 

 

The amendments in this Bill reflect the government's approach.  

These amendments will accomplish the following objectives, 

Mr. Speaker.  First, they address the problem created when an 

urban division whose board members are elected at large 

amalgamates with a rural division whose board members are 

elected on a subdivision basis. 

 

The amendment will allow a school division created in this way 

to continue electing the urban board members at large and the 

rural board members through subdivisions.  The option will 

exist for the entire school division to be split into subdivisions 

if that is the local preference. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, the amendments address the desire to 

retain local community and parental input and advice in the 

event that a voluntary amalgamation between a rural and urban 

division occurs. 

 

At present, rural divisions are divided into school districts, each 

of which elects a local board of trustee; while urban divisions 

appoint local school advisory committees to serve a similar 

purpose. 

 

The amendments will allow each part of an amalgamated 

rural-urban division to retain its current type of local board or 

committee so that there continues to be a direct link between 

the community and the school. 

 

As I've indicated, Mr. Speaker, the current amendments are 

designed to eliminate clearly identified barriers to a particular 

type of an amalgamation.  The amalgamation of school 

divisions 

raises a variety of legislative and administrative questions 

which will need to be addressed by all of our stakeholder 

groups. 

 

The amendments have been prepared in full consultation with 

the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation; the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association; the League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials. And 

they have the support of all of these organizations. 

 

(1430 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn now to the second main type 

of amendments contained in the Bill.  These amendments are a 

group of miscellaneous changes to repeal obsolete provisions, 

revise sections which are in need of updating, and add new 

provisions to assist in the efficient operation of our school 

divisions.  They may properly be described as administrative or 

housekeeping amendments. 

 

These administrative amendments cover such diverse topics as 

the operation of the Saskatchewan Book Bureau, the sharing of 

secretary-treasurers by school divisions and a liability clause 

related to school safety patrols. 

 

As well, the terms chairman and vice-chairman, which appear 

throughout the Act in a variety of contexts, are being replaced 

by the gender-neutral terms, chairperson and vice-chairperson. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these amendments have all been drafted in 

consultation with the stakeholder organizations and have their 

approval. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Education Act is the fundamental legal basis 

for the K to 12 school system in our province.  It is important 

that we continue to revise the Act to reflect changing 

circumstances and facilitate new arrangements. 

 

I am therefore very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move that Bill No. 

52, An Act to amend The Education Act, be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've been 

listening very carefully to the minister's second reading speech.  

And it would seem that certainly the Bill that the minister has 

brought to the Assembly and in her comments would be 

reasonable and non-controversial. 

 

However I must remind the Assembly -- and I'm sure the 

minister is quite well aware of this -- that a piece of legislation 

such as this Bill that we have before us today is something that 

causes a stir amongst a lot of residents in the province of 

Saskatchewan, especially when you talk about education, and 

certainly in the rural areas of Saskatchewan.  And I think that 

there are many people that have a lot of concerns, and I believe 

as we get into further debate on this Bill there certainly will be 

a number of concerns that would be brought to 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

our attention and will be raised with us, as we have seen today. 

 

I think one of the areas that people in this province feel 

threatened about by this government's legislation is the area 

that allows for . . . particularly the part in the legislation that 

allows for any type of amalgamation.  Now the minister had 

indicated that certainly there has been some talk, and the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) at their last 

convention did pass a resolution that asked their members to 

look at alternatives and to discuss the issue, and I think that's 

appropriate. 

 

I think it's certainly excellent that leaders amongst the school 

trustees would take some of the initiative.  I would like to 

indicate that certainly in the area I represent, in my 

constituency, two of the major school boards have been 

actually consulting amongst each other as to ways and means 

and areas whereby they could provide a more effective service, 

and in fact where they could maybe amalgamate some of their 

services -- not necessarily amalgamating the two units into one, 

but where they could work together with some of the services. 

 

And I think, when you think about this, this is certainly not 

unreasonable.  And I think the concerns that people would be 

raising to date aren't unreasonable as well when you take a 

minute just to reflect upon where the government has been and 

some of the actions that they have undertaken in other areas 

where they have talked about amalgamations.  And one of the 

major areas that is raising a controversy, and it continues to 

boil across this province, certainly is in health care.  Mr. 

Speaker, when you realize that 52 facilities were closed, 52 

hospital facilities were closed, and towns and villages were 

forced to form districts, and if they didn't join school districts 

soon enough, the minister decided where they should be placed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our health care system is still reeling from this 

government's reform, and I would suggest and I trust that the 

Minister of Education has taken some time to reflect on the 

problems that have arisen because of the reform that has taken 

place in health and in particular, the way the government went 

about reforming health care districts across this province. 

 

I believe that is one of the major reasons that people fear this 

type of legislation, because they have been involved and have 

been affected . . . they're directly affected by the heath care 

reform and how it has hit their areas.  And certainly in many 

cases where it has taken away a lot of services; some of the 

major service that they've had access to. 

 

The minister has said that in the past that school divisions will 

not be forced to amalgamate and I trust that the minister holds 

true to her word.  And that in fact the legislation we have 

before us will go further and will not only just . . . that leave it 

up to a minister, but will enshrine that fact and allow school 

divisions to make their own decisions about amalgamation so 

that if there's a change in ministers, a new minister 

then will not be able to decide that no, they're going to make 

the decision like the Minister of Health did regarding health 

boards. 

 

The minister has said she has assured parents, students, 

teachers, and boards that the government would take a hands 

off approach and I'm sure many people, when they hear that, 

will say:  fine and dandy, we like that, we will wait and see, we 

will reserve judgement, we trust and hope the minister is true to 

her word. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at what has happened 

over the last two, three months, and four months, and even the 

last year and a half to two years, that it is unfortunate that 

people will look and they'll listen to the minister and say well it 

sounds good, but we're not exactly sure if we can trust the 

minister or if this government can be trusted to keep its word. 

 

I think if the government had a better track record, if it kept it's 

word to others, this legislation and other Bills would quickly 

pass through this Assembly.  And I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, instead we have seen this government is known to 

pass legislation breaking contracts without consultation and 

without consideration of the Bill's ramifications on the people 

of the province. 

 

In fact we have a Bill before us that shows this government 

doesn't even have any regard for the laws that it creates.  We 

have seen the evidence of this with the amendments before the 

Assembly for The Provincial Court Act, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

believe that's unthinkable and unheard of that members would 

break their own laws and would even in this case, even though 

it would be politically right to say no to a salary increase, the 

fact that you would instil a law and bring it into place to force 

you or to . . . actually the legislation was brought forward 

because of an agreement between the judges and the 

government.  And what we see is the members broke their own 

laws in regards to provincial court judges' salaries. 

 

And it's because of these things that people out in rural 

Saskatchewan feel betrayed and they feel abandoned.  They 

simply do not feel that this government is going to bat for 

them.  And I believe there was a question raised in the 

Assembly regarding a farm foreclosure action, and again if 

people feel the government is going to bat for them . . . this 

minister responsible this afternoon certainly didn't leave us 

with that impression.  It left us with the impression that we're 

on our own.  And the people right across Saskatchewan and 

rural Saskatchewan have that feeling that they are out on their 

own.  And that's why they are standing up, beginning to stand 

up, and speak out and fight for their rights 

 

People right across this province have suffered cuts to health 

and now they fear major cuts to our educational system, and 

certainly a lot of these cuts were going to come and will take 

place anyway regardless of what the government does.  But I 

think what we need to do -- the most important thing -- is to 

make people feel and allow people the ability to 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

make some of the difficult decisions at the local level so that 

they can feel they are a part of the process. 

 

And you wonder why rural Saskatchewan fears for its school 

system.  They look at the Bill and they say, will this lead to 

school closures in the future?  We see that children in rural 

Saskatchewan already ride the bus far too long.  And we've 

seen the number of articles already with headlines talking about 

the fact that some children are on the bus at quarter to seven in 

the morning. 

 

And I talked with some of the teachers at the recent STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) council meeting here in 

Regina and they acknowledged the fact that in some of the 

divisions where they are teaching that children, some children, 

are on the bus at quarter to seven.  And you have to ask 

yourself, especially when a child who is just into grade 1 -- 6 or 

7 or 8 years old -- is on the bus at a quarter to seven and doesn't 

get home until after 5 . . . that's a long time period and long 

time frame. 

 

And teachers are even asking themselves, are we being able to 

give them the proper education because this child really doesn't 

have the physical capacity to ride a bus for an hour or hour and 

a half, or almost two hours, Mr. Speaker, and then sit in class 

for five hours and try and keep their mind on the subject matter.  

And so parents of children who ride buses do not want to see 

their kids even have to get on and ride further and start the day 

out earlier. 

 

If there are amalgamations, all decision making should be in 

the hands of local boards, and it is imperative that local control 

is absolutely necessary.  Mr. Speaker, when I talk about that I 

recall the concern that was raised in the community of Wapella 

when the local board or the unit board at that time, about four 

years ago, decided to move grades 10 to 12 from Wapella into 

Moosomin and it was a decision made by the local board. 

 

Now certainly the community didn't like it, the parents affected 

in Wapella didn't like it, and to this day there are still some 

animosities although in the end, in some cases, it worked out 

well.  But on the other hand, I think what people, and the 

people in Wapella, will be looking at with regards to this piece 

of legislation -- we talk about amalgamation -- they'll say, well 

does that mean that we're going to lose our school altogether 

now? 

 

And that's why it's very important that local boards and unit 

boards have the ability . . . and that the minister do exactly 

what she has said -- that she'd take the time to sit down, not just 

with the SSTA, not just with STF, but even with the parents, 

and have a broad base of discussion and allow our local boards 

the avenue and the means and the tools whereby they can sit 

down and address some of these concerns so that as they make 

the decisions, they've got some parental support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association has proposed and voted in 

favour of amalgamating many school divisions and boards.  

And I also realize that if existing school divisions were 

amalgamated into one larger school division, some financial 

savings could be realized and most people are aware of that, 

but you wonder at whose expense.  Who pays for it?  Are the 

rural people going to be short-changed again, as they were in 

health care?  With amalgamation perhaps we would see a 

reduction in the number of board members which would result 

in lower cost for meetings, travel, and honoraria for trustees. 

 

It there were a reduction in board members, perhaps we would 

see a similar reduction in the number of division-level senior 

administrators, program consultants, and secretarial staff.  If 

savings are to be realized, it is my hope that all of the dollars 

stay within the educational system, not that the educational 

system looks at ways in which they can become more efficient, 

ways in which they can save some money, and then the 

government conveniently pulls those monies and puts them into 

another project. 

 

Again I'm forced to compare this Bill to the health districts Bill.  

The NDP revamped our health care system -- nurses were let 

go, hospitals were closed and wellness centres were introduced. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the government said they were hoping to 

save money by having health district boards in place.  

However, what has happened since the two large boards have 

been in place in Saskatoon and Regina?  All they have done is 

spend money.  And my colleague, the member from 

Kindersley, was raising some of these questions with the 

Minister of Health the other day, and we'll certainly get into 

more of that discussion as we get into Health estimates. 

 

Health care professionals call our office regularly to complain 

about the large number of people working for the boards.  It 

seems, Mr. Speaker, that the downsizing does not apply to 

district boards who hire on a quite regular basis.  However, I 

realize this is a topic for estimates. 

 

It is my hope that if there is to be some amalgamation, some 

reduction of school divisions, that the administration will be 

reduced accordingly.  Amalgamation may be necessary, and it 

may occur quite painlessly.  I think that the SSTA is already 

studying options and feel if given enough time the divisions 

can work together without controversy and I commend them 

for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural divisions in particular are anxious about any 

changes, as I mentioned earlier.  They fear a loss of local input 

and control of their communities.  And again the reason for this 

fear is past evidence with regards then when we look at the 

health reform Bill. 

 

It is my hope that this legislation helps districts in the 

deliberations and does not tie their hands or hinder progress to 

reward local-level decision making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a number of other conditions or 

considerations I could raise as well.  And 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

I believe my colleague, the member responsible, has a number 

of concerns and he would like to address those at a later date as 

we further consult with people in asking them for their input 

regarding this piece of legislation before we move through 

adjourned debates and into Committee of the Whole and 

passage of the Bill.  And therefore at this time I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 32 -- An Act 

to amend The Labour Standards Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's not often that 

we have the opportunity to debate such a serious and heavily 

impacting piece of legislation as this one that we have before us 

in this debate. 

 

As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, I have spoken a couple of 

times on this issue.  The first time I took all of my time to 

discuss from the point of view . . . those things that were going 

wrong in this legislation from the point of view of the workers 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  I felt very strongly that 

everyone was jumping on the bandwagon to support the 

business side which is only natural because there is very much 

for them to worry about. 

 

But at the same time there was a lot being done here that was 

going to affect the actual workers of the province and the 

ability for workers to be able to get jobs in the future.  And of 

course with the loss of our job base, we also have those 

implications that go along with it, which means very simply 

that we lose our tax base and all of the ramifications that that 

can have for society. 

 

But we did spend a considerable length of time, I think, putting 

into perspective how the workers in the province would be 

negatively affected by this legislation. 

 

In the second occasion, Mr. Speaker, that I spoke on this issue, 

you will recall that I then took the point of view of the business 

community and tried to lay out very distinctly for the general 

public how this legislation is going to be regressive for the 

business community. 

 

But more importantly, what we now need to look at is the fact 

that we have a very strong argument that, first of all, labour is 

being injured by this legislation; secondly, that business is 

being injured by this legislation.  And when you combine the 

two together, then we see a detriment to all of society around 

us.  In other words, the province of Saskatchewan becomes 

the net loser through this legislation. 

 

And you will say, well that's all well and fine; you've pointed 

all that out, but today we now have even more fuel thrown into 

the fire of debate.  We now have added to The Labour 

Standards Act, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act, which 

of course, combined together, makes this an even more 

Draconian type of approach to the province's labour problems 

and business problems that we face. 

 

We face a tremendous challenge in Saskatchewan, not only in 

terms of the fact that we are a land-locked province with no 

easy transportation methods in or out of our province, but we 

now have labour legislation that puts us out of synchronization 

with all of our neighbours in North America.  And so quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, I can't see how any business that has a 

choice in the matter will ever stop to develop in Saskatchewan. 

 

There are certain infrastructures, of course, that always need to 

be served.  Those infrastructures will always have some 

entrepreneurial individuals that will serve those needs.  

However if you have a population declining to 600,000, then 

you don't need very many of those people as well.  And so you 

have almost a guaranteed scenario with these pieces of 

legislation that dictate that the province of Saskatchewan will 

decline in population, and very significantly and very rapidly. 

 

Quite frankly, there is no possible way that I can see that 

businesses from the outside world will ever come to this 

province under the deterrents that are proposed in these two 

pieces of legislation that we have finally seen the bottom half 

of today, with the new Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, then folks would say, well you made a few 

points on both sides, why not just let it go on and let the people 

suffer; and if they suffer enough, in the next election they'll 

surely change the government, and the new government can 

change it back. 

 

Well realistically that's probably what will happen in the end, 

because as the opposition is smaller in numbers than the 

government, the government will surely outvote us in the end.  

However, in the democratic process we have always the hope, 

that same kind of hope that every farmer in the province has in 

the springtime when he plants a crop, and that is the hope that 

things will turn out better as the year goes along. 

 

Our hope in this debate of course is that we might still be able 

to affect the thinking of the government so that they will bring 

in regulations to this piece of legislation that will modify at 

least to some degree the impact that this legislation will have 

on the province, so that in fact we can exist, so that in fact we 

don't go backwards. 

 

What I fear happening before we get to another election of 

course is that we go backwards so fast and so hard that no 

matter if you do change the government, you can no longer 

correct and catch 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

back up all of those businesses and opportunities that we will 

have lost in the interim.  And surely we will lose a lot of 

businesses and we will lose a lot of potential of new businesses, 

because I can't see anyone coming into the province to try to 

compete in our labour market under the circumstances that we 

have. 

 

Now I'm not going to for a minute say that it isn't nice for 

people who work in our province to have protection of all sorts 

and all kinds.  The reality is though that if you have your 

province out of sync with the rest of the world, then businesses 

won't be here and you won't have the jobs.  So naturally the 

working people suffer because they can't find work. 

 

In view of those considerations, Mr. Speaker, it is imperative 

that we make our case very strongly to the Minister of Labour.  

And we want to make our case based not on just our own 

philosophies and our opinions; as I pointed out the other day, 

we want to build our case based on the opinions of the people 

who have contributed to us the information and the ideas that 

they have. 

 

And I've given I think a fairly broad cross-section so far of the 

business community and of the workforce of Saskatchewan.  

I've gone through examples from various companies as well as 

from various areas.  One area that I hadn't touched on very 

much was private individuals and their specific ideas.  And I 

think it's important that we include a few of those. 

 

I have taken some pride in the fact that we have had a 

tremendous amount of correspondence on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker, so much so that I have been able to speak on this 

subject without referring to the same pieces of material more 

than once.  And I think that that bodes well for the Minister of 

Labour to take account of the fact that there is so much material 

available to us that we do not have to repeat ourselves even 

after a long and deliberate debate in this Assembly. 

 

So going on, Mr. Speaker, to some of the individual concerns 

that have been expressed, I would like to bring to the attention 

of the minister a letter from a private individual who also works 

as a mayor in the small-town community of Leader, 

Saskatchewan.  And he has written us a letter outlining his 

personal concerns, which I think I'll quote a little bit of in order 

that we get it onto the Hansard so that the minister will know 

exactly where this individual is coming from and what his 

points are. 

 

Now this was addressed originally to the minister, and by the 

sound of things, I seriously doubt if he ever had the opportunity 

to read it, because in his remarks it doesn't seem to reflect 

anything of this kind of input.  It goes along: 

 

 Re: proposed labour legislation 

 

 Dear Mr. Minister: The comments that I'm about to set out in 

this letter are derived from watching legislation from the 

following positions.  Number one, serving local urban 

 government in the town of Leader for 12 years as its mayor 

and nine years as a councillor at various times beginning in 

1956; now the mayor. 

 

 Number two, operating a small business serving the electrical 

and the refrigeration and air-conditioning needs of the town 

and area continuously since 1953. 

 

 I have been in business under the government of Douglas, 

Lloyd, Thatcher, Blakeney . . . 

 

I won't say the last premier from the previous administration, 

and of course he has the present Premier's name as well.  He of 

course referred to all of the premiers from way back when right 

up to the present day. 

 

The letter goes on: 

 

 There was not one thin dime's worth of difference between 

the whole lot of them from the perspective of the 

small-business operator or the elected official of urban 

government until now. 

 

Well having heard that commentary, Mr. Speaker, one is 

naturally led to wonder what is different now.  So I will go on 

with the quote from the letter: 

 

 The above-mentioned labour legislation is beyond doubt the 

worst piece of legislation ever to be introduced for first 

reading in the 89-year history of the province. 

 

 My consideration of the content indicates to me that it will 

circumvent all existing collective agreements, ensure 

conditional employment for all employees that are able to 

find any issue, substantive or otherwise, to complain to the 

department about thereby eliminating any possible lay-off or 

dismissal for any reason. 

 

 It will only hinder economic development, cause many 

problems for the very people that I assume it is intended to 

help.  The cost to urban government and to business will be 

significant and almost impossible to accurately determine 

without perusal of the regulations. 

 

Now here, Mr. Speaker, the writer of course alludes to those 

evasive regulations that we have talked about so much.  And he 

has recognized the reality that the worst features of this 

legislation may not in fact be in the written form of the 

legislation itself, but in the regulations that can be set 

afterwards -- the regulations that come into power and effect as 

a result of the legislation becoming law. 

 

And that means that after the fact, out of view of the legislature 

itself, out of view of the general public for the most part, the 

cabinet can pass regulations that become law, and they don't 

have to consult with anybody, and they might affect the 

legislation in a very adverse way. 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

The writer goes on: 

 

 Urban government and small business are right now having a 

very tough time just to get by without having to embrace any 

extra costs that will only retard, if not entirely stall, the 

limited easing of the economic upturn.  Your bureaucrats 

(Mr. Speaker) are totally out of control. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what the writer is alluding to here is 

the fact that he feels that the bureaucracy has instructed the 

minister on what legislation should be drawn up and how this 

legislation should be put into place and what powers it should 

have. 

 

I think the writer is saying that he doesn't believe that the 

minister is in total contact with the realities of the repercussions 

that this legislation will have on the province, and especially on 

small business and small towns, the kind and like of which this 

individual represents. 

 

The writer goes on to say: 

 

 Do what is best for the province, Mr. Minister.  Put the whole 

Bill into the trash can, then shred it and let the market-place 

and the law of supply and demand operate.  Business will 

then be able to make a profit -- not a dirty word, but essential 

to the creation of jobs.  Labour has not been abused in this 

province since the end of the '39-45 war.  There is no one 

operating a business in this province that doesn't know that a 

good and content labour force is their greatest asset. 

 

And it is signed by the mayor, one Mar Clary from Leader, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Clary, of course, is an individual who 

represents a small town, but certainly is not a person that hasn't 

been heard from by people in government over the years.  He 

contributes regularly in an open and honest way to try to help 

people in our province's electoral positions to do those things 

that will make life better in the province of Saskatchewan for 

all people concerned. 

 

Here is a man who has truly dedicated his life to the service of 

helping his fellow man as well as to be a God-fearing man, 

raising his family in the best possible way.  And a tribute to this 

gentleman is the fact that he is still the mayor after so many 

years of public service. 

 

I talked to him before presenting his letter and asked for his 

permission to do so, which he readily gave to me.  In that 

conversation, he indicated a couple of more things that are of 

concern to him.  He said that if you use the number of 20 

people as the bottom line for how many employees you have in 

a business before you qualify for certain restrictions and 

regulations within the legislation, he said it appears that when 

you first read it that this is not a serious problem then for 

small employers, for example, the town of Leader or the town 

of Shaunavon or some other small town like Oxbow, I suppose, 

or something like that. 

 

What the reality is that Mr. Clary points out, is that this 

legislation very trickily says -- and this is a deception of sorts -- 

it says the number of T-4s that you issue represent the number 

of countable employed positions.  In other words if you hired 

10 students to clean trash up in your town for one day, they 

would all probably be issued a T-4 slip at the end of the year 

and you have 10 positions right there.  If the next week you 

hired 10 other young people, students perhaps, to go out and 

pick stones off of a street, then you have 10 more.  Immediately 

that you have one more employee you're over the magic 

number of 20 and you now become subject to all of the 

requirements of the legislation. 

 

(1500) 

 

And the mayor points out to me that there is such a program -- 

it's called the start program -- wherein towns like his have 

employed 20 to 30 students in the summertime.  And he says 

that automatically when all of the implications of the new 

legislation become apparent to the town fathers of all of the 

communities in Saskatchewan, they are automatically not going 

to hire those students this summer. 

 

He says their council right now is discussing the possibility of 

starting a program whereby they would employ students for the 

summer.  And he said they are seriously in doubt as to whether 

they will hire any students at all at this time. 

 

He says to me that if this be a fact in his town, how could it 

possibly be different in any other town where the same 

regulations will apply and where people are most likely 

discussing the very same issues.  And it makes sense to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that most small towns are now going to seriously 

consider whether or not they will employ students for the 

summer simply because of this new regulation and new 

legislation. 

 

So the point is well taken, Mr. Minister, that you should be 

aware of the fact that you are killing jobs in small town 

Saskatchewan and throughout the entire province as a result of 

your legislation.  The very people that you claimed you were 

going to help with this legislation end up being the people who 

will suffer the most and who will lose their jobs and 

opportunities for the future. 

 

Opportunities like this, Mr. Speaker.  A student gets out of 

school; does he want benefits paid to the federal government or 

to the system for unemployment insurance and all that sort of 

thing?  Absolutely not.  He cares less about those kind of 

things.  He wants cash, money in his hand, so that at the end of 

the summer he can go back to school and pay his bills.  He 

doesn't care about all of the union needs and all of the 

highbrow philosophies of workers bargaining for rights and all 

that sort of thing.  He wants a job that pays cash so that at the 

end of the summer he can pay his bills and go back to school. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

And the less money that's chipped off for a check-off for this or 

a check-off for that or a check-off for something else means 

more cash in his pocket to spend on his tuition.  And that's what 

confronts the students of our province today, is all of this extra 

charging that's going to go on, all of this extra book work and 

headache that's going to go on; the inability of people, as 

employers, to provide work; and of course at the end of the 

day, the inability of the employer to be able to give very much 

actual cash to the person who has done the work. 

 

And so we have killed the goose that lays the golden egg, is 

what we're saying, Mr. Speaker.  Quite frankly, we're 

destroying the job base and the potential for young people to 

have jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now having said that, we need to also consider some of the 

views of some of the other folks that have given us input.  I'm 

happy to say that over the weekend we've received even more 

correspondence.  And a few of these point out . . . while 

somewhat similar in nature to some of the other business 

places, each one seems to have a bit of a different twist as to 

how this legislation is going to affect them in a very personal 

and real way. 

 

I will use an example from Canadian Tire Associate store.  We 

hadn't heard from any of those yet in our previous debate, and 

so I would like to get onto the record what some of their 

position is. 

 

Here too we have a letter that was originally addressed to the 

Premier, that was given to us as a copy, and we're certainly 

appreciative of people doing that so that we can help them to 

voice their opinion on this matter. 

 

 Re the proposed changes to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

 For the past several months I was feeling good about the 

leadership of the provincial government.  You were taking a 

middle-of-the-road attitude on most issues; you had set as a 

priority to obtain a balanced budget. Now with the proposed 

changes to The Labour Standards Act, my support for the 

government has greatly diminished. 

 

 If the proposed changes are implemented, we will probably 

use more full-time and we will only use students who are 

looking for employment for a short period as part-timers.  

The mature person who wants a part-time position will be the 

ones who lose out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a little different twist to the position 

of small business than what we had heard from the other people 

that we quoted from.  And so it's important that the minister 

take note of the fact that each individual business seems to have 

a different perspective as to how this legislation will personally 

affect their operation and be detrimental to them. 

He goes on to say that: 

 

 You are adding considerable cost to the employers, 

particularly in the retail industry which has already had some 

very difficult years.  Below are some areas I have concerns 

about. 

 

 First of all, the full benefits for part-time workers is 

extremely costly. 

 

I think the minister probably already knows that but he needs to 

take note of the fact that this comes from a small-business man 

in the province of Saskatchewan who is pointing it out, 

factually, how it's going to affect him.  He goes on to say that: 

 

 One week's notice for change in working schedules is not 

acceptable.  We have several employees who only want a few 

days of work now and then.  We call them when we need 

them and they come to work if they want to.  It works both 

ways.  We would not employ these people under the new 

legislation. 

 

Simple as that. We would not employ them. Another job lost, 

another opportunity gone in the wind, Mr. Speaker, because the 

Minister of Labour simply has not listened to the people that he 

presumes to have consulted with.  What he's forgotten is that 

consultation means also listening and not just preaching to the 

people. 

 

And so we have this minister putting in this Draconian 

legislation that will take away jobs. And example after example 

from this business community and others, shows exactly how 

that's going to happen.  So there can be no question in the 

minister's mind at the end of this day as to the reality of what 

his legislation is doing in a negative fashion to the province of 

Saskatchewan and to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

 The minimum notice requirement of six weeks after two 

years is far too extreme.  What company will want to come to 

Saskatchewan and who will want to become a director of a 

company when the liability is unlimited, including liability 

for wages?  Are you trying to keep industry out of the 

province? 

 

A very fair question that this gentleman asks, Mr. Speaker, 

because that's what it appears to most people to be going on 

here. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

 How can a business be run if employees have to absent for 12 

weeks out of 52 before they can be replaced? 

 

Now he goes on to say: 

 

 I apologize for coming on so strong in this letter, but I have a 

difficult time understanding 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

 these changes.  It is obvious that the government has had no 

input from the business community on this.  I would request 

that the government take a much more reasonable approach 

to any proposed changes to the Act. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a very solidly clear message in that 

note to the Premier.  Here he brings out the problem that he 

sees with the liability on directors for corporate entities. 

 

Now I suppose for those people who support the present 

administration, they would say well, we believe in the 

cooperative point of view and the cooperative way of doing 

business, and we believe in cooperatives, we don't believe in 

companies.  We don't believe in the multinational corporations, 

and we don't agree with what they do anyway, so why should 

we care what happens to their directors? 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, for the people of this province 

that you're in the very same boat.  You're all in this boat 

together because cooperatives do have boards of directors.  

They have elected members that take control of the 

cooperatives.  And they, in this legislation, will become just as 

responsible as anybody else. 

 

And as individuals, I suggest before you run for a directorship 

with a co-op, any kind of a co-op board, any kind of a credit 

union board that you run for, you'd better think twice about 

how many dollars this might cost you if in fact that 

organization goes broke and goes into receivership. 

 

And never fear, co-ops do go broke; they do go into 

receivership.  We've seen an example of that with the machine 

dealership in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan, a few years ago, 

where all of the equity built up had to be cancelled to all of the 

patrons; people's dividends over the years that had accumulated 

had to be erased.  They were no longer able to claim them or to 

expect to get them.  And of course in the end the entire 

structure failed. 

 

Now this legislation means that those directors would all be 

responsible for the losses in that circumstance.  So they're in no 

different position than people at Canadian Tire or any other 

corporate entity. 

 

And with that, I suggest that the minister ought to take a hard 

look at how he's treating the people in Saskatchewan who most 

likely supported his bid to become elected. 

 

We have from another small group in the province a note from 

Seal Tite Systems out of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  It's also, 

"Re: The Labour Standards Act, Bill 32."  Now here this 

individual writes to the minister, saying: 

 

 Again, I must write to you to express my deep concern about 

your government's labour agenda. 

 

 1) Prorated benefits to part-time employees:  As 

 the Labour minister stated to me on February 3, 1994, about 

65 per cent of all part-time workers only want to work part 

time.  The vast majority of these people do not require 

benefits as they are covered by their spouse's or parents' plan.  

Students working part time in almost every small business in 

the province require the maximum amount of money an 

employer can pay them to help them with their education. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here again we have an individual who is 

recognizing that need for students to be treated in a different 

way than the normal, regular workforce.  And this legislation 

has not clearly defined that there is any opportunity for that to 

happen. 

 

The letter goes on to say that: 

 

 The additional costs related to prorated benefits, premiums, 

and administration will make benefit plans too expensive and 

impractical for the full-time employees to participate in them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here is the problem.  This is the real nuts 

and bolts of the problem -- the costs of these benefits that 

people are going to be forced to take and to accept are simply 

going to be too much.  In other words, the take-home pay 

becomes less attractive. 

 

And what really is the bottom line when you say this?  Well 

what it really means is that those jobs that are close to 

minimum wage, in reality, when people find that all of these 

deductions are taken off, they might just as well stay on 

unemployment insurance or welfare because they are actually 

probably netting more dollars of take-home pay that way than 

they will by working.  And so we create in this province again 

a disincentive for people to work.  In other words, we create an 

incentive for people to stay at home and not do anything. 

 

What would be wrong with creating a program where we 

actually would encourage people to want to get jobs?  How 

could it possibly hurt us to in fact offer a benefit of some kind, 

a package where people would be allowed to improve their 

monetary position by taking a job and actually being rewarded 

monetarily for getting off of unemployment insurance or out of 

the welfare system?  Perhaps even a cash bonus or a monthly 

pay cheque of so many dollars on top of your new-found job 

wage scale that would give you a positive incentive because 

you'd be paid some cash money, hard, cold cash, for getting out 

of the system and getting to a job, and show the people that you 

appreciate their efforts to try to help themselves, and of course 

to help society around them. 

 

The letter goes on to discuss item no. 2 in the letter: 

 

 2) One week's notice of change of work schedules: would 

you please explain to me how a business is able to predict 

one week in advance what the weather conditions will be 

like, what the sales volume will be, or what tourists and 

recreation volume will be?  This 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

legislation will most certainly force businesses to service 

Saskatchewan from other areas in Canada. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, what the writer is saying is that 

people, even though they may do business in Saskatchewan, 

will locate their head offices outside of the province.  And this 

is a terribly negative position for business to have to take from 

the point of view of someone like myself, who lives in this 

province and would like to see an expansion and growth of the 

business sector and not simply be served from the outside with 

the specific needs that we have.  And it just simply means a 

loss of that much more tax base and a loss of that many more 

tax dollars. 

 

The no. 3 item goes on to say that increased provisions for 

break-in period: 

 

 This provision of increasing the break in service from 14 

days to 13 weeks will force employers to hire different, new 

and inexperienced part-time employees and will certainly 

discourage employers from hiring students for part-time 

work. 

 

Again we have an attack on the student population; those 

people who very shortly will be looking for jobs in our 

province, many of which are already starting to look, with the 

university year in its closing days just at the moment.  Now it 

goes on to say that 

 

 These are only three examples of the very poorly thought-out 

legislation.  All of the changes will increase the cost of doing 

business in Saskatchewan, and will certainly discourage 

businesses from locating here and will force businesses to 

relocate to more competitive areas of the country. 

 

 As a result, our tax base will continue to be eroded, thus 

increasing the tax burden on the wealth generators who 

remain in this province, which today -- and the future's 

communications:  telephone, fax, computers, and 

transportation -- it is very easy to serve Saskatchewan's small 

population from other areas of the country or the continent. 

 

(1515) 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, this individual now starts to look 

further afield and is suggesting that we could even see the head 

offices staying in the United States or Mexico or perhaps even 

Europe.  In other words, you could have a distributorship for a 

Toyota car never ever setting up a head office in Saskatchewan 

any place, never even setting up a parts depot in Saskatchewan.  

They might simply locate everything outside of our province 

and only have salesmen travelling through the province to sell 

their products. 

 

That letter goes on to say that: 

 

 In a letter dated March 14, 1994 I received from (the 

minister's name is here), he stated that the 

cost of the changes to The Labour Standards Act will be a 

minimal amount of $9.5 million.  Now this minimal amount 

certainly does not take into account the additional costs of 

administration to small business. 

 

In other words, what this individual is saying, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the minister is using a very minimal figure of the losses 

because he's not taking into account a lot of the costs that will 

happen outside of the jurisdiction of the government itself; in 

other words, the cost of administration for the business places 

who in fact are the creators of jobs and the creators of our job 

base. 

 

The Prime Minister of this country in a recent tour through the 

province of Saskatchewan made a deliberate point in his speech 

delivered in this very community, the city of Regina.  He made 

a concerted effort to point out that it is small business in this 

country that will create the jobs for the economic recovery that 

we must have; it cannot be done by government, was his point. 

 

And of course in Saskatchewan the government is saying: small 

business, we don't like you very much; we're going to slap such 

restrictions on you that you cannot financially exist. 

 

Now it goes on to say: 

 

 It is discouraging for me to have to tell my children that they 

have a much better chance of finding employment in other 

provinces or states than they do in Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, this was signed by Mr. Asher, the 

president of this small company.  And the reality there being, 

Mr. Speaker, that he echoes some of the words that I have felt 

myself when it is very apparent that as a father you must tell 

your children that your opportunities in Saskatchewan are 

non-existent, that you must in fact leave the province if you are 

to find a decent way of life with dignity and honour and 

respectability and some measure of reward financially for your 

lifetime's chosen profession.  It simply won't be in 

Saskatchewan and you will have to consider leaving, and my 

children have had to do that.  And I see this person being very 

concerned as well about that fact of life that has become a 

reality for all of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We want to cover a few more of these, Mr. Speaker, to make 

sure that the minister gets a full impact of how general the 

concern is throughout the province. 

 

And so I'll quickly go on to some statements made by another 

individual, president of Nu-West Construction Products Inc.  It 

says simply, addressed to all concerned. 

 

 As an employer and new business attempting to build a future 

for our company and just as importantly, a secure and 

prosperous future for our employees, I strongly oppose the 

proposed labour standard changes.  Should these changes 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

proceed, as a company we will need to enact the following: 

 

 Stop our proposal to add a benefits package to our full-time 

employees; stop expansion plans which would require 

on-demand, part-time assistance; re-evaluate potential 

manufacturing expansion plans in alternate locations. 

 

Now here again, Mr. Speaker, we have an individual pointing 

out from his point of view how this legislation will affect him, 

and even though in general terms it's much the same as 

everyone else, specifically here are concerns that this individual 

sees as being different from all of the other folks.  It will 

specifically hit his business in those three specific areas. 

 

And he tells you exactly what he's going to have to do in order 

to save himself from this legislation and how that's going to 

impact the very work that he does, the very profession that he's 

in, and the very people that work for him. 

 

He's going to have to re-evaluate the potential manufacturing 

expansion plans and look at alternate locations.  In other words, 

he may not manufacture his product here in this province.  He 

may in fact be going to Alberta, Manitoba, Mexico, who 

knows; wherever it can be done so that he can financially exist 

with a bottom line that shows black numbers instead of red 

numbers. 

 

And that's what business is really all about in the long and the 

short of it -- if you lose money, you go bankrupt.  If you go 

bankrupt, you're out of business.  If you don't want to go 

bankrupt, you don't lose money.  So you must make money, 

you must have a profit in a business. 

 

The only way you can do that, of course, is to be competitive 

with your competitors and you must be able to produce a 

product that you can sell at the same price as everybody else 

does or nobody will buy what you have to sell. 

 

The man is pleading, pleading with the Minister of Labour to 

allow his business to continue to exist in the province of 

Saskatchewan so that he can provide jobs for Saskatchewan 

people and provide a tax base for this province.  And he's being 

denied that.  He feels very strongly about it -- so strongly that 

he's willing to write a letter to us and to allow us to discuss his 

problems in this public forum in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The last line is very simple and straightforward.  It says: please 

overturn this proposed action.  Very simple request, Mr. 

Minister.  Stop what you're doing before it destroys this 

individual's business and the province that he loves so much. 

 

We have letters from people like the Graphic Arts printing.  I 

see memos here from an individual, Perry Foster.  I think I'll 

get to that one just a little bit later.  Perhaps I should do that 

one right away so I don't mix 

it up with the rest, Mr. Speaker, because it's addressed to one of 

the other ministers in the government.  I'm sure that minister 

will recognize who they are, so I won't bother reading the name 

that it's addressed to. 

 

It says: 

 

 Please forward if in Regina. 

 

 I have glanced at the proposed Labour Standards Act 

changes.  Please do not proceed; they do not make sense.  

They are not needed and are unworkable.  It would be a big 

step backwards in this age of national and international trade. 

 

 Some number of years ago I did work for you in what I 

believe was a turkey ranch towards Pike Lake.  I ask you, 

could you hire with such laws; as almost as important, would 

you want to live with such laws?  And would you have the 

heart and the time to comply?  You have run a business and 

you will know it ain't easy.  Thus I presume you will have a 

better insight than many of your fellow members. 

 

Now I think that that is a very personable and real plea to a 

member of the present administration, a back-bencher in the 

government, who knows exactly what the business atmosphere 

in the province is and has to be in order for a small business to 

operate. 

 

And this individual who used to work for the member is 

pleading for an opportunity to have his province continue as a 

place where workers can work and job creation can be the 

bottom line of what we are trying to do. 

 

Another point of view from the Hundseth Line Construction 

Corporation re the revisions to The Labour Standards Act.  This 

individual explains as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 This proposed legislation will have a significant impact on 

our business.  At a time when it has become increasingly 

difficult to maintain a positive bottom line, small business in 

Saskatchewan does not need another increase in its cost of 

doing business. 

 

 We are especially concerned with the changes with respect to 

the minimum notice requirements or requirements for pay in 

lieu of notice or termination notice or pay in lieu for 

temporary lay-offs, as well as the proposal to make the 

directors' liability for wages unlimited. 

 

 Contrary to the report of the consulting accounting firm, we 

believe that all of these proposed changes will have a 

significant cost factor associated with them.  We strongly 

request that you reconsider these proposals. 

 

A straightforward letter, Mr. Speaker, very short, very to the 

point, concisely telling the minister exactly 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

what's going to happen and what is wrong with the legislation.  

This person knows for certain that he's going to be cost 

impacted very significantly, and he too pleads with the minister 

for some kind of recognition, some kind of understanding of 

the problem that he will face as an employer in this province 

who needs the opportunity to be able to find a bottom line in 

his business that isn't red every year. 

 

We have several references that are made through the news 

media, some of which I will allude to later, Mr. Speaker.  But 

in particular I want to deal with the statistics that I mentioned 

the other day.  I said I had this copy of statistical facts about 

labour relations in the province, and I mentioned at that time 

that I would take the opportunity to explain them and to go into 

them at some future time.  And I think possibly this would be 

as good a time as any because today we have seen the 

introduction of yet another labour Bill.  And the impact of that 

Bill coupled to what is going to happen with the one that we are 

presently discussing just magnifies the whole problem by 

tenfold. 

 

We have Draconian legislation introduced today that, coupled 

with The Labour Standards Act, will make it almost impossible 

for businesses in Saskatchewan to survive.  And we say why?  

Why do we bring in these legislations?  Surely there must be a 

reason.  And the folks say, well the union leaders want us to 

have these changes.  So then we say, well what's broken with 

the old Act?  Why do we need to have a new one?  And of 

course the people in the business community say well, there is 

nothing broken, it worked just fine.  And they offer these 

statistics as proof of their position. 

 

And their position is quite simply this:  that the labour 

relationship between management and business and labour in 

the province over the past ten years has been significantly 

better than it was during the period of the 1970s.  And they 

make their point that during the 1970s the labour unrest in this 

province, which reflected into very high numbers of people in 

terms of days lost, of work lost -- it all happened as a result of 

the fact that we had very regressive labour legislation.  The 

labour legislation which unfortunately almost reads line for line 

exactly the kind of labour legislation that we're bringing into 

effect right here, right now. 

 

In other words, we're going back to the good old 1970s in 

labour relations.  And here's what these statistical facts show, 

Mr. Speaker.  From the Department of Human Resources, 

Labour and Employment, work stoppages in Saskatchewan 

since 1978, by sector, the table 1, gross days lost.  In the public 

sector we have from 1978 to 1982 under the number of 

disputes, we had 61.  The number of workers affected was 

35,768.  Number of days lost was 359,183. 

 

In the same categories for the years of 1982 to 1993, we had 

number of disputes was 50; with the number of workers 

involved here was 37,316; with the number of days lost was 

252,107.  Now the totals there were: number of disputes, 111; 

number of workers affected, 73,102; and number of days lost 

was 661,290. 

Now that was public sector, Mr. Speaker, so we want to 

compare that now to the private sector. 

 

In the private sector of 1978 to 1982, we had: number of 

disputes, 133;  number of workers involved, 25,946; number of 

days lost, 658,586 days lost.  And in the period from 1983 to 

1993 -- that 10-year period -- we had number of disputes, 91 -- 

significantly less there, Mr. Speaker; with number of workers, 

13,975; and the number of days lost was down to 322,851.  

Now the totals there ran across the board at 224 disruptions 

with 39,921 workers involved, losing 981,437 days of work.  

All stoppages for the period then were the 1978 to '82 period, 

194; as compared to from '83 to '93, 141. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now if my counting is right, '78 to '82 is four years.  We had 

194 disruptions altogether.  And in the period of 1983 to '93 -- 

that's 10 years; 10 years compared to the 4 years -- then we 

were down to 141 disputes.  In other words, something like 53 

disputes less over more than two and a half times the number of 

years. 

 

And there has to be an explanation for why that occurred, why 

these statistics are important to us, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

important thing there is quite simply that under the old labour 

legislation that we had through the 1970s, we had the 

conditions and the right atmosphere for major labour disputes 

that were non-existent when that legislation was revoked and 

changed in the early 1980s. 

 

As soon as we got away from that Draconian legislation of 

dictatorial direction and allowed the workplace to settle its own 

disputes through the bargaining process, the collective 

bargaining process, and allowed it to work freely and 

independently of obstructions from government legislation, we 

had a lot more happy workers and a lot less disruptions of work 

altogether. 

 

In fact a very, very significant percentage of less disputes under 

that legislation than we had under the Draconian legislation of 

the 1970s, the likes of which we are seeing reborn and 

recreated here today, the exact same kinds of dramatic changes 

in reverse happening again in 1994; back to the good old '70s, 

where we'll have everybody on strike and nobody's working 

and nobody wants to work and nobody can afford to pay the 

bills.  And if you don't think it's going to happen, phone your 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool agent today and ask him when he's 

going on strike because it's going to happen pretty quick. 

 

So there you go, back to labour disruptions and labour disputes 

because you tried to legislate into a law the very things that 

people should be settling for themselves.  Every time 

government interferes in people's lives, nothing good can 

happen of it, Mr. Speaker.  Nothing can ever happen that is 

good when you have the government trying to run things, 

because quite frankly we don't have the very smartest people in 

the world getting into the political theatre all the 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

time.  We've got an awful lot of people who don't know what 

they're talking about and don't know anything about labour 

relations trying to write legislation to rule people and to make 

them and force them to do certain things that can't work and 

won't work. 

 

As we go into this area of debate, Mr. Speaker, I think now that 

it's only fair that we round out some of these personal and 

smaller business complaints with a couple from some of the 

umbrella groups that I alluded to earlier that I said I would save 

until the last of my debate, and my participation in the debate, 

because we need to round this argument out so as to allow 

people to know that we are taking a representative sample of 

not only the workers' concerns but also from individuals 

concerned from a business point of view -- small, independent 

businesses as well as the larger businesses. 

 

So we have from the Saskatchewan Construction Association -- 

very well known to this government and to all governments, the 

head office located right here in the city of Regina -- a very 

detailed outline of exactly what is going on in this labour 

legislation.  And it goes on to say: 

 

 Re: The Labour Standards Act, Bill No. 32 

 

 We are forwarding a brief interpretation of the amendments 

to the Bill we understand are forthcoming. 

 

It has, in the briefing notes, changes to The Labour Standards 

Act, Bill No. 32, March 31, 1994.  And I'll quote a little of this, 

Mr. Speaker, so as to give the Minister of Labour an 

opportunity to know what exactly it is that the construction 

association, whom I believe represents some 700 organizations 

throughout the province, a very large umbrella group 

representing a tremendous amount of employers and 

employees, it says that: 

 

 The Government informed business and labour on March 31 

of the number of changes to Bill 32 which will be introduced 

as House amendments.  These changes respond to a number 

of serious problems identified by business.  There are still a 

couple of issues that were not addressed and it is not known 

whether they will be.  We do not have the actual text of the 

changes, only brief explanations, but it appears there would 

be still some problems with some of the new provisions.  The 

following is a summary of the changes to Bill 32. 

 

Notice of workers' hours, shifts, meal breaks, section 13.1. 

 

 Subsection (1) changed to specify that employees who work 

6 or more hours will have 30 minute meal break within the 

first 5 hours. Variance to be permitted by collective 

agreement or majority of employees. 

 

 Subsection (2) changed to require written 

notice where reasonably practical only. 

 

 Subsection (3) clarified that a change would entail normal 

overtime only. 

 

 Subsection (4) changed to provide variance . . . through the 

collective agreement or by agreement of majority of 

employees, and approval of Labour Standards Director. 

 

 Subsection (5) changed to clarify "emergency circumstances" 

exemption to include where an accident, unforeseeable or 

unpreventable circumstance occurs. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is quite clear, after reading this 

analysis of the changes, that these people had studied very 

carefully the effects that they were going to have on the 

construction industry and the 700-and-some-odd people that 

they represent. 

 

Now this letter goes on to explain in detail the changes to the 

legislation in all of the key areas: most available hours to 

part-timers on a seniority basis; the statutory holidays 

provisions; the group termination regulations that are set up or 

in amendments; no regulations -- that was a wrong term to use 

because we haven't seen the regulations nor does it appear that 

we will see them at all. 

 

We also have a discussion here on the discipline for illness and 

injuries, the reassignment of disability . . . or disabled 

employees, and the benefits to part-time workers. 

 

All of these issues are dealt with by this umbrella group that 

has a very keen interest and a lot at stake with what happens in 

this legislation: wage assignments, directors' certificates, 

minimum standards, existing regulations, and the fines, and 

they go into the whole gambit of the legislation and how it's 

going to affect the business community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister should be well aware that now 

we have not only the workers of the province, not only the 

small businesses of the province and the large business 

corporations, we have a cross-section actually of all of the 

people of Saskatchewan saying, right from local government 

right up to provincial government, right across the board, we've 

had educators in the educational system, we've got health 

people in health organization of our province -- all of these 

facets of our society have been contacting us, telling us that 

they cannot live with this legislation and do their job in the 

province of Saskatchewan, that it will be detrimental to 

business. 

 

It will be detrimental to them and that in the end will be 

detrimental to the job base of Saskatchewan and to the tax base 

of Saskatchewan -- a whole cross-section of people in 

Saskatchewan, all delivering the same bottom-line message 

even though it is in a very different and very defective way of 

how it is going to affect them as individuals and their 

individual businesses and individual lives. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

So while the legislation in a very sweeping way covers so much 

territory and affects so many people, in the end the bottom line 

is that all of those diversifications come together with one 

conclusion, and that conclusion being that this legislation is not 

good for the province and that it is not good for business and 

it's not good for employers and it's not good for employees.  

Students will suffer, elderly people will suffer, disabled people 

will suffer.  No one is going to benefit except the union 

leadership that grabs off a small bit of power for itself in the 

scheme of things. 

 

And is that why we're really in this province of Saskatchewan, 

to have a few powermongers at the head of the unions 

benefiting by the work that we do in this Assembly at a cost of 

millions of dollars a year, as we debate and pass legislation?  Is 

that why we are putting legislation into effect, to appease the 

major union leaders; to give them power and control in the 

province while we are creating a detrimental atmosphere for all 

other people in every segment of society? 

 

Every segment, right down to a law office I've got in here, from 

every segment in our society -- from farmers and ranchers, to 

mayors and all of those people that have contacted us, 

explaining how this labour legislation in its Draconian way will 

destroy the province of Saskatchewan.  And only the member 

from Regina can smile in his seat because he has fought for the 

labour movement all of his life, and nothing else and nobody 

else ever mattered to this individual -- absolutely no one is 

important, just the labour movement.  So you take your stand 

and enjoy it, because for a brief time you will have your 

moment in the sun. 

 

But the devastation to the province will be so great, in my 

prediction, that this legislation will not be allowed to go on as it 

is written.  I predict that the fallout from this legislation will be 

so severe in terms of loss of jobs, loss of tax base, and loss of 

tax money to the revenue, and loss of people to the province, 

that these people will leave this province in such big numbers 

that by the end of this year regulations will be so significantly 

changed in this legislation by necessity, the cabinet will see 

itself in a position where it will have to change these 

regulations so significantly that the labour union will turn on 

the government like a hungry pack of hounds and be ready to 

devour the government in the next election. 

 

And that's exactly what will happen.  Because they will turn on 

you just as quickly as anyone.  Your adversaries are in front of 

you; that's me.  I'm your adversary.  Your enemies are the 

union bosses and they're behind you, sir.  Watch out for them.  

They're the guys that'll get you in the back when you're not 

looking, because it's coming.  They won't be happy when you 

change your regulations the way that you will be forced to 

change them, and then they will be after you, not me. 

 

There are a couple of more points, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 

think I'll have to make here, from the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association.  The Labour 

Standards Act amendments.  We have a bit of an alert and it 

points out some of the concerns that they had.  I mentioned to 

you the specific areas of concern and now it goes into a little bit 

of detail of what to watch for.  And I'll just quote and comment 

on that. 

 

 Bill 32 introduced in the legislature on March 11 has a 

number of provisions that must be changed or deleted before 

business can live with it.  We have had many meetings with 

Ministers and their officials in an effort to get the necessary 

changes.  Through the Saskatchewan Business Coalition we 

have consulted with other senior officials of other affected 

industries.  We are enclosing our March 14th quick analysis 

as well as the March 21st briefing notes we developed 

through the Coalition.  Our very recent meetings appear to 

have developed a compromise on all but three major issues.  

Two of these will affect most employers and one is a 

construction issue.  The latter is a requested construction 

industry exemption from the notice of lay-off . . . (and I think 

it's, say) in lieu of notice provisions in Section 43.  This 

should not apply where work is temporary, for the duration of 

a project or seasonal.  Our industry is exempt in neighboring 

provinces.  The other two major unresolved issues relate to 

part-time work, as follows: 

 

Now, here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's important to note that we 

actually have an example being made of how we are out of 

sync with our neighbours in other provinces.  And it's 

important for the minister to take note of this because we have 

tried to point out over and over to him that this legislation, 

while being a front runner and a leader, is in fact putting us in a 

position of being out of sync with our neighbours.  And that, in 

this instance, is detrimental. 

 

Whereas in some other areas, you might take some pride in 

being a leader -- for example, in health care and providing 

opportunities for people to have better medicine.  Certainly it 

can be an advantage to be in a government that brings those 

things forward and you can take the applause for having done 

something good for society.  But in this situation being a leader 

means that you are a loser because you're driving business out 

of the province. 

 

(1545) 

 

It says here that: 

 

 Section 45 which provides that the same benefits provided to 

anyone (including managers) who work thirty or more hours 

per week must be provided to all employees including 

part-time workers, including casual, seasonal, and student 

workers. 

 

 Section 13.4 which provides that employers will be required 

to make additional work hours available to qualified 

part-time workers according to seniority. 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

It goes on to explain: 

 

 Please review our analysis and the briefing notes and let your 

M.L.A., the Minister of Labour and the Premier know that 

you object to Bill 32 in the present form, and in particular 

with respect to the above three issues.  We are enclosing a list 

of all M.L.A.'s and their Legislative Assembly and 

constituency telephone and fax numbers.  If you need or want 

more information, call . . . 

 

Now very clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is an example of 

how we are out of tune with other provinces and of course with 

the other jurisdictions in North America, which a few years ago 

would not have had so great an implication as it does now.  

Because now that we have the free trade agreements both with 

the United States and with Mexico, we certainly have to be 

more and more aware of being in tune with our neighbours. 

 

The Trade Union Act amendments it goes on to say: 

 

 We have been told that the Trade Union Act amendments 

will be introduced shortly.  We are enclosing our brief 

comments on the amendments we have been advised are 

being considered and may be proposed.  Please make your 

views known on these issues as well when you call . . . 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly the business community has 

seen the connection of these two Bills and how they tie together 

and how they have a detrimental effect on society more as a 

combined unit than each one as an individual. Because while 

each one is a terrible detriment to business in Saskatchewan, 

combined they become a Draconian drain on our system and a 

threat to the very existence of the province of Saskatchewan 

and its viability. 

 

I want to throw in from a law firm here, Graff & Associates . . . 

It says: 

 

 For what it's worth, I'm enclosing a copy of our letter from 

Workers' Compensation. 

 

Now a while ago we talked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 

results of regulations and how they affect legislation.  This 

letter is a clear indication of how regulations put into effect 

with The Workers' Compensation Act that we saw here last 

year, an Act which we opposed because we said that it was 

going to do things in regulation that it didn't show on the 

surface in the law . . . the legislation itself.  That the regulations 

after the fact would have detrimental effects on the community 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

This letter goes on to explain a bit of how that worked and we 

are saying that exactly the same scenario will happen in The 

Workers' Compensation Act or The Trade Union Act and The 

Labour Standards Act.  All of these Bills are affected after the 

fact by decisions that are made outside of the jurisdiction and 

debate forum 

of this legislature. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 You will notice a 100 per cent increase for offices in 1994 

and 200 per cent over two years with further increases 

possible.  The rate increases are not justified by loss 

experience.  We, Saskatchewan, are losing our competitive 

edge in attracting companies such as Crown Life and 

Babcock & Wilcox. 

 

 Second, there was a labour department flyer in the 

Leader-Post.  How much is this political propaganda costing 

taxpayers?  If you don't have a copy, I can send it to you. 

 

We do have a copy, by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We 

found out, after some discussion with the Minister of Labour, 

that he in fact didn't just have the 1,500 original copies.  He 

actually had 300,000 of them printed and there were scads of 

them laying in the garbage cans at every post office, so we 

were able to get an armful of them without any trouble at all.  

And we certainly don't agree with the tens of thousands of 

dollars that little project did in fact cost us, and I'm sure that 

this taxpayer who writes this letter will be very interested in 

finding that out. 

 

Now, he goes on to say that certainly you are getting good 

coverage on this patronage angle -- and of course this letter was 

address to us -- and he goes into telling us in the rest of the 

letter how opposed and appalled he is at the kind of patronage 

that the government was handing out. 

 

And while that has very little to do with the labour legislation, I 

think it's not necessary to go on with the rest of the letter 

because all it does is pat the opposition here on the back, and 

we appreciate that, but we won't make the minister suffer 

through this letter of congratulations to us.  It simply suffices 

for him to know that in fact we do get those kind of letters 

occasionally yet, and it makes us very proud of the opportunity 

we have to debate in this legislature and to present the views of 

individuals in the province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have talked at length about issues 

in this Labour Standards Act.  We have talked about the input 

from individuals and corporations.  And now, just for a minute, 

I want to talk about the position that was taken by the news 

media people because they have an important role to play in 

our society, just as everyone else does.  We have shown input 

from all cross-sections and certainly too we have many very, 

very pointed observations from people in the media. 

 

We have the "Labour law juggling seen" as one of the top news 

stories just back here on April 5.  It says here, "Sask. may bring 

new rules in back door" and of course it goes on to explain the 

whole process of how the regulation system works and how 

amendments are brought in.  And the media of course is 

pointing out very clearly what can and will be happening to this 

legislation. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

In another article -- "Labour legislation won't help very much" 

-- the headline again pretty well self-explanatory of how the 

article runs on through its entirety, basically condemning the 

legislation for not doing very much to help the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

"Proposed work changes are under attack."  Of course, here 

again pointed out by the media that there are several provisions 

that need to be looked at.  It goes on to list the things, like 

provide the same benefits to part-time workers on a prorated 

basis available to full-time workers in the same establishment.  

It goes on to say, improved parental leave benefits by reducing 

the qualifying period for maternity leaves from 20 weeks to 52 

weeks, increasing unpaid maternity leave to 12 weeks from 6 

weeks and making adoption leave equivalent to maternity 

leaves. 

 

It points out the good parts of the legislation in this article to 

begin with and then it goes on to bring some balance into it 

from the other positions of business on some of the other 

issues. 

 

And I think that's good reporting.  I think that's fair and 

reasonable because the business community and the people of 

Saskatchewan have said that there were some things in labour 

standards that were out of tune, out of date, needed to be 

revised, and certainly it is good to see that part done.  However, 

the negative effect is so drastic that we have to take a position 

in general against the legislation. 

 

Having said those things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and noting that 

I have several articles left, but knowing that I can get into this 

whole debate at a later time in Committee of the Whole, and 

that we in fact then will be able to pose these as questions that 

the minister will be obligated to answer on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan, I think it's only fair that I make a few 

last-minute comments and then allow my colleagues an 

opportunity to talk to the minister about the Draconian 

legislation and the very terrible effects that it's going to have on 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Section 72 of The Labour Standards Act seems to be of 

particular concern and interest to a lot of people, and I just 

wanted to bring that to the minister's attention.  The 

amendments to section 72 of The Labour Standards Act is an 

unacceptable interference to the collective bargaining process.  

Not only are collective bargaining agreements taken as a 

package much more favourably to the employees collectively 

than are the individual requirements under The Labour 

Standards Act, but each specific type of benefit, i.e., overtime, 

public holidays, vacations, rates of pay, is more favourable than 

the Act. 

 

The cherry picking that will be permitted under the proposed 

law, or proposed new amendments, offends the interests of 

those employers such as the city of Regina. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we now have the very support base of 

this government, the city of Regina, very 

clearly in this document that they have delivered to us, pointing 

out to the Minister of Labour that this labour law is very, very 

detrimental to the city of Regina, to the people of Regina. 

 

And we need to note that here we have a specific request from 

one of the two biggest cities in our province, specifically asking 

that on behalf of the people of Regina -- this comes from the 

city manager -- pleading with the Minister of Labour, pleading 

with the Minister of Labour not to do this legislation the way 

he's done it, not to affect all of the contracts that the city has 

with its collectively bargained-agreed partners, not to throw 

into disruption all of the fundamental activities of agreements 

with the workers in the city of Regina. 

 

It's very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of 

Labour take into account this one last plea from the very centre 

of its own support, from the centre of his own seat in this 

Assembly, the people crying to him, asking for his attention, 

pleading with him not to destroy the province of Saskatchewan 

with this Draconian legislation. 

 

Here from the city of Regina we have the last message that I'm 

going to delivery to you today, because it rounds out the plea 

from all of the people of this province -- from the workers; 

from the small-business people; from the individuals; from the 

schools; from the municipalities, from SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), from SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities); from all 

of the educators; from all of the business people, both small, 

corporate, cooperative; all of the people in this province. 

 

The co-ops have pleaded with you not to destroy this province's 

labour balance.  Everyone in this province, Mr. Minister, has 

pleaded with you not to upset all of the good things we have in 

this province with this terrible legislation. 

 

And it rounds up with one very important conclusion to you, 

the last piece of evidence that I will present to you that your 

labour legislation is out of tune with the people, and that is this 

letter from the people of Regina, from the very core of your 

existence as a politician, and surely you must take that into 

account. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'll conclude my remarks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think my colleague, the member from Maple Creek, 

has certainly delivered what I believe is a very close and 

thorough examination of this piece of legislation, and I believe 

he is correct in his assessment of the legislation that we see 

before us, Bill No. 32, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Bill 32 supposedly, the minister says, has the silent majority of 

people backing it.  And yet we can't seem to find out from the 

minister who that silent majority is.  All we can find is letter 

after letter, group after group, representation after 

representation, that says 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

they have difficulty with this legislation.  And yet the minister 

suggests to the people of Saskatchewan that the silent majority 

is backing this. 

 

I only have a couple of letters that I would like to provide as 

evidence against the legislation, and they come both from my 

constituency.  One represents the . . . one is the town council of 

Kindersley and the other one is a small-business person in 

Kindersley.  But I think they both point out the inadequacies of 

the legislation and what they believe will be the result of the 

legislation. 

 

These people I represent.  These are the people that I believe 

understand the legislation.  These are the people that are paying 

close attention to the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

First of all, I 'd like to read into the record the letter that I 

received from the town of Kindersley, the town council in 

Kindersley, and the minister has received a copy of this, I 

understand.  In fact he received the original and I received a 

copy. 

 

 To the Hon. Minister of Labour:  Re: The proposed changes 

to The Labour Standards Act.  On behalf of the council of the 

town of Kindersley, I would like to inform you that this 

council is extremely opposed to the proposed amendments to 

The Labour Standards Act.  The cost of these changes for 

small business and all local governments would be extremely 

high and would deter growth and development. 

 

 Local governments have been faced with revenue-sharing 

decreases, SAMA requisition increases (150 per cent in that 

case), and utility increases -- telephone, natural gas, and 

electrical -- over the past number of years, and we are trying 

our best to maintain a satisfactory level of service at 

reasonable tax rates. 

 

 However, unilateral labour changes as are being proposed 

only add to the cost of running our municipality and we find 

this legislation totally unacceptable.  We therefore request 

that you reconsider this proposal and use a consultation 

process before any new amendments are considered.  Yours 

truly,  John Klein, Deputy Mayor, Town of Kindersley. 

 

(1600) 

 

Cc'd myself, the Hon. Premier, and the mayor of Kindersley. 

This was a resolution that was passed by the town council in 

Kindersley.  And I think it highlights, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

Mr. Minister, what the people of Saskatchewan, and in this case 

a town council in rural Saskatchewan, believes are the 

problems with your legislation: they are inappropriate, that 

they'll cost jobs and investment into Saskatchewan and 

therefore aren't needed.  And one can only wonder why you are 

proposing this kind of legislation at this time. 

 

The second piece of correspondence that I have had 

from a constituent of mine was from a gentleman in 

Kindersley, Don Longmuir, who operates a small business in 

Kindersley.  I'll just tell you a little bit about him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He operates a small radiator repair shop and he sells a number 

of short-line farm equipment pieces as well.  It's a small 

business, not a big employer by any means.  I think he employs 

three or four people, some of them on a part-time basis, some 

of them on a full-time basis, but nevertheless a very decent 

operation that he and his family and others have built up over 

the years to provide him and his family and the employees of 

his business with a very adequate living.  And I think he would 

represent the views of a lot of small-business people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is a letter sent to the Premier of Saskatchewan, cc'd to 

the Minister of Economic Development and the Minister of 

Labour and myself: 

 

 Dear Sir: In regards to Bill 32, amendments to The Labour 

Standards Act, if this Bill is passed as proposed, it will mean 

the death (and he's highlighted that, underlined it) of many 

Saskatchewan jobs and many Saskatchewan businesses.  

How a government which promotes job creation could even 

consider such legislation, is beyond me.  The power of the 

Department of Labour over running of business borders on 

communism, with the government having full power while 

the individual small business trying to make ends meet has no 

say. 

 

 I was planning on hiring a new staff person this year, but with 

this legislation like Bill 32 planned, I will not be hiring (again 

highlighted and underlined).  Sincerely, Don Longmuir. 

 

And as I said, I think Don is a very sincere business person, not 

one that normally gets involved in the discussions, I don't think, 

on a day-to 

_day basis of what's going on in Saskatchewan, but definitely is 

concerned about the piece of legislation we see before us and 

what it might do to his business and to the employees that he 

has currently under his employ. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it highlights the two different views 

of largely very different groups -- the municipal council, the 

town council, on one hand, and a small-business person.  And I 

think these are only very small representations of the kinds of 

letters that we've been receiving, the official opposition, 

particularly the member for Maple Creek, the critic for Labour. 

 

And yet we still have a government that believes that this is a 

proper piece of legislation and a piece of legislation that has the 

support of the people in Saskatchewan.  And we can only ask -- 

who?  Who supports this kind of legislation?  We see a few 

union leaders sprinkled around the Chamber from time to time, 

and they claim to support this legislation, although they even 

have difficulty with it now, we understand. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

We know the member from Regina Rosemont supports the 

legislation, even though it isn't strong enough in his view. And 

I understand he's going to be providing amendments to the 

legislation and we'll look forward to that kind of lunatic fringe 

view that he'll be bringing forward. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows that 

that kind of language is not really befitting of this Chamber and 

I wish he'd refrain from using it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We only have to 

wonder who is supporting this kind of legislation.  And we'll be 

looking forward to the member from Regina Rosemont when 

he brings forward his ill-informed contribution to this debate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Who is it going to help?  Who is this legislation going to help?  

Who is it for?  Who are you paying off?  Who are you paying 

off?  Is it Barb Byers you're paying off for her support?  Is it 

George Rosenau for his support?  People like that, is that the 

people you're trying to pay off these days? 

 

They're a little uncomfortable with you folks, you have to 

admit though.  Even it hasn't gone far enough for them, this 

legislation, and therefore I think they'll probably be 

withdrawing their support before very long. 

 

So I think the question has to remain, who is out there in this 

silent majority of people that supposedly supports this 

legislation?  We'll be looking forward to your help in that 

regard in telling us who all of this vast number of people within 

the silent majority of workers in Saskatchewan that supports 

this legislation.  Because I have yet to receive a letter in support 

-- not one that I can recall, of support for this kind of 

legislation. 

 

When it comes to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister 

is saying that part-time workers would be making 

representations to us, and yet I haven't received a letter from a 

part-time employee in Saskatchewan.  I'd welcome those kinds 

of people making representations to us. 

 

There's lot of people, Mr. Speaker . . . In the businesses that I'm 

involved in, the businesses that I'm involved in with part-time 

workers, none of them have come up to me and said that they 

need this kind of legislation.  I've discussed it with them.  None 

of them have said that this kind of legislation . . . 

 

I'll tell you what they did say to me though.  They were 

concerned that this kind of legislation may spell the end of their 

job rather than the continuation of their job.  That was what 

they told me.  They were worried about that maybe happening 

to them.  They were worried that maybe employers would look 

at full-time employment and cut back on the number of 

part-time employees within their employ, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there's some problems with the legislation when we look 

at things like scheduling and all of that kind of stuff.  Part-time 

workers are often hired on a very short 

notice type situation because there is a substantial amount of 

business walks through the door at that particular moment and 

you need the help.  That's why you hire part-time workers.  

You need the help at critical times of the day, and often those 

critical times are unforeseen.  You don't know when you're 

going to need it, quite frankly, and that's why there's such a 

thing as part-time workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think this piece of legislation is a shoddy piece of legislation 

and it was brought in by a minister that's been ill-prepared for 

this type of legislation.  And the only job loss that there should 

be in this province is that minister.  That's the only job loss that 

should result from this piece of legislation after it's pulled.  I 

think that minister should be taken to task for bringing forward 

such a piece of legislation that is so poorly drafted and so 

poorly accepted and so poorly consulted with prior to bringing 

this piece of legislation forward. 

 

And I would expect that once this legislation is withdrawn that 

that minister will be resigning, because I think that's what the 

appropriate action that he should be dealing with.  Just as the 

appropriate action was when the former minister of Agriculture 

screwed up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program and had to . . . well he didn't exactly have to step 

down; he was simply relieved of his responsibilities and 

shuffled over to another department so that the people of 

Saskatchewan maybe wouldn't think that he was dismissed.  

But of course all farm families know different than that.  They 

know very well that he was let go from the ministry of 

Agriculture.  And I expect the same fate will face the Minister 

of Labour after this legislation is withdrawn. 

 

And the member from Regina Rosemont, I suspect when he 

finds out that that's in the cards and that the Minister of Labour 

may have to do that, I wouldn't be surprised if he has to do 

some backtracking, some substantial backtracking as well when 

the people who he claims who support him out there are 

unhappy with his change of heart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why doesn't the legislation apply to businesses 

with 20 people or less?  If this is such an important piece of 

legislation, if this is such an important piece of legislation, why 

doesn't it deal with people that employ 20 people or less?  Are 

there only problems with bigger businesses than people that 

employ 20 people?  Is that the rationale behind it, Mr. Minister, 

that only businesses that have 20 or more employees have 

problems?  Or are businesses that have 20 people and less, do 

they have problems as well? 

 

Are there only sexual harassment and discrimination and other 

work related problems associated with businesses of over 20 

people?  Is that what you're telling us, and that's why there's a 

benchmark of 20 people as the cut-off?  Is there not those kinds 

of problems in smaller businesses? 

 

If you felt so strongly about this, why didn't you simply say all 

businesses instead of . . . if you felt so strongly 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

about this, why didn't you put in a provision for all businesses 

instead of just businesses of 20 people or over? 

 

And the minister says that the cost of bringing in this 

legislation and this piece of legislation will be minuscule, the 

cost.  In fact, if the cost is minuscule and the businesses would 

hardly notice any changes, why doesn't it apply to every 

business?  Why is it that small businesses with 20 employees or 

under are not participating?  There's basically no cost, I guess. 

 

What problem could there have been with Bill 32 if in fact 

these costs had been . . . or if these things made for better for 

everyone and at no additional costs?  Why doesn't the minister 

just admit that he's exaggerating the crisis, and the costs to 

businesses are much higher than he claims?  Why doesn't he 

just admit that Bill 32, as it stands, is a mistake and it should 

not under any circumstances be forced through this legislation, 

which will probably be the result of how the legislation does 

pass.  At the end of the day they'll probably bring in closure 

and force it through the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it stands to reason that when the business 

community, municipalities, health organization, the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, have major 

problems with Bill 32, that something is wrong with it, Mr. 

Minister.  The minister claims that the silent majority is in 

favour of it.  But how more out to lunch can he be than that 

observation?  Who did the minister consult with on this 

legislation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's hard to say, because there's so little evidence 

of any consultation whatsoever.  Regarding health insurance 

benefits there was no consulting.  The government did not talk 

to groups like the Great-West or Crown Life or Co-operators.  

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn't even contact the Canadian 

Life and Health Insurance Association out east until a week 

after the Bill was tabled.  A week after they were already trying 

to push through this legislation, the government stopped and 

said, oops, I guess we'd better make a few phone calls so we 

can claim to have consulted on this one.  That's this minister's 

type of consultation, unfortunately. 

 

Even then, Mr. Speaker, it was more of a general inquiry rather 

than seeking advice.  So no written response was given by the 

association.  That's not consultation, Mr. Minister. That's 

Saskatchewan's intrusive heavy-handed NDP government that 

is not willing to listen, period. 

 

Who did the minister talk to about the health benefits, about 

providing these services, about the pros and cons of the 

legislation?  Well, Mr. Minister, I know for a fact that you did 

not consult with the two largest consulting firms in 

Saskatchewan.  So just who did you consult with? 

 

The minister responsible for Labour, in addition to whoever 

was providing poor advice to the minister, didn't even take the 

time to consult with the consulting firms that specialize in these 

issues.  They 

didn't even ask the advice of the professionals who know this 

issue from the insurance side, from the employer side, and from 

the employee side. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the organizations who have spoken 

against the legislation are not fly-by-night operations.  They are 

not radical interest groups that enjoy stirring up the pot for no 

good reason. They're honourable, accomplished, concerned 

organizations who are completely objective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are talking about groups like the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, an organization of over 

10,000 members -- 10,000 independent business people, Mr. 

Speaker, that employ thousands and thousands of 

Saskatchewan people.  Do they think Bill 32 is acceptable?  

No, they don't.  They have a number of concerns regarding Bill 

32 concerning concerns that the minister tries to pass off by 

saying, we'll take care of all of those concerns in the 

regulations. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think that kind of answer is good 

enough.  The people of Saskatchewan aren't willing to just trust 

you to do the right thing, because you so often haven't done the 

right thing.  No wonder everyone wants to have first a look at 

these kinds of amendments, at the regulations, before Bill 32 

can go any further.  They want to see it in writing, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

But then again this government's written commitment isn't 

worth the paper it's printed on.  Just ask people like the judges 

in this province or the farmers or the civil servants or the 

people at the Co-op upgrader.  The Minister of Justice has 

backed out on a number of times when he's made his solemn 

promise to people in Saskatchewan, and yet now the Minister 

of Labour is asking us to trust him. 

 

But why should we trust you any more than the people of 

Saskatchewan, or the judges trust the Minister of Justice in this 

province?  He isn't willing to uphold the law of this province 

and neither are you.  And that's why the people of 

Saskatchewan aren't willing to support you on this type of 

legislation or this type of notion -- just trust us and we'll bring 

forward the concerns in the regulations, deal with the concerns 

in the regulations. 

 

(1615) 

 

These organizations, groups like the chamber of commerce, 

SUMA, SARM, SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations), all believe that you should be bringing forward 

those regulations prior to the implementation of this piece of 

legislation so that they can judge for themselves what the 

regulations are going to be and point out the  inadequacies of 

them. 

 

The Minister of Labour stands up and says, you'll just have to 

see them in committee so let's just skip right to it, is what he's 

suggesting.  But he knows it is not quite that simple.  All you'd 

have to do, Mr. Minister, is provide us with the regulations as 

you promised to do, 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

and groups that you promised to bring forward the regulations, 

so that they can all judge for themselves.  They'd have further 

opportunity to judge this destructive piece of legislation, and 

that's why you don't want to do that.  I think you want to push 

through this piece of legislation prior to anyone knowing what 

all is involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's time for this government to be held 

accountable to the people it serves, to stop trying to arbitrarily 

run everything from the Co-op upgrader to the 7 Eleven corner 

store.  It's time for the NDP to start taking steps to create jobs, 

not to make them disappear.  And that's what will result from 

this legislation. 

 

I think you have, in your own minds, honourable intentions.  

Unfortunately I don't think you understand the reality of what 

business people in Saskatchewan face today and how they will 

react to this type of legislation. 

 

Have you considered that for a moment, about how people will 

react?  We just look at letters that we receive, like that business 

person from Kindersley, and they suggest that they will not be 

hiring part-time help as a result of this kind of legislation. 

 

It's time, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite stopped their 

big-government mentality and start listening to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, Bill 32 is 

a mess, and the minister knows it.  It's a complete mess.  And 

right now the only way to clean up this mess is to listen to 

groups like SUMA and SARM and SAHO and others who say 

Bill 32 should be pulled in order so that it can be tightened up, 

in order to provide proper consultation, which hasn't been 

provided so far. 

 

They say it shouldn't even be introduced until 1995, to allow 

groups all over the province to have opportunity to have input 

into the legislation.  The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, Mr. Speaker, employ over 40,000 people in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And yet this government is 

unwilling to listen to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I have mentioned, members of the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce employ thousands of people in Saskatchewan.  

It's probably very safe to say that they represent more than 

100,000 people in Saskatchewan.  And the government won't 

listen to the chamber of commerce either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then there's the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 

Mr. Speaker, who employ between 17 and 18,000 individuals 

as well, and the government isn't listening to them either. 

 

So roughly, organizations that represent over 50 per cent -- 

over 50 per cent of Saskatchewan's workforce, Mr. Speaker -- 

not including unions who are against this legislation as well, in 

some regards, and the NDP 

still keeps pushing and pushing and pushing this legislation 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last time I checked, over 50 per cent 

represents a majority in a democracy, so where is this minister's 

so-called silent majority -- so-called silent majority? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add my voice with the official 

opposition to SUMA, to SARM, to the SSTA, to the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and others who want 

this piece of legislation pulled.  I'd like to urge the NDP 

government to listen to the people in Saskatchewan for once, to 

pull this legislation and take the proper time to consult and to 

redraft this legislation before it is given any further 

consideration in this Assembly. 

 

It is imperative that the government listen, Mr. Speaker, 

because if they don't, jobs will be lost and students, single 

parents, and seniors will be hurt, Mr. Speaker -- the very people 

the NDP claim to want to help will see many of their jobs 

disappear. 

 

Considering the number of people on welfare in this province 

equals the population of communities like Estevan, 

Lloydminster, Melfort, Melville, North Battleford, Swift 

Current, Weyburn, Yorkton combined -- all of them combined, 

Mr. Speaker -- 8 out of 12 of Saskatchewan cities, the creation 

of jobs should be the number one priority of this government, 

not pushing through legislation that is going to make part-time 

jobs disappear. 

 

Considering the fact that there are 12,000 less jobs right now 

than when the NDP were elected, I'd say the advice of all of 

those groups like SAHO, SUMA, SARM, SSTA, the official 

opposition, should be heeded.  Mr. Speaker, it's time that the 

government realized that there are people out -- and lots of 

people -- out there, that do not support this kind of legislation.  

They don't support it because they understand the implications 

of it. 

 

And I don't think the government does understand the 

implications of it, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think they understand 

that there could be job losses as a result of this legislation.  

They won't simply take the opportunity to talk to these people.  

I can't understand why that would be the case. 

 

Why doesn't this government want to take the time to consult 

with groups like SUMA, and SARM, and SAHO, SSTA?  They 

consulted with groups like SAHO when SAHO was in 

agreement with them on something.  The moment anyone 

opposes this government, they all of a sudden become the 

radical fringe, as they call it, as the . . . extremists, like the 

Minister of Labour called groups like SAHO, SUMA, and 

SARM. 

 

Those groups, Mr. Minister, are not extremists.  Those groups 

represent people all over Saskatchewan.  Those people within 

those groups represent people all over Saskatchewan, people 

who are in large number in elected positions, on city councils, 

town councils, 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

and urban municipality councils, and rural municipality 

councils, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's those groups I think that the government, 

any government, should be willing to listen to, should be 

willing to consult with when they bring . . . prior to bringing 

forward any kind of legislation like this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, as I said earlier, was 

very, very poorly drafted.  They didn't take the opportunity to 

consult with the people of Saskatchewan.  They do not have the 

support of the majority of Saskatchewan workers or 

Saskatchewan businesses, as they claim to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And because of that I believe that this legislation -- and I agree 

with groups like SUMA, SARM, and SAHO, and the SSTA -- 

should be pulled and should be redrafted and tightened up and 

not be reintroduced for at least a year, to give people adequate 

time to have the proper kinds of consultation with the 

government that there should have been prior to the bringing 

forward of this legislation. 

 

And in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, when you see people, 

unsolicited, bringing forward resolutions, like the town of 

Kindersley, in regard to this legislation, and business people, 

small-business people -- very small-business people with one 

or two, three, four employees -- bringing forward 

correspondence to us, sending us correspondence suggesting 

this legislation is not the right kind of legislation for the 

environment of Saskatchewan today and for the business 

climate of Saskatchewan today, I certainly cannot see how a 

government can proceed with that kind of legislation. 

 

I believe that the minister should withdraw this legislation.  

And I think that the majority of people in Saskatchewan agree 

with me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know that other 

members wish to enter into the debate today, but I do wish to 

make a few comments.  As my colleagues have most ably 

pointed out to you, Mr. Speaker, particularly the member from 

Maple Creek -- the member responsible for labour issues in the 

official opposition -- that there is no question all around the 

province of Saskatchewan there's a tremendous feeling of 

let-down by people who thought that the rhetoric of this 

government was true and honest. 

 

If you remember back to 1991, there was a lot of criticism of 

the former administration because they supposedly didn't 

consult with people in enough areas before they went ahead 

with legislative agendas -- legislative agendas that 

fundamentally affected the lives of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And you and I can both remember a number of areas where 

there were very substantive and major changes occurring in our 

society.  And I think back to the debate surrounding the 

privatization of the Potash Corporation, for instance, when 

many members of the Assembly took the opportunity to speak 

at almost 

inordinate amounts of time, Mr. Speaker, about that 

fundamental shift.  And there was a lot of criticism that those 

types of shifts should not occur in our society without people 

being consulted first. 

 

So now we've arrived in 1994 with Bill 32.  And the assertion 

by the member,  the minister responsible for Labour in the 

NDP government, that he has embarked on a year and a half 

consultation with Saskatchewan people and the result of which 

is the necessitated changes. 

 

And as my colleague from Maple Creek and my colleague from 

Kindersley and other colleagues have pointed out to this 

Assembly and to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, is 

that there is an overwhelming reaction by people in all walks of 

life against this legislation, absolutely overwhelming. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a list of faxes that have come into my 

office that virtually cover the length and breadth of this 

province.  They are from business groups; they are from towns 

and villages; they are from tourism associations; they are from 

regional tourism authorities.  They in fact, Mr. Speaker, cover 

every segment of society in this province -- anyone that has 

anything to do with employing people -- SUMA, SARM, 

health organizations, and it just goes on and on. 

 

It amazes me, Mr. Speaker, that a person supposedly could go 

around this province for that amount of time, supposedly in a 

listening mode -- not a speaking mode but a listening mode -- 

and not pick up on this. 

 

I don't know if it says something about the attitude of the 

government, Mr. Speaker, or if it simply is the particular 

agency and department involved.  But I just find it really 

strange, Mr. Speaker, in a province that today boasts one of the 

highest percentages of its population in Canadian 

Confederation that are on welfare rolls; that has had a 

continuing exodus of young people and skilled individuals out 

of the province; that today has almost nothing going on in the 

way of economic development in the entire province; that that 

type of a government you would think would want to listen 

more than they would speak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because obviously there is a crying need out there for 

Saskatchewan to fit better into the Canadian Confederation 

than what it's doing.  I mean here we are almost on a daily basis 

listening to the government opposite say that they are being 

short-changed by Confederation; that all of the woes that this 

government faces in life are always somebody else's problem.  

They are always somebody else's creation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I see before me in this pile of faxes and in another 

pile of newspaper editorials that I have here, is that this is a 

problem of their own making; that the ultimate responsibility 

for these changes lies squarely with this NDP government and 

with some of the people that obviously have more say in these 

matters than this large spectrum of Saskatchewan people who 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

are the major employers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I had one individual from a chamber of commerce meeting, Mr. 

Speaker, in a city in our province, tell me that the minister 

came out to speak one morning on this issue and gave them a 

long dissertation on American labour law in the 1930s and how 

the democratic government of the late Franklin Delano 

Roosevelt made some major changes in labour legislation at 

that time which helped American society rebuild itself from the 

Depression.  And I think all of us that understand history 

recognize the fact that that took place. 

 

But what the people went for that morning to breakfast, Mr. 

Speaker, was to understand how Saskatchewan in the 1990s, 

going into the next century, would fit into the North American 

trade concepts, how we would fit into the matrix that is rapidly 

developing around the world about how countries and people 

communicate with each other, how they trade with each other, 

how they share education, how they share science and 

technology, and how they reach out and do different things than 

they had in the past. 

 

(1630) 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that is the disappointment that 

people in this province are finding today with what they see 

before us, is that obviously the agenda was pre-set, that this 

whole exercise that Saskatchewan people had to go through 

with this minister and this government was a pre-set agenda 

that quite frankly could have been dealt with months ago, 

because ultimately the concerns have not been addressed.  The 

concerns haven't been listened to. 

 

These people have simply forged ahead, as they have so, and so 

wantonly to do in this Legislative Assembly, whether it be 

taking away the constitutional and court rights of individuals, 

groups.  But they have simply forged ahead because the 

political agenda ultimately always speaks louder, always 

speaks louder than does the reality, Mr. Speaker, of people in 

the province. 

 

For example, the requirements to reimburse employees for 

cancelled holidays, the improved maternity benefits, the 

extension of funeral leave to the death of grandparents, all of 

these things, Mr. Speaker, can easily be seen as progressive 

steps by most people in our society.  And they are the type of 

things that I think everyone out there, Mr. Speaker, if they had 

been put in the proper context, would agree with. 

 

But instead those things have been mixed in with a whole 

menagerie of other agenda items, other agenda items, Mr. 

Speaker.  And you've heard my colleagues talk about them 

sector by sector by sector -- items that quite frankly put 

Saskatchewan out of step with the world that we live in; out of 

step with the Manitoba's and the Alberta's and the British 

Columbia's and the Montana's and the North Dakota's and the 

Minnesota's, the whole world that we deal with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I mean here we have the Deputy Premier of our province going 

off down East to a conference to talk about the reduction and 

removal of interprovincial trade barriers, so that Saskatchewan 

can naturally seek out market-places, areas of expertise, so that 

we aren't hemmed in by some of the constraints that we have 

seen in the past in Canadian Confederation, so that our 

relatively small, industrious population here can do some of the 

things that it does very well and we won't be penalized by 

others for doing those things well; that we'll find our place in 

Canadian Confederation and by doing so will strengthen our 

dealings with people in the Pacific Rim, with people in the 

United States, people in Mexico -- that we will strengthen the 

very fundamental of our society here. 

 

And instead we have a government bringing in legislation, 

legislation that will put Saskatchewan out of step with everyone 

else.  I mean I have seen comparison after comparison of the 

labour standards legislation in this province and other areas 

dealing with how working people are treated, and you stack 

that up against others, and you know what, Mr. Speaker?  In 

almost all the cases we're either first or second -- and first in a 

lot of areas.  Because just like health care, Mr. Speaker, no 

matter what the stripe of government in this province, no matter 

what the stripe, if anything people have tried to err on the side 

of the people, i.e., spent large sums of money to ensure that 

people were protected rather than the other way.  And that has 

been the tradition in this province, Mr. Speaker.  It has been the 

tradition. 

 

So I really wonder, Mr. Speaker, why do we take these steps 

when we have over 81,000 of our people on welfare, when we 

have young people continuing to flow out of our province, 

when our agricultural community is still under severe pressure 

in world commodity markets; why we come forward to try and 

drive ourselves so far out in front of the pack that we don't 

know where we're going. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, if there were a half a dozen projects going 

on around this province and there was empty union halls, as 

there was a few years ago when we had to import tradesmen 

into this province because we could not fill all of the job 

placements either in western Canada, it would be different for 

them to talk about these things, because those people would be 

employed, they'd be paying income tax, and our economy 

would have the opportunity to piggyback on the recovery of the 

North American economy.  But no, we don't have that 

situation, Mr. Speaker.  We don't have it going on anywhere in 

this province at all. 

 

And we can talk about Ag 2000, and we can talk about this 

blueprint of cooperation with the business community that's 

supposedly there.  But quite simply, Mr. Speaker, the jobs 

aren't there.  We see no evidence that there are going to be 

significantly more numbers of taxpayers.  We don't see any 

evidence that Saskatchewan's economy is going to take 

advantage of the changes that are going on around us. 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

Instead we have this sort of hope-and-pray attitude that 

agricultural prices will go up.  The Minister of Agriculture 

reminds of us of it all the time, that the price of canola's gone 

up -- whoop-de-do.  It can go down just as fast next year.  The 

price of durum wheat can go down just as fast as it came up 

this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now the industrial sector in particular of our province, 

which has always had to fight and scrimp and scrounge to find 

its way to the market-place, is going to find itself now even 

under more pressure because they quite simply will be 

uncompetitive. 

 

The issues, Mr. Speaker, that this legislature should have been 

dealing with, the concerns of people -- the part-timers who are 

having trouble collecting their wages; the people who can't get 

leave for bereavement -- those issues could have been dealt 

with in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, in very short 

order. 

 

But in effect, what we have seen this government do is bump 

every last contract in this province upwards.  Contracts that 

were bargained for, I remind people, shifting that was 

bargained for; ways that people go to work that were bargained 

for, to help out the very people whose jobs are at stake.  And 

now this government has the audacity to come in and 

effectively bump every one of those contracts upwards, and 

throw the whole collective bargaining process out of whack.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is not good legislation. 

 

You can go through it sector by sector by sector where you will 

see agreements that people have arrived at after years of 

negotiation, and in some cases strike action, being dramatically 

changed because of what the government's proposing.  And the 

Minister of Labour says, oh, no, that's not the case. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if he had been listening, if he had been 

listening, then the piles of faxes that were coming into my 

office and his on a daily basis wouldn't be arriving.  You 

wouldn't have every major public sector and private sector 

group in this province talking about this legislation in the way 

they are if they had been listening. 

 

The minister talks about $14.2 million a year being small 

potatoes. This is from the Leader-Post of March 17.  Well if it 

was only $14.2 million, Mr. Speaker, we might give the 

minister the benefit of the doubt.  And that's a lot of money to 

all of us, especially in today's province where everyone's 

finding a tough time. 

 

But the simple fact is that in one sector alone -- and that being 

the hospitality industry, and particularly the restaurant trade in 

this province -- they alone just about, Mr. Speaker, can make 

up these kind of numbers.  And when you look at the potential 

lay-offs, the people in this province that are going to have no 

choice but to join those already swollen, bloated welfare rolls 

because the hospitality industry can no longer employ them 

because of these legislative 

changes, then I say to you the minister's quoted "small 

potatoes" are going to be one great big potato, Mr. Speaker; 

one great big potato that's going to land on the head of 

hundreds and hundreds of people around this province.  That's 

going to be one headache, Mr. Speaker, that they aren't going to 

be able to live with. 

 

So it seems logical to me that the minister would want to 

re-evaluate.  He'd want to listen to all of these people that he 

supposedly consulted with and he would want to re-evaluate 

and think about how he could do things a little bit better.  And 

if that means going around this province and going to every last 

chamber meeting and Rotary Club meeting and wherever he 

can find an audience to sit down and listen and not talk about 

American labour legislation in the 1930s or British industrial 

law from the 1830s, as he is wont to do, I think he would find 

the true reality of what is going on in this province.  And he 

would understand that people in this province want to use their 

God-given talents to do what they do best, and that means they 

have to be competitive. 

 

It doesn't mean, Mr. Speaker, that they have no heart, no soul, 

no compassion, but it means that they want to go out and 

compete.  There is no way the member from Maple Creek 

could have stood in this Assembly for three and a half hours the 

other day and gone through it letter by letter, area by area, if it 

wasn't true, Mr. Speaker -- if it wasn't true. 

 

The longer this debate goes on, Mr. Speaker, the more people 

are coming to the fore and they're doing their cost benefit 

analysis both in economic terms and in human terms, Mr. 

Speaker.  And when they put those two together, they're finding 

that there is a loss on both sides.  On the economic side of the 

ledger, they lose their competitive edge.  And on the human 

side of the ledger, not one more employee in the province of 

Saskatchewan because of this legislation, but the reality is 

probably hundreds if not thousands fewer employees. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, why would you want to be the 

minister responsible for the Department of Labour and bring in 

a piece of legislation that effectively reduces the size of the 

workforce.  Now if that isn't a contradiction, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't know what one is. 

 

I mean we had the spectre the other day raised in this House, 

where the projections made by the Finance minister for job 

growth this year in the province, instead of working toward the 

5,000 that she projected, it's actually going the other way.  The 

first three months of this year we're in a deficit of 2,000 

placements instead of going the other way. 

 

Now the various ministers stand up and say, well in this sector 

or that sector there's a little more employment here or there.  

But the numbers don't lie, Mr. Speaker.  The numbers don't lie.  

There's 12,000 less people working in this province today than 

there was in 1991 -- 12,000 taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, 12,000. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

Nowhere in the minister's second reading speech, or in 

anything I've seen in the media, or his conversations with 

groups around this province, have I seen where the minister can 

indicate one more employee because of this legislation - 

_ one. 

 

I mean there are a lot of groups in this province, a lot of towns, 

a lot of cities, that would say yes, I'll back you, Mr. Minister, 

because you're showing me some more employment.  But 

nowhere has the minister shown us where he is not going to 

have anything but net losses, sector by sector by sector, 

because of this legislation. 

 

It will be interesting in committee, Mr. Speaker, for the 

minister to bring his consultation process forward to this House 

where he can show the various groups who are expressing 

concern with him, where they are going to have a net gain in 

employment.  Because I don't believe the minister can show us 

that.  I honestly believe he can't. 

 

(1645) 

 

If the minister has the courage, he'll probably show us, Mr. 

Speaker, he'll probably show us some net losses.  And I hope 

he has the courage to tell us the truth, Mr. Speaker, the truth 

about those net losses.  Because then he will be delivering to 

Saskatchewan people the straight goods on this legislation. 

 

I haven't had a chance, Mr. Speaker, to look at the piece that 

was introduced today.  But I suspect that when you tack that 

one on top of what we've already seen here, that it's going to be 

even worse.  Just what people are telling me about the changes 

that the member from Regina Churchill Downs, just the 

changes that the minister is proposing for the Labour Relations 

Board, Mr. Speaker, I suspect will mean that we will see even 

fewer employees.  Because from what I'm told, it's going to 

make situations like the Woolco employees in my home city of 

Moose Jaw even more uncomfortable than what they are today 

with where the government's heading. 

 

I've got a packing plant in my community, Mr. Speaker, that's 

been shut down now for approximately a year and a half.  The 

entire boxed beef industry in this province, of which there was 

a significant one in the city of Moose Jaw, tied to the old 

Canada Packers plant, the entire boxed beef industry has 

shifted to Alberta. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, in this province, if you're a farmer and 

you've got a cow that loses a calf and you decide to can her, 

you can't find a place hardly in this province that'll kill her.  

You've got to ship her off to Alberta.  And by the time you pay 

the freight, Mr. Speaker, by the time you pay the freight, it isn't 

worth sending her. 

 

But it used to be that she went into the Moose Jaw plant and 

into the boxed beef process and we supplied a half a dozen 

major chain restaurants in this province with steaks and various 

kinds of cuts because it was economical and you could 

compete. 

Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in this legislation or in the 

legislation proposed today that's going to open that packing 

plant up, that's going to put that assembly line in place again, 

and the 30 to 40 people that used to work in the boxed beef 

industry in this province back on their jobs. 

 

And I'll be interested if the minister can point that out, how 

those people are going to come back on those jobs and go back 

to work.  And, Mr. Speaker, the minimum wage in that plant, as 

I understand it, was about ten and a half dollars an hour.  And 

those people contributed to their community.  Instead of 

bringing in legislation that would help solve those situations so 

that the boxed beef industry in this province thrives, the 

minister brings in legislation that almost ensures, Mr. Speaker, 

that it will never occur again. 

 

This from a government that was going to create more jobs in 

agriculture, that was going to use the largest industry in the 

province of Saskatchewan to build on -- a building block.  It's 

Ag 2000. It talks about red meat, red meat, red meat, all the 

way through, but when they have opportunities to make the 

red-meat sector grow and employ people in this province, what 

did they do?  They bring in legislation that ensures that it will 

never grow. 

 

Those are fundamental choices, Mr. Speaker.  And you can't 

tell me, in this consultation process that the Minister of Labour, 

the member from Churchill Downs supposedly entered into, 

that somebody didn't come forward and tell them that -- that 

there is a major problem in the red-meat industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I only use that as an example because it's 

close to home and it means a lot to my community.  There are a 

lot of farm families dependent on that packing plant as a second 

income that paid the mortgage, that helped them keep farming.  

Without the packing plant there, Mr. Speaker, they can't 

necessarily keep farming. 

 

And then they have choices, Mr. Speaker.  They have choices.  

They either enter into the welfare rolls of this province or they 

leave, because the opportunities aren't there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what legislation is all about.  It's helping 

people; it's creating opportunity; it's creating employment, not 

driving it away, Mr. Speaker, not driving it out of the province. 

 

The tourism industry, Mr. Speaker, identified as one of the 

potential growth areas.  Large areas of our province that are 

still virtually unspoiled -- clear water, clear skies, no smog, 

industrious people.  Most places in the world that have those 

things sell it and they sell it hard, Mr. Speaker, and they make 

good money off tourism. 

 

I met with some of the board members from TISASK (Tourism 

Industry Association of Saskatchewan) the other day, and I 

know what they told the minister about this legislation.  The 

whole entire Saskatchewan tourism industry said you're going 

to be a net loser on jobs, that the opportunities that are out there 

for 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

Saskatchewan people in hunting and fishing, family farm 

vacations, showing the best of our province off to the outside 

world, are telling the minister there will be a net loss.  And 

because there's a net loss there will be a loss in profit and there 

will be lost opportunities because we aren't in the ball game 

any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they told the minister that; they told the Premier that; they 

told the Minister of Economic Development that.  And yet this 

legislation proceeds a  piece with no indication that the 

government is ready to shelve it and go back and relearn and 

restudy, and most of all listen to the folks that provide the 

employment in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's an absolute travesty that this minister and this 

government would say to people, particularly part-timers in this 

province, that we aren't going to allow you, we aren't going to 

allow you to design your workplace at all.  We're going to 

design it for you.  And you will have no opportunity except to 

follow the rule from on high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a lot of these industries, people work in them 

for various reasons.  Number one, people like to work around 

their children's activities.  There are many, many people in our 

province that choose to work certain types of shifts at certain 

times of the day, so that they can be there with their children in 

the morning and again when they come home from school. 

 

Those changes, Mr. Speaker, were worked out in many cases 

business by business, occupation by occupation, because 

people value their time with their children.  You will often see 

couples who are both working, designing their workload 

around the fact that when one is out of the home, the other one 

is in, so that they can be with their children.  The necessity for 

two-income families is there; and they by choice, Mr. Speaker, 

work with their employer to make sure that those quality hours 

and days are spent with their children. 

 

That's probably the number one reason, Mr. Speaker.  Does this 

government recognize that?  No.  They are going to dictate how 

those workplaces are organized, Mr. Speaker, so that those 

people will not have that opportunity, so people will simply 

back out of the workforce. 

 

The other thing that it does, Mr. Speaker, because so many 

Saskatchewan people are multi-talented, is that I believe the 

minister is actually helping out the underground economy.  

There are a lot of numbers coming forward today showing that 

because of the oppressive tax regime of the Canadian 

government and provincial governments, particularly this one, 

that a lot of people are working for cash.  They say, rather than 

put up with the hassles imposed on me with taxes and utility 

rates and now goofy labour standards laws, I'm simply going to 

work, and I'll take cash, and I will manage my time because the 

government won't allow me to. 

Mr. Speaker, that is all backwards from the way it should be.  

You should have people being able to work in their society and 

working out arrangements that allow them to be productive, 

and part and parcel of the workforce and paying taxes rather 

than doing everything they can to avoid it. 

 

And that is the reality of what the minister presents to this 

province.  Do you think for a minute, Mr. Speaker, that those 

81,000-plus on welfare are going to be thrilled with what the 

minister brings forward; that their hope of getting off of the 

social welfare roll has changed?  No. Because the minister will 

hamstring the employer to the point where he cannot work and 

design programs with these people.  That is reality of this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. That is reality. That is why so many, 

so many in this province, Mr. Speaker, band together and 

oppose. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I was flabbergasted the other day 

when SUMA and SARM and SAHO all came in at one time 

and said, we have very serious concerns with what this NDP 

government is proposing.  The whole spectrum of public sector 

employment in this province, the real big ones, the urban and 

rural municipal councils, and our health area, Mr. Speaker, 

came in and they said to the minister, this is wrong. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, they had to come down to the offices of 

the official opposition because obviously people weren't 

listening.  And the minister says, well don't worry about it, 

don't worry about it; let's get this piece of legislation passed 

and then we'll go out and we'll design some regulations; we'll 

design some regulations that can be changed by cabinet -- 

nothing to do with this Legislative Assembly here -- that we'll 

simply do by OC (order in council) what we think is right to 

change the workplace. 

 

And the folks that represent 50,000 public sector employees 

said: thanks, but no thanks.  You expect me to go out and set 

mill rates, to plan, to set in place agendas, and then you are 

going to change by OC and I'm expected to live with the whims 

and vagaries of cabinet decisions.  They want, Mr. Speaker, the 

right of this Legislative Assembly to view all aspects of this 

legislation. 

 

And the minister . . . the member from Maple Creek asked the 

minister the other day, he said, come on, bring in those 

regulations, put them in this House; let's have a look at them 

and we'll talk about it.  And we could have been in committee 

last week, Mr. Speaker.  The minister can do it at any time.  He 

can bring those regulations into this House; he can pass them 

across; we can all take a look at them; we can sit down and we 

can talk about it, and we can say what's right or wrong here. 

 

And the folks that sent all of these faxes in can also take a look 

at them and say: yes, no, maybe.  But the minister says no, trust 

me.  Trust me.  Well they trusted him for 16 long months, Mr. 

Speaker, when he went around this province and totally 

consulted with them.  He was saying, trust me. 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

And what do they get at the end of the protest, Mr. Speaker?  

Do they get trust?  No, they get absolute betrayal by the 

Minister of Labour.  That's what they get, absolute betrayal.  

Absolute betrayal. 

 

It's not too late, Mr. Speaker, for this minister to stop the 

process.  I mean why would he want to bring into this 

legislature, into committee, this legislation, when we know at 

the end of the day we're not seeing all the goods. 

 

We can have the legislation in front of us; at the end of the day 

the minister can do whatever he wants in regulations.  Sector 

by sector, group by group he'll cherry pick his way through 

there because there's other folks in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

that do have an agenda.  And they seem to have the minister's 

ear. 

 

Now I don't know how you get that ear, Mr. Speaker -- there's 

lots of people in the province trying to figure that out.  I don't 

know whether it's the door-knockers for the NDP Party or if it's 

other considerations, boards, commissions, I don't know -- 

they're pretty good at that type of thing, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

that's where it is, but there's some people in this province seem 

to have that minister's ear. 

 

It's not the people that employ 50,000 public sector employees, 

it's not the tourism industry, it's not agriculture, it's not the 

industrial base, it's not the people down at Sears.  I don't know 

who it is exactly, Mr. Speaker, but they're obviously . . . 

somebody has the minister's ear. 

 

Maybe they should send in some faxes and explain to us why 

they have the minister's ear, why the minister would carry out 

this charade for 16 months, Mr. Speaker, and tell us he 

consulted and at the end of the day there's no evidence of 

consultation anywhere.  That's the question that has to be 

answered, Mr. Speaker.  That is the question that has to be 

answered and that this minister has to answer it.  Why 

Saskatchewan people have been put through this process at this 

time by this minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this 

House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


