




















































Hansard: April 15, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1579 

 April 15, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

my pleasure this morning to present petitions once again on 

behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, and I'll just read the prayer 

into the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from communities of 

Lemberg, Saskatchewan; Duff; Lemberg; Abernethy; Neudorf; 

Marsden; obviously communities all over the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I do present these petitions today. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 

dealing with the high cost of removing and digging up storage 

tanks in the province and I won't read the prayer, but I will just 

indicate that there are people here from Gerald, Saskatchewan; 

Carrot River; Abrorfield; Tisdale, Aylsham, Waldheim, Carrot 

River, Success, and areas throughout the province, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I want to lay these on the Table on behalf of 

these people. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I have a number of petitioners here, also 

dealing with the Workers' Compensation, Occupational Health 

and Safety Act.  And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, these come largely from areas in the province in 

my area of Laird, many from Waldheim, Rosthern, and 

Martensville, along with some from Grandora, Liberty, and 

pages from the area of Yorkton, and Viscount as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it is my pleasure to table them this morning. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present this morning: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Gainsborough, Carievale, 

Storthoaks, Estevan, Marshall, Luseland, Meadow Lake, 

Dorintosh, Pierceland, Glaslyn, Beauval, Wilkie, Saskatoon.  

Mr. Speaker, I present them now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

have several petitions I'd like to lay on the Table on behalf of 

the people.  And as the prayer has been read, I will not read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These petitions come from various municipalities and towns 

across the province -- Luseland, Major, we go to Unity, 

Saltcoats, Bredenbury, Martensville, Maple Creek, Stornoway, 

Langenburg, Rokeby.  Mr. Speaker, they seem to cover the 

whole province.  And it's my pleasure to lay these on the Table 

on behalf of those people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a number of 

petitions I would like to present to the floor of this Assembly.  

And the petitions read along the lines of the other petitions that 

have already been presented regarding the underground tanks 

and the problems associated with them, and they call for the 

government to reconsider. 

 

And they're signed by individuals from the communities of 

Wapella, Tantallon, and Whitewood in my constituency -- and 

a number of people have taken the time to sign them in these 

communities -- the community of Weyburn, the communities 

of Weyburn and Estevan, Canora, Yorkton, Kamsack, Pelly, 

Sturgis, Buchanan.  I so present them to the House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

with regard to underground storage tanks and the cost of 

digging them up and the useless . . . 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows that 

he cannot make those comments on presenting petitions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it deals 

with the underground storage tanks issue that I'm sure all the 

members are familiar with. 

 

And they are from . . . they are presented on behalf of people 

from the Spalding-Weyburn area of Saskatchewan.  I'm pleased 

to be able to present them on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of Saskatchewan praying that the Assembly urge 

the government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

distinct pleasure for me to get on my feet again and introduce 

to you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, 40 

cadets.  They're sitting in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a lot of these are . . . they are out of North Battleford, I 

understand, but a lot of them are from my constituency.  They 

range in age from 12 to 15 years.  Mr. Speaker, I'll be meeting 

later with this group and we'll have a visit and probably have 

some pictures taken. 

 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Joan Frey, and 

chaperons, Michael Curtis and Wayne Stephens.  And we'll be 

having a visit in room 255 later on. 

 

Now I would ask members present to give a rousing welcome 

to these people who have come quite a distance to visit with us 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

great pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you, to 

my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, 14 grade 12 

students from Bert Fox Composite School in Fort Qu'Appelle.  

They are accompanied by their teacher, Richard Rathgaber. 

 

And Fort Qu'Appelle is always a very special place to visit; I 

love to go there.  So I'm delighted to welcome them here today.  

And I would ask all my colleagues to join me in giving them a 

warm welcome to this Assembly and to Regina.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you 

and through you, to the House I would like to introduce two 

guests up in your gallery -- Ruth Linka and Cheryl Grzeda who 

are here today to observe one of our pages in operation.  And I 

would like to ask the House to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

two guests from my constituency.  In your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, we have the Mayor of Creighton, Mr. Richard 

Carnegie.  Mr. Carnegie has been involved in many activities in 

relation to northern development and continues to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce my office manager, 

the person that has kept me out of trouble, that has solved many 

specific issues from the people in northern Saskatchewan.  My 

office manager, Cec Allen. 

 

And I would like all members to welcome them to the House, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Esterhazy Health and Wellness Expo 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today and 

tomorrow the great Esterhazy health, wellness, and fitness expo 

will be held, an event sponsored jointly by IMC (International 

Minerals and Chemicals Corporation) Canada, the North 

Valley Health District, the local medical community, the town 

of Esterhazy, and the Potashville School Division.  The 

honorary chairperson for the event is our Minister of Health 

who will be participating in this function later today. 

 

This is an exciting and innovative way to promote wellness, 

Mr. Speaker.  There will be hands-on exhibits encouraging 

public participation.  There will be a fat-free cooking 

demonstration, fitness demonstrations, aerobics for people 

other than myself, and many other demonstrations -- 35 

exhibits, plus seminars and speakers like Dave Ridgway and 

Gainer the Gopher. 

 

There is also the great elevator weigh-in in which 10 members 

went to the local elevator to be weighed in, then returned four 

weeks later to be weighed again.  The team losing the most 

weight will win a cash price.  More importantly, one-half of the 

team entry of $50 goes to the Heart and Stroke Foundation.  

There were 47 such teams -- almost 500 people -- participating 

in that event itself. 

 

The expo is an outstanding example of the community working 

together in harmony to promote health, wellness, and fitness.  

Our health is our responsibility; our wellness is the result of our 

actions.  This educational and fun-filled two days will make us 

more aware of those facts. 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

Congratulations to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teachers Honoured by Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Today I would like to recognize two 

outstanding educators who were recently honoured by the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation.  Verda Petry of Regina 

and Gordon Merryfield of Watrous were both named honorary 

life members of the federation. 

 

Verda Petry, who was orginally from Melfort, enjoyed a 

teaching career that spanned over 42 years. 

 

Her strong involvement in the community gained Verda Petry 

much respect.  She has served with the STF (Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation) on various committees, including 

president of the Regina Public School Teachers' Association 

and various other academic committees and services.  Verda 

Petry has also received many awards for her service, including 

the mathematics teachers' Master Teacher award, the Governor 

General of Canada 125 award for community services, and the 

Regina Public School Teachers' Association award for 

outstanding contributions.  Verda Petry is currently 

vice-chairperson of the Regina Public School Board. 

 

Gordon Merryfield was honoured for the time, commitment, 

talents, and leadership that he has provided to the teaching 

profession.  Gordon Merryfield's involvements with the STF 

started at the local level, as a councillor and vice-councillor.  

Provincially, he was an executive member, vice-president and 

president.  Nationally, he represented the federation of the . . . 

the Canadian Teachers' Federation board of directors.  And 

internationally, he was a delegate to two assemblies of the 

world conference of organization of the teaching profession 

and a member of the CUSO team teaching in Nigeria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both teachers deserve congratulations from this 

Assembly for their great accomplishments and for being 

recognized by their peers. 

 

Southwest Regional Economic Development Authority 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last night in 

Gull Lake the Minister for Economic Development and Mr. 

Corney Martens jointly announced Saskatchewan's third 

regional economic development authority.  The Southwest 

REDA (regional economic development authority) has nine 

founding members, with eight more expected to join soon.  

Communities like Gull Lake, Eastend, Maple Creek, Herbert, 

the R.M. (rural municipality) of Carmichael, and the city of 

Swift Current are members of the REDA.  We expect other 

RMs, communities and 

the Nekaneet First Nation to join soon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the REDA covers the largest geographic area of 

any REDA to date.  We do things big in the south-west part of 

the province, and our region is a diverse one, offering many 

strengths in tourism, agriculture and industry.  Because of our 

huge distances and sparse population, cooperation and working 

together is necessary to prosper.  We have this history of 

cooperation.  This announcement is further evidence of that 

tradition. 

 

As Mr. Martens said last night, there is already a history of 

regional teamwork and a commitment to economic 

development in this region.  This new organization will help 

focus our efforts and strengthen our ability to work together to 

build our own future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the minister and especially the 

members of the Southwest REDA.  This is a fine example of 

partnership in action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Milestone Recreation Complex Earns Award 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Each year the 

Saskatchewan Recreation Facility Association presents to a 

community the Cecil Nobes Facility Award of Excellence, an 

award for construction of a new facility where the unique or 

outstanding design contributes to the overall efficiency of the 

facility's operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce that last evening at the 

association's 12th annual awards program, the Milestone and 

district recreation complex was the proud winner.  The 

Milestone and district recreation complex consists of four main 

areas -- the arena with an ice surface measuring 87 feet by 190 

feet, four sheets of curling ice and two large waiting-rooms.  

The arena seats 800 people and an additional 300 people can be 

accommodated in the waiting-room. 

 

The building was started in November 1987 and as funds were 

obtained, construction progressed.  The building was officially 

opened to the public in April, 1992 when the Milestone Rodeo 

Association hosted its first indoor rodeo in the complex. 

 

The building lends itself to a multitude of uses from the 

traditional ice sports of hockey, figure skating and curling to 

many other functions, such as fowl suppers, rodeos, dances, 

craft/trade shows, high school grads.  There's a walking club, 

meetings, seminars, bridge tournaments and carnivals.  The 

only limiting factor in the use of the building is the imagination 

of the people in the community. 

 

The building committee and the people of Milestone and 

district are to be congratulated on winning the award and for 

seeing this major sports and recreation project through to 

completion.  A tremendous amount of fund-raising and work 

went into it.  Congratulations on a job well done. 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to SaskTel Operators 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  Last night I had a 

very pleasant experience.  I telephoned my wife from Lumsden, 

and we have a rotary dial on the phone at the farm so I couldn't 

punch in my calling card number and I must have misdialled.  

A voice came on the line and said: you have reached an 

operator; how can I help you? 

 

I was surprised and delighted to speak to a live human being 

and I told her so, and she giggled and thanked me.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, sir, have you ever had an answering machine that 

giggled?  I'm sure you haven't and neither have I.  And I was 

suddenly struck by the thought that what serves people best is 

other people. 

 

It pointed out to me, Mr. Speaker, that the strength of any 

country or any province or state, for that matter, lies in its 

people, and the joys of life consists in communicating with 

those people, sir, not machines.  And let us try and keep it that 

way. 

 

And please allow me the opportunity to thank those wonderful 

and helpful operators at SaskTel for all their hard work and 

kindnesses over the past -- people that we never meet, we never 

see, we only hear.  Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 

my colleague from Maple Creek asked the Minister of Labour 

about your amendments to The Labour Relations Act.  We've 

been informed by a human resource specialist that the 

definition of spouse as contained in the Act opens the door for 

spousal benefits to be extended to same-sex couples. 

 

Mr. Minister, an inquiry to the Department of Labour 

confirmed that suspicion, specifically the extension of 

bereavement, injury, and illness leave.  I understand that from 

media reports you have garnered a legal opinion from your 

department that differs from that of the Labour department and 

I'd ask if you would report to us your findings, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm glad to do that, Mr. Speaker. I've 

had an opportunity to look at this overnight.  I must say I 

couldn't make out what the member's question was in question 

period yesterday but he clarified it, he clarified it later . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I resent that, Mr. Speaker. I don't 

have to put up with that kind of nonsense across the floor. 

 

This was drafted by the Department of Justice and it was 

drafted in a way that the member need not be concerned.  The 

words used in the section 29.3 (1), will not extend any benefits 

at all to same-sex couples 

and that is the opinion of the Department of Justice and we're 

content with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again to the 

minister: Mr. Minister, as I indicated yesterday, you had given 

a strong defence of what the Human Rights Code meant and as 

we look over The Labour Standards Act we could find, Mr. 

Minister, that the way the wording is here it would appear to 

leave it wide open for any same-sex couple to come and 

suggest that they have that legal right.  And my major concern, 

Mr. Minister, is that it leaves it open. 

 

Now I think the easiest way to settle that issue, Mr. Minister, 

and the way to end the concern and the confusion would be to 

change the definition of a spouse to correspond with the federal 

tax definition, and that means including the phrase "of the 

opposite sex." 

 

I believe, Mr. Minister, this is a simple House amendment and 

we will all agree to it.  Will you commit to changing The 

Labour Relations Act to preclude expensive benefits to 

same-sex couples? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well in drafting statutes in 

Saskatchewan we strive for a certain amount of consistency.  

This is a definition that we've used in other Acts.  We think 

there is no question about the fact as to what is a spouse in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It has never, it has never been held, it has never been held and 

never been found and never been a matter of practice that 

same-sex couples are regarded as spouses.  I mean who among 

us has ever considered that same-sex couples would be 

spouses?  They are clearly not, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we're trying for some consistency across the piece here.  

This is the definition that has been in use in the past, and it's 

one whose meaning is perfectly clear.  And may I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that the member really has to distort the plain 

language of the amendment in order to come up with the idea 

that in some way it would extend benefits to same-sex couples.  

It simply does not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Contract 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are for the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, in March of last year SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation) launched an investigative 

audit into the operations of Trail-Rite in Tisdale.  What were 

the results of that investigative audit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, in 

March of '92, SEDCO accepted a bid 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

from . . . an offer from a group headed by a Dave Burton to 

purchase the assets of Trail-Rite. 

 

I want to say that the group was unable to raise the funds that 

were necessary to complete the deal.  And subsequent to that a 

second offer at a lower price was turned down by SEDCO.  

Certain conditions arose.  The receiver, Ward-Carney 

Management, was involved and an action was started and I 

believe is still under way. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand that as a result of the investigative audit, SEDCO 

fired three Trail-Rite employees.  Then in April of last year 

SEDCO launched a lawsuit against those same three 

employees.  The lawsuit alleged that the three employees had 

used their positions within Trail-Rite to direct business to two 

new companies they had set up. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the current status of that lawsuit and is it 

being pursued by SEDCO? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is that that action 

is under way at the present time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, shortly after this lawsuit was launched, SEDCO fired 

the receiver who had instigated the lawsuit.  Ward-Carney 

Management of Saskatoon was replaced by Price Waterhouse 

even though Ward-Carney had been doing a good job and had 

the company turning a profit for the first three years.  No 

reason was ever given for this change. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did SEDCO replace Trail-Rite's receiver?  

Did it have anything at all to do with the lawsuit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is that it had to 

do with the best operation of the company.  Management made 

the decision and the company has since come out of 

receivership, has been sold, and is doing very well in the 

community. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the three 

Trail-Rite employees who were fired and later sued by SEDCO 

are now part of the management team of a new company, 

Advanced Ag & Industrial Ltd. of Biggar.  This is the company 

owned and run by Jack Messer's son and who recently received 

a major SaskPower contract. 

 

Mr. Minister, in April 1993, your government sued these three 

individuals for unscrupulous business practices, for directing 

clients to their new companies.  By December 1993, your 

government awarded their new company, Advanced Ag & 

Industrial of Biggar, with a major SaskPower contract.  That's 

quite a change of attitude on the part of your government. 

 

Mr. Minister, why would you sue these three people in April 

and then turn around and award a new company with a major 

SaskPower contract in December?  What changed between 

April and December? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is I think 

drawing a long bow making the allegations that he is.  When it 

comes to the issue of the awarding of contracts by SaskPower, 

the minister of SaskPower will make comment, as he has told 

the Assembly, on that issue.  It's a completely, as I understand 

it, separate matter. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I don't 

think it's separate and neither does anyone else.  In fact I would 

suggest to you that three things happened between April and 

December of last year that contributed to your government's 

change of heart.  One, you fired the receiver that launched the 

lawsuit against the three employees; two, you replaced the 

president of SEDCO with your friend and political ally, Zach 

Douglas; and three, the people that you were suing went into 

business with Jack Messer's son.  This whole matter has 

political interference written all over it, and you know it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that Jack Messer used his considerable 

political influence to alter the government's course of action on 

this matter and ensure that his son's new company was well 

positioned to start receiving SaskPower contracts.  Is that not 

the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

assertions that the hon. member makes demand a detailed 

explanation.  And I do not have any knowledge of Jack Messer 

having the influence that you refer to in the House here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of question period I'll be tabling a set of 

documents.  These documents indicate that the SaskPower code 

of conduct does not exclude relatives of SaskPower officials 

from doing business with SaskPower.  According to an 

independent external legal counsel who has reviewed this 

matter, this contract does not appear to violate SaskPower's 

existing conflict of interest guidelines. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that's not good enough.  In business and 

contracting matters, this government is committed to ensuring 

that cabinet ministers, MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), public servants, and Crown corporations meet the 

highest standards of conduct and are seen to be doing so by the 

public.  This contract would not have been acceptable under the 

tougher guidelines that apply to ministers, MLAs, and senior 

public officials within executive government. 

 

I can report to the House that the government has therefore 

instructed the Crown Investments Corporation to immediately 

examine the feasibility of harmonizing conflict of interest 

guidelines for Crown corporation senior executives with the 

stricter guidelines that apply to senior public servants. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, while this contract does not appear to 

have violated existing guidelines and rules, it does concern me 

that the system did not understand 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

 that such a contract and the perception created by such a 

contract might be of potential concern for the public and should 

have been raised with the board of directors and/or myself.  

And I would table the documents at the end of question period, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, I'll direct my question to the minister responsible for 

SaskPower.  None of that is necessary, Mr. Minister.  All you 

have to do is follow the guidelines that are already in place. 

 

I have been able to obtain a copy of SaskPower's conflict of 

interest guidelines, even though SaskPower refused to provide 

them to our office.  They say, and I quote: 

 

 An employee must not, either himself or indirectly through 

family members, have a financial relationship with or derive 

a financial benefit from an individual or an organization 

doing business with SaskPower where such an employee is in 

a position to influence a decision within SaskPower 

pertaining to such an individual or organization. 

 

Mr. Minister, that means that if Jack Messer has any financial 

relationship whatsoever with his son Michael, he is in conflict 

of interest regardless of whether this contract was tendered or 

not. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is Jack Messer exempt from the rules that 

apply to all other SaskPower employees?  Why don't you do 

what is right and what the people of Saskatchewan want today, 

and dismiss that man? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- First off, Mr. Speaker, I want to make 

the point that Jack Messer's not exempt from any guidelines or 

code of conduct set by this government or the Crown 

corporations of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What the member asserts is that Jack Messer has a financial 

interest in the matters he raises before this House.  I find it very 

easy for that member in the immunity of this Assembly to be 

able to make those assertions. 

 

The documents that I will be tabling after question period point 

out quite clearly that there was not a financial interest involving 

Mr. Messer, who is president of SaskPower.  And either the 

member is trying to make gain on someone else's reputation, or 

else they are saying that the people who swore the affidavits are 

lying.  Either way, the member should stand outside this House 

and make those assertions publicly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the only 

person that seems to have immunity in this 

entire province is Jack Messer.  The only person that seems to 

be able to cancel things like co-generation, jack the power rates 

up to people in this province, collude people into selling their 

farm to him, is Jack Messer, Mr. Minister.  And it's you and 

your government that should be doing something about it. 

 

Will you stand up for the people of Saskatchewan and the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan and do what is right and get rid of 

this man before he creates any more problems in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- To my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, Jack 

Messer has done nothing wrong that would warrant his firing 

from the Crown corporation SaskPower.  If the member 

opposite has evidence to the contrary, I ask him to provide that 

evidence. 

 

He makes play on someone's reputation in the immunity of this 

Assembly.  I think that that is wrong, Mr. Speaker.  I think that 

is terribly wrong of the member opposite to do that. 

 

In the issue of co-generation, I take responsibility for the 

deferral of that project.  In the issue of the farm, Jack Messer 

never got 1 cent for that transaction, and the member clearly 

knows that. 

 

On the issue of rates, and finally, Mr. Speaker, I would point 

out, in 1992 the over a hundred million dollars that went from 

Crown corporations into the Crown Investments Corporation 

still wasn't enough to pay the debts left over by the Tory 

administration who put us into the terrible mess that we're 

experiencing there.  The Consolidated Fund still had to put in 

over $4 million to pay off the bad debts that that administration 

left behind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, the single most important aspect of government 

policy today is economic development and jobs.  If you talk to 

the average person in Saskatchewan who has a job, they're just 

happy to have it; and if you talk to someone who doesn't have a 

job, they just want to be working.  Yet your government has 

introduced a series a labour Bills which will limit new job 

creation. 

 

The proposed measures make it more costly to run a business, 

more time consuming to run a business, and more risky than 

ever to run a business.  Mr. Minister, what possible economic 

advantages do you believe this legislation creates for 

Saskatchewan?  What economic advantages, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would point out to the member 

opposite that there isn't any evidence that the 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

labour legislation is going to result in an economic decline, 

except in the fevered imagination of members opposite.  

Otherwise there is no evidence of it. 

 

It is our view, I say to the Liberals and Conservatives opposite 

who have opposed every single reform, beginning with the 

abolition of child labour, I say to members opposite, 

progressive labour legislation is an essential part of an 

economic restructuring.  And that's what this is. 

 

We are in the process of bringing this province to an economic 

restructuring which will mean we won't just survive in the '90s, 

we're going to thrive in the '90s.  If we're going to thrive in the 

'90s, we need to restructure the whole gamut, and that includes 

labour legislation.  I wouldn't expect members opposite to 

understand that any more than your ancestors could understand 

why child labour should be abolished. 

 

But I think the majority of the public who are much more 

reasonable, do understand the progressive labour legislation is a 

part of economic restructuring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- This question is for the Minister of 

Economic Development again. 

 

Obviously the partisan political forces that steer this 

government have decided that this must be a priority item on 

your agenda.  It's clear that somebody wants this on the 

government agenda as a priority.  However there can be no 

doubt about the tremendous negative implications this has for 

the economy. 

 

Can you name me one component, one partner in the renewal 

of the Saskatchewan economy who asked the government to 

take these drastic measures?  Was it the Premier's action 

committee on the economy, or SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), or the construction association, or 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, or the mining 

association?  Which of these organizations support the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say that there would be 

some thousands of people, working people from your 

constituency, madam, who very much support the changes that 

make good labour legislation in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- You may want to just go on the 

doorstep in Regina North West, having promised that you 

would deliver jobs and good labour legislation, which I know 

was part of the scenario laid out by the Liberal Party when they 

were campaigning to steelworkers and others, and explain to 

them how you today argue for poorer working conditions for 

working poor in this province under the labour standards at the 

same time as you argue for 24 per cent increase for judges. 

I would advise you that if you were to take the opportunity to 

go out and knock on doors today with the truth about your 

position, the 37 per cent increase for your leader, the 24 per 

cent increase for judges, and poorer working conditions for 

working people, you might be surprised at the attitude of the 

thousands of people who support the position that we're taking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, there are many in the North 

West constituency who have no jobs.  The Saskatchewan 

economy has been struggling over the past few years, but the 

level of labour unrest has been relatively minor.  Workers and 

employers alike are focused on the importance of keeping the 

doors open and keeping their jobs. 

 

At a time when business and labour are working together to 

remain productive and stabilize jobs, why would you introduce 

legislation that will create tension in the workplace?  What 

evidence do you have that business/labour relations are in such 

distress that this legislation is necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the member opposite that having poor labour law is not the 

panacea for having full employment.  I want you to compare 

the situation, for example, in third-world countries and other 

countries, where they have very poor labour law, and see 

whether or not the unemployment rate is doing well.  Even 

compare it to Liberal provinces in the Maritimes where the 

labour law is much less than it is in Saskatchewan; we find the 

unemployment rate is two or three times higher. 

 

The simple fact is that in Saskatchewan we have a tradition of 

good labour law.  The 1970s, when we had a government that 

believed in a good relationship between management and 

labour, we had good labour law and the unemployment rate 

was by far the lowest in Canada, as it is now. 

 

For you to attempt to raise the issue and put the wedge, as those 

members in the Conservative caucus did while they were in 

government, to try to put yourself in a better political position 

is old-style Ross Thatcher politics and one maybe shouldn't be 

surprised that the new Liberals are the same old Liberals they 

were in the 1960s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Welfare Abuse 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

two or three questions I'd like to ask the Minister of Social 

Services.  Mr. Minister, as you know there are over 81,000 

people on welfare in the province.  While this is mostly due to 

your dismal economic record, and probably you don't have to 

take the blame for it, but we do feel that this is also due in part 

to individuals abusing the system. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many millions of 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

dollars are paid out each year in welfare payments due to client 

abuse and mistakes in your own department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say that this 

government's attitude towards low income people and people 

on assistance is positive and proactive -- we're trying to find 

solutions to employment; we're having some successes -- rather 

than punitive, negative, and contradictory like theirs are, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can't have it both ways.  The member says in 

Hansard to me the other day, that people want a cheque from 

an employer and not the provincial government, yet at the same 

time he attacks low income people for getting a cheque through 

social assistance.  You can't have it both ways.  That's the 

lowest form of political politics that I have seen in this House. 

 

I'm going to send the member over, Mr. Speaker, a copy of an 

article; it's called "Cheating the Poor" and it talks about . . . it's 

from The Canadian Forum, April '94 and it talks about all 

welfare fraud in Canada doesn't add up to one case of tax 

evasion in B.C.(British Columbia).  I'm going to send that over 

to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

there is a reason why you won't answer the question and I'll tell 

you why it is.  According to the Provincial Auditor, you aren't 

even measuring the amount of abuse to your system.  The 

Provincial Auditor has confirmed that there is abuse in the 

welfare system, and Social Services should be working to bring 

this abuse under control.  Okay? 

 

The auditor said in 1985-86, Social Services started measuring 

department errors and welfare abuse for the first time.  They 

found a total error rate of 14 per cent, which was costing 

Saskatchewan taxpayers $27 million a year.  In 1991-92 the 

error rate had been reduced to 2 per cent and $4 million a year.  

That's a saving, Mr. Minister, of $23 million a year, simply by 

eliminating errors and abuse of the system.  Nothing to do with 

the people that needed the assistance -- nothing to do with them 

at all. 

 

Mr. Minister, when your government took office you 

immediately stopped monitoring the amount of overspending 

due to errors and abuse.  Why did you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have explained this 

to the member many times.  I sent him over a whole page of 

new controls that we put into place in the last year or so.  The 

member knows . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the auditor 

does believe us because that report ended March 1993. 

I told you before in this House that we have reintroduced a 

random sample verification process since the auditor's report.  

We've hired 30 new staff for verification of eligibility.  We've 

entered agreements with other western provinces in terms of 

verification so that people aren't getting duplicate assistance.  

In addition to that we've announced in the budget new legal 

family law positions to ensure that we're collecting 

maintenance. 

 

So we're working very closely with the auditor.  If you be 

honest about what that report says, the auditor is by and large 

very satisfied with our auditing controls.  And we have taken 

his recommendations and we have improved substantially some 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well that ends March 31, 1993. 

 

I gave you a copy of all the additional controls that we put into 

place in the last year.  But you're not interested in that.  You're 

interested in beating up on low income people. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the member from Rosthern 

please come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly the mayor of Creighton who is visiting Regina.  

Richard Carnegie is up in your gallery and I'd like all members 

to welcome him today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 -- An Act 

to amend The Trade Union Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's again a 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly and speak regarding Bill No. 

54, The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think as I take a few moments today to address 

some of the concerns and the issues that have been raised with 

our caucus by concerned individuals across this province 

ranging from business and employers and business groups and 

the community leaders, I think it's very important that we 

continue to remind people of the fact that this government's 

behaviour regarding the Labour Standards and Trade Union 

Act has been anything but open and reasonable, honest, and 

fair. 

 

The minister has continually stood in this Assembly and 

indicated that he and his colleagues have taken time to 

extensively sit down and visit with groups and numerous 

individuals across this province, and yet as we have seen with 

The Labour Standards Act . . . and I'd just like to raise a couple 

of concerns here. 

 

The one letter we received said: 

 

 Despite an expensive government ad campaign that says, 

we're listening, the business and employer community had no 

prior opportunity to review the detailed proposals contained 

in this legislation.  While Labour Minister Shillington and his 

deputy minister, Merran Proctor, held dozens of meetings 

over the past last few months, the department continued to be 

vague and elusive regarding the specific contents they had in 

mind. The mere act of meeting does not count as meaningful 

consultation if the department does not reveal its detailed 

intentions and does not really hear our legitimate concerns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say and read: 

 

 The business community has never asked for prior input on 

the design of a so-called cost impact study using highly 

questionable methods.  This cost impact study is nothing 

more than a clever smokescreen which continues to miss 

several key cost factors. 

 

And that was comments regarding The Labour Standards Act. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, as we get into The Trade Union Act, we 

find that the same concerns are raised.  That business leaders 

and community leaders across this province, while the minister 

would indicate to us that they have been in consultation, 

continue to tell us that they haven't seen any consultation.  

They haven't had the opportunity for real and meaningful 

consultation. 

 

The Minister of Labour may have met with a few people, but it 

seems that the most important people, or 

the people that he should have been listening to and meeting 

with, were never informed until possibly after the fact; they 

may have found out that there was a meeting in the area. 

 

And I think those are some of the things that need to be brought 

to light, that people must be aware of -- that the government, if 

it is going to consult and have meaningful discussion, should 

have their ad campaign, basically, Mr. Speaker, should lay out 

where the meetings are.  Lay out the format and indicate that all 

people are welcome to attend.  And they should include all 

affected persons or persons that would be affected. 

 

What I see, Mr. Speaker, and has certainly been raised by 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business, that they are 

concerned with the legislation, and rightly so, Mr. Speaker.  

They are concerned because, as they are concerned with The 

Labour Standards Act, that it may be technically unworkable.  

And they've indicated that it will side-swipe and harm more 

workers than it helps. 

 

And they've also indicated that it represents a huge and costly 

payroll grab from employers beyond fair payment of wages 

actually worked.  And another concern they raise, it represents 

an automatic enrichment for powerful union interests in 

Saskatchewan without having to bargain for it.  And why, on 

the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, it makes Saskatchewan less 

economically competitive, which means job loss in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And those concerns that were raised regarding The Labour 

Standards Act are the same type of concerns that are raised . . . 

being raised today regarding The Trade Union Act. 

 

Let me read an article, or read into the record an article put out 

by the Federation of Independent Business.  It starts out by 

saying: 

 

 The Canadian Federation of Independent Business expresses 

its outrage over Trade Union Act amendments tabled in the 

Saskatchewan legislature today.  This Bill was developed 

with no opportunity for advance review and comment by 

business, other than an informational briefing held earlier this 

morning by Labour Minister Ned Shillington and Economic 

Development Minister Dwain Lingenfelter. 

 

 Even the business representatives on previous task forces and 

advisory committees were given no opportunity to suggest 

revisions to any drafts of this legislation.  Most importantly, 

very little of this legislation was developed on the basis of 

consensus with business and labour organizations. 

 

 With a very few exceptions -- example, continuing ability of 

employers to use replacement workers during strike action -- 

most of the legislation represents a serious 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

capitulation to almost all the demands of organized labour in 

Saskatchewan.  It will seriously tip the balance in favour of 

large and powerful union interests. 

 

And I think that, Mr. Speaker, is the major concern we have 

here.  Again the minister has talked about the consultation 

process, has talked about involving all partners that would have 

an interest and would be affected, as with the Labour Standards 

and the same with The Trade Union Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about either pieces of 

legislation, the same arguments apply because they affect the 

workplace in this province; they affect business people; they 

affect the employers and employees; they affect jobs; and they 

affect jobs of even students across this province -- students who 

are now in the midst of preparing for or writing final exams and 

looking for job opportunities to put some money aside to get 

back to college to complete their degree or the courses that they 

are taking, and will be finding that there will be fewer job 

opportunities that are available to them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have had many business men and women 

from across my constituency who have raised these concerns 

with me; who have brought to my attention the concerns and 

the fact that in looking at part-time work, as we've seen with 

The Labour Standards Act, they're going to have to cut back 

because they will not be able to afford the additional costs that 

are forced upon them. 

 

And The Trade Union Act is the same thing.  It basically forces 

and incurs more costs on employees; and one has to wonder 

who the government was really listening to.  And it would 

appear that as we've seen with SaskPower, the person running 

the show would be Jack Messer, not the minister responsible.  

And in this case I think the person running the agenda for The 

Labour Standards and The Trade Union Act is none other than 

the . . . one would maybe call her the hon. Barb Byers, but Barb 

Byers, who is the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour.  It seems, Mr. Speaker, that this agenda is totally 

dictated by this individual, by one Barb Byers. 

 

The government has introduced labour standards and I've 

mentioned the fact that this Bill has caused outrage in the 

business community.  The government began slowly to 

perceive that they were harming the people they meant to help 

and as we've been discussing and as we've been debating the 

Bill, we've seen that the minister, time and time again has 

indicated that maybe there were amendments needed. 

 

But one of the biggest concerns we have, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact of not whether there are going to be amendments coming 

forward regardless of whether it's The Labour Standards or The 

Trade Union Act, is what the amendments will mean.  And 

also, Mr. Speaker, the fact that these amendments may not 

cover all the issues when we hear that the government . . . we 

find out that a number of the terms and 

references are going to be passed eventually through 

regulations, a process which doesn't allow for open public 

consultation and involvement. 

 

In fact when regulations are passed, they are just passed and 

moved through Executive Council and it takes away the ability 

of members to sit in this Assembly and debate the concerns that 

will be raised by men and women as we've seen with the 

SaskPower rate increases.  Did we have the ability to debate 

those rate increases, or whether they were justified before they 

were brought forward?  No.  It was just a simple stroke of the 

pen through Executive Council.  The rate increases were passed 

under the form of regulations. 

 

And I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that we raise these 

concerns and that's why we continually ask the minister to 

show us what regulations will be coming forward after the 

legislation has passed through this Assembly.  What will the 

regulations include, whether they are with The Labour 

Relations Board or whether they would be involved with The 

Trade Union Act. And we've been raising that time and time 

again and the minister continues to chirp from his seat that he'll 

have them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've given the minister ample opportunity 

and if he's got those why doesn't he just lay it out for us to see 

and then we will know where we're going.  Then the business 

community will at least understand what is going to be coming 

down after the fact and we can address those questions today as 

we continue the discussion.  As businesses began to indicate 

that they were not . . . that the changes to The Trade Union Act 

were going to, and The Labour Standards Act, were going to 

harm their ability in hiring part-timers and students. 

 

It seems that the government did take some time to reconsider 

where they were going.  But I think it's more important that the 

government continue to recognize that there's more to 

Saskatchewan than the labour movement and the few unionized 

people across this province; that there are a number of people 

in the province of Saskatchewan, employees, working very 

diligently to build the businesses that they're involved in today.  

And I don't think it's fair for the government just to be running 

on the whims of one or two individuals who would like to 

dictate the workplace in this province. 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, have insisted that 

the government take more time to examine the implications of 

The Labour Standards Act and to go on record with their 

intentions regarding the regulations.  And we will continue to 

raise that, even as we get into discussion in Committee of the 

Whole, and as we continue to speak to The Trade Union Act 

and discuss it in Committee of the Whole. 

 

(1100) 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is entirely reasonable.  It 

is a very solid suggestion, given the strong outcry against this 

Bill.  But as we've seen in the past, we see again, rather than act 

responsibly and 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

step back from the legislation, the minister and his department 

and the government have begun to use intimidation tactics.  

And one of the tactics they're using is by pushing and forcing 

the Bill and just continually pushing it at us. 

 

Because I believe, Mr. Speaker, the reason they continue to 

throw it at us is the fact that they do not want the issue 

belaboured, because they do not want to give the business 

community the ability to finally rally its troops.  And not just 

the business community, but even employees that will be 

affected across this province.  They don't want them to finally 

see what's coming down and be able to speak up. 

 

They want to have these Bills through this Assembly and out of 

the way, so that people forget about them until they finally find 

out at the end of the day, whether it's an employee or a student 

who can't find a job or an employee who loses his job, or an 

employer who has to close the door because of the repressive 

labour legislation in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems when you're in trouble with one piece of 

labour legislation, that it would be appropriate not to push 

forward with another, more extreme piece of labour legislation.  

I would think as the government has been sitting back and 

observing what has been transpiring with . . . and the events 

surrounding The Labour Standards Act, that they would have 

been, it would have been more beneficial if they would . . . and 

they could have gained some points for themselves if they 

would have taken some time and decided, no we're not going to 

push The Trade Union Act at this time; there are too many 

concerns out there regarding The Labour Standards Act and if 

we're looking at an election in the next year and a half or two 

years, maybe we need to look at the broad picture in this 

province and we need to talk to all people; not just a small 

sector of the people of this province. 

 

Or maybe what I see happening is the same thing that's 

happening in Ontario, where the Premier of Ontario is now 

trying to draw back into the fold the union leaders of his 

province and the unions across his province who are becoming 

very annoyed at him.  And he is doing whatever in his power to 

bring forward legislation that would draw unions back into the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) fold, and in fact in some cases 

it's working.  Some of the union organizers have finally 

admitted that at the end of the day, even though they don't like 

what the government has done, they will still have to vote for 

them. 

 

And I think that's what the government here in Saskatchewan 

are doing.  They want to solidify the union support in this 

province.  And one would ask, why?  I think a good example, 

even going back to the last election, in my constituency where 

the party executive or the party organizer in my constituency 

happened to take a month leave with pay from his unionized 

position and worked for the New Democratic candidate in my 

constituency 24 hours a day.  No one else could do that.  The 

people that were helping me, Mr. Minister, didn't have the 

opportunity 

to take time away from their job with pay.  They voluntarily 

gave of their time. 

 

And so I can see why the government would want to bring this 

type of legislation forward -- to appease the unions across this 

province so that they will again get out there as foot soldiers 

and work on behalf of NDP candidates across this province in 

the next provincial election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think this is a responsible government.  A 

responsible government would not allow one or two individuals 

or certain groups or organizations to manipulate and demand 

actions on their behalf.  They would take the time -- if the 

government is really truthful and honest with themselves and 

with the people of this province -- they would indeed take the 

time necessary to consult and talk to all organizations. 

 

This government, I believe, has shown their irresponsibility in 

the fact that they have barely allowed time for Saskatchewan 

society to examine and discuss The Labour Standards Act.  

And the people of Saskatchewan have barely had time to catch 

their breaths between the two Bills.  The stakeholders in this 

legislation have not had time to assess how it will affect them 

since they have been focused on The Labour Standards Act. 

 

But I would suggest that's why the government has come 

forward with The Trade Union Act.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, we 

noticed on Monday when the government introduced The 

Trade Union Act.  It would seem that they were just using 

another means of trying to focus attention away from where 

they were going.  The fact that they introduced The Trade 

Union Act on the same day when the Provincial Auditor's 

report was being released and the release of . . . and they also 

released the public utilities annual reports.  A number of public 

utilities reports were released to this Assembly at the same 

time. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the reason why that was done -- and it 

doesn't take a rocket scientist to understand -- that the 

government did that to try and bury the impact of The Trade 

Union Act under all the other releases that were coming out so 

that the media wouldn't have the time and wouldn't have the 

space to cover all the issues and to inform the Saskatchewan 

public of what was taking place. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly the behaviour of a 

government that knows it is in trouble.  This behaviour alone is 

reason enough for this Assembly to defeat this Bill.  However, 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure there are enough members on the 

government side of the House who will stand up for the real 

people of this province, for all people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  No Bill conceived in such an atmosphere of bad faith 

can possibly hope to achieve the public consensus that such a 

major piece of legislation requires. 

 

I think the Minister of Economic Development today, in his 

response to one of the questions, talked about 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

dividing and conquering.  And I think he suggested that this 

caucus, the Conservative caucus, had always worked under a 

system of divide and conquer.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know 

if there's any party that has worked more completely and has 

worked as easily and has used the terms of divide and conquer 

as effectively as the government opposite.  This government 

loves to typify our approach to this legislation as divide and 

conquer. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, they have used that approach of divide 

and conquer, but their tactic today seems to be . . . appears to 

be in the form of a blitzkrieg.  They are the ones trying to 

divide and conquer, enhance powers of arbitrators and 

mediators that reduce direct communication between workers 

and management, as we see in The Trade Union Act. 

 

They have outlawed communication from employers while not 

addressing the problems of threatening communications from 

unions.  And, Mr. Speaker, this would appear to me to be a 

total affront to the rights of free speech. 

 

And to reiterate that, Mr. Speaker, I just want to read from a 

letter that we received from . . . one of our local businesses sent 

a letter that had been sent to him from businesses in Alberta, 

that they had received from a Doug Faucher, the president of 

local 1085, the Canadian Auto Workers association.  And let 

me read this letter into the record.  It says: 

 

 Dear General Manager . . .  

 

And I would take that this was going to GM (General Motors) 

dealerships across the province of Alberta. 

 

  . . . we wish to update you on the labour dispute at Engine 

Rebuilders Ltd.  There are issues which we believe you will 

find interesting.  It has come to our attention that Engine 

Rebuilders is purchasing some rebuilt goods from suppliers 

that are not "authorized" remanufacturers.  These goods are in 

turn sold to you and your customers.  You, the dealership, 

have an obligation to sell "authorized" parts to your 

customers.  Meanwhile, Engine Rebuilders will continue to 

sluff off unauthorized parts to you. 

 

 Further to this, we are in the process of declaring a "hot 

edict" on Engine Rebuilders goods.  A "hot edict" is a 

declaration of a boycott.  The most successful boycott in 

history was Gainers.  Let us say that this boycott would be 

more successful.  We know exactly where the parts are sold, 

at your dealership.  This will certainly have an effect on the 

servicing and parts departments in your dealership. 

 

 Further to this, we are contacting all other Unions and the 

general public.  We have found that a good number of 

vehicles are leased.  These people seem to have no problem 

obtaining their next lease with Chrysler, if we ask them to.  

This actually translates to a few 

thousand vehicles across this country.  We have relayed this 

message to the president of your corporation. 

 

It says: 

 

 We prefer not to use these avenues, but it is something that 

we must do.  This will certainly have an effect on your 

business.  We ask that you take your concerns to the Motor 

Dealers Association, the president of your corporation in 

Ontario and have these bodies apply pressure on this 

company to get a collective agreement that is truly fair.  This 

dispute will do nothing for you and your corporation. 

 

 If you have any questions regarding this matter, please feel 

free to contact us at any time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what I've just read into the record is a letter 

from a union president to the dealerships across Alberta, 

indicating that if they do not take action, if they do not 

discontinue buying or purchasing parts from the Engine 

Rebuilders Ltd. manufacturer, that they will instruct their 

members to boycott General Motors dealerships and that they 

will instruct a number of organizations to start leasing from 

other manufacturers such as Chrysler. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know whether you would call this a 

democracy or not, when union leaders can start issuing those 

kinds of threats to dealerships across the province and to car 

owners and car manufacturers. 

 

But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if we're talking about a 

democracy, if we're talking about a democratic country where 

people have the right to voice their views and their opinions, 

then I would think that if the unions can issue threats -- and if 

this isn't a threat, I don't know what it is -- if the unions can 

issue a threat, then it would seem to me that it would be only 

fair that businesses at least have the opportunity to discuss 

employment matters with their employees.  And yet The Trade 

Union Act takes that away.  It takes that away from businesses.  

Again we see that the principle of divide and conquer in favour 

of none other but the labour unions. 

 

Any communication regarding the individual worker's rights 

and labour negotiations must now be referred to the 

bureaucracy, which is not well known for supplying clear, 

helpful, or timely information. 

 

The government has created new areas of potential resentment 

between employers and employees -- for example, in requiring 

management to supply benefits to striking workers.  If the 

business offers day care, the employer will have to benefit the 

workers' kids while they walk in the picket line.  This is hardly 

helpful in creating an atmosphere of harmony. 

 

And that is another of the major concerns that has been raised 

with us, Mr. Speaker, regarding this Bill -- the fact that 

employers are going to have to pay employee benefits.  It says 

here one of the . . . (inaudible) . . . warrants or changes to the 

union Act, 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

employers may have to subsidize strikers. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if we're talking about fairness, some of 

the onus should be put on the unions themselves.  We've just 

gone through the process of talking about a major strike on the 

west coast that affected farm producers and agricultural 

producers across Canada.  And at that time, Mr. Speaker, when 

the unions went on strike, it was just one union; but basically 

when one union goes on strike, all employees are affected.  It 

shuts down the system.  And, Mr. Speaker, because the one 

union had gone on strike, what did we see?  They forced the 

other unions basically not to cross the picket lines or else. 

 

It really bothers me, Mr. Speaker, when certain groups and 

certain individuals can decide that they are going to lay down 

the law.  Who is the law?  Mind you, we may not have law any 

more in this province with this government in control because 

when they make a law, they turn around and change it the very 

next day if their law doesn't happen to please them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is unfortunate when a few individuals 

can determine how all the employees or the labourers across 

this province and across this country are going to live and 

whether or not they can go to work.  And the fact that when a 

union goes on strike, this piece of legislation is going to put the 

onus on the employer to continue to pay the benefits that that 

employee would be receiving if they were working, I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that is very unfair. 

 

Employers don't complain and don't baulk at the fact that they 

have benefits that they pay their employees when they're 

working.  But to have to pay those benefits while they're on 

strike and even provide a baby-sitting service, Mr. Speaker, is 

unconscionable and unheard of and certainly is appalling to 

business groups and leaders across this province. 

 

(1115) 

 

This is just . . . Any communication regarding the individual 

worker's rights in labour negotiations must now be referred to 

the bureaucracy, as I indicated, which is not well known for 

supplying clear, helpful, or timely information. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think as we continue to debate the Bill, 

we're going to find that more and more people, as they take a 

clearer view and take the time to really assess The Trade Union 

Act, will find that where they were sitting back before and 

thought, well this piece of legislation may not really affect me, 

are going to look a little more carefully.  And they're going to 

say, boy, maybe it's time I spoke up, maybe it's time I 

addressed some of these concerns, because certainly there's a 

number of things there that I should be really concerned about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take a moment just to talk about another 

area where I mentioned earlier that one of the headlines read: 

Employers may have to subsidize strikers.  The chamber of 

Saskatchewan said paying benefits during a strike really annoys 

them. 

And I'd like to quote from an article in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, Thursday, April 14, 1994: 

 

 Saskatchewan could become the only province where 

employers are forced to subsidize their striking workers, 

warns the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 

 Proposed Trade Union Act changes will require employers to 

provide holiday pay, sick pay and health benefits to their 

striking workers, says chamber spokesperson . . . 

 

 Bill 54 would make it an unfair labor practice for employers 

to stop providing benefits during a strike. 

 

And how are benefits defined? 

 

 Benefits are defined as anything received by a worker, apart 

from wages. 

 

 The only stipulation is the union that represents the strikers 

must continue to make any payments that are normally 

payable by employees. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the Saskatchewan chamber has indicated, 

they are feeling . . . they are concerned about The Trade Union 

Act and what it is going to do to the labour force and the ability 

to enhance and draw businesses into this province, as we have 

with The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has taken away numerous 

prerogatives of management in negotiations, taking away 

management's ability to call for a final vote offer. 

 

Now I would think, Mr. Speaker, that if the unions feel that 

they want to unionize and they want to give their membership 

and allow their membership the opportunity to vote, wouldn't it 

be fair that if they are given that opportunity, that management 

can call for a final vote offer as well and ask their employees? 

 

And I think it would be only fair as well to have that vote be 

taken through a secret ballot, through a mediator or someone 

outside of involvement with union and management so that at 

the end of the day, employees would know that as they voted 

on a contract offer or voted whether or not to unionize, that 

they had the real ability to vote without interference by union 

organizers and even management. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, would allow management to present 

their offers very openly and straightforward.  It would also give 

the ability for union organizers to present their proposals and 

then let employees vote as we do in a general election, secretly, 

through a secret ballot. 

 

And the fact that we can . . . What it does, Mr. Speaker, is 

allows people to go to the polls without harassment.  And that's 

one thing we're fortunate about in this country; we can do that.  

We can go to the polls and 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

not be harassed.  That's a far cry from many other countries of 

the world where people go to the polls in fear.  And they go to 

the polls to vote not knowing whether they will even leave that 

poll alive. 

 

So I think if we're talking about true democracy, The Trade 

Union Act, rather than hindering the ability of employers and 

employees to work together, should be looking at ways in 

which it can enhance that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the governments have set up new Draconian 

penalties for unfair labour practices that can be based on 

nothing more than hearsay and which have no avenue for 

appeal.  And what I'm saying here, the government is also 

undermining the competitive business atmosphere in many 

ways, for example slowing down needed technological change 

by throwing up time constraints on how quickly they can be 

implemented. 

 

That means if a business decides that they want to bring some 

more technology and mechanization into their business, they 

must have a period of time, inform the employees that there is 

going to be a change-over on some of their technology, some of 

their machinery; and that period of time, especially if that 

technology may affect employees' jobs, they must give notice. 

 

What the legislation is doing, Mr. Speaker, is limiting the 

ability of the employer or the manufacturer or the business 

person to put that technology in place. Even if he's got 

everything ready, he's limited in putting it in place so it may be 

90 days to six months before he gets that opportunity to really 

effectively enhance and build his business. 

 

The government is also undermining the competitive business 

atmosphere by hampering the abilities of businesses to enhance 

the job opportunities that may be out there.  Also they have 

hampered the ability of businesses to achieve cost savings by 

restricting the ability of unionized businesses to tender out 

services.  The Minister of Labour swears that this is not 

happening, but given the undue speed with which the 

legislation is being pushed, we have had no opportunity to get 

this clarified. 

 

And we continue to ask and we will ask, as I've indicated. I'd 

ask the minister even today to clarify these issues.  All the more 

reason that this legislation should be pulled until issues like this 

can be clarified. 

 

The legislation not only fails to address the ongoing problems 

with workplace democracy, especially regarding the 

availability of secret ballots, it actually makes these problems 

worse.  Certification and decertification have now become even 

more undemocratic. 

 

And as I was saying before, Mr. Speaker, if we're really talking 

about democracy, and the ability, and union organizers having 

a desire to go into any workplace and unionize, right now they 

can go in and they can talk to those employees about 

establishing a union. But if the employer should dare raise the 

question with his employees about whether it's right or not to 

unionize, and would suggest it's in their best interests not to 

unionize, that employer could be taken before the Labour 

Relations Board and be accused of an unfair labour practice. 

 

And at the end of the day, under the new rules under The Trade 

Union Act, that Labour Relations Board could force a union 

contract on that employer and force him into a union and even 

force the employees into a union, even though maybe the 

majority of them were not in favour of a union. 

 

A business can be certified if a related company anywhere in 

Canada has been certified.  And if the decertification vote can 

be annulled if a small minority of workers claim that unfair 

labour practice have been followed, in both cases the wishes of 

the majority of workers in the business are ignored.  It is hard 

to see how this will serve to build consensus. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I have to refer to the problem facing 

the Woolco workers in Moose Jaw, where the majority of 

people wanted to decertify.  But because of the Draconian rules 

we have in this province, it just takes a minor group of people. 

 

If a group of employees form a meeting and even if it's only 40, 

or 30 or 40 per cent of the employees show up and decide we 

want to unionize and we're going to take a vote to unionize, and 

if 50 per cent plus one of only 30 or 40 per cent of the 

employees vote in favour, they're unionized.  But to decertify, 

or to not unionize, they need 70 per cent of all employees 

voting against it.  Mr. Speaker, that to me seems hardly fair. 

 

Again as I indicate, given the undue haste with which this Bill 

is being pushed and given the numerous serious problems with 

the Bill that deserve further attention, I think, Mr. Speaker, it is 

appropriate that we take the time and continue to take the time 

to reiterate the points that have been brought out before us. 

 

I also understand from this piece of legislation, The Trade 

Union Act, that there are some people within the union circles 

that are still not totally happy with it.  And one wonders if this 

is just a faade to try and get the rest of the people in 

Saskatchewan to begin to ask and question whether or not this 

piece of legislation isn't as bad as many people would make it 

appear to be. 

 

And I talk about I believe one of the government members has 

indicated that he is going to bring an amendment to the Bill 

because he feels that . . . here's the headline I wanted to raise, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again this is taken from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, 

Friday, April 8: 

 

 Backbencher vows to toughen labor bill with amendments. 

(And this was talking about the fact that)  Labor Minister Ned 

Shillington will introduce amendments to the Trade Union 

Act on Monday. 

 

 And government backbencher Bob Lyons says 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

if the long-awaited bill doesn't contain provisions banning the 

use of replacement workers during strikes, he will introduce 

his own amendments in a private member's bill. 

 

 The Regina Rosemont MLA said he would bring forward 

amendments on other important issues if they're left out of 

Shillington's version. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I begin to ask myself, if the member from 

Regina Rosemont is bringing amendments in, if the 

government is leaving them out, I wonder if this just isn't 

another way of bringing amendments to The Trade Union Act 

in through the back door. 

 

If the government found that it would be offensive to have 

these type of amendments, and the member from Regina 

Rosemont continues to talk of replacement workers as scabs, I 

think that is unfortunate that people in this province and in a 

free democracy would refer to individuals who want to work, 

as scabs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think unions would want to refer to their 

membership in that way, but it seems unionized people or 

labour leaders across this province have no problem in picking 

up on the honest, ordinary citizen of this province who would 

like to work and put in a full day's work. 

 

And maybe that's the problem as we've been finding out, and as 

we've been hearing from different workplaces, Mr. Speaker, 

where people have gone to work and put in a full day's work 

and found out that maybe they were working a little too hard, 

maybe they were being a little too diligent in the work that they 

were doing, maybe they should slack off a bit, maybe they were 

. . . 

 

And the reason that they were being confronted by union 

organizers is because they were showing up a number of the 

other union people who were sloughing off.  And you know 

when people do not take their work seriously, that impacts the 

business and the manufacturer and the employer and their 

ability to be economically viable and to live in our competitive 

society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the member from Regina 

Rosemont suggesting that if this Bill does not have that 

provision, that he's going to bring it in, I ask myself if it's not 

the government's way of again using the back door to cover off 

a few areas that the labour organizations and the labour groups 

across this province like the Barb Byers and the George 

Rosenaus are trying to cover.  And I ask you again, is that 

freedom?  Is that how democracy operates? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to raise a number of concerns that have 

also been raised by the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business and the Saskatchewan business groups and chambers.  

This Bill, as they've indicated, would bring serious harm to 

Saskatchewan's competitiveness.  And as we're looking at a 

time, Mr. Speaker, when we are trying to enhance job 

opportunities in this province . . . We've just heard my 

colleague, the member from Wilkie, just again raise 

the fact that there are over 81,000 people in this province on 

unemployment . . . or on welfare, pardon me, Mr. Speaker -- 

81,000 people on welfare and growing. 

 

And the Minister of Social Services just said I believe it was 

two or three weeks ago, that the welfare rolls had levelled off.  

And yet we found out shortly after he made that comment that 

there was another increase of 1,500 people in the last month.  

Not only coupled with that, Mr. Speaker, we find that the 

government may hang its hat on the fact that the unemployment 

has decreased. 

 

Unemployment may have decreased a marginal amount, Mr. 

Speaker, but at the same time there are fewer jobs in this 

province than there were even back in 1991.  There are some 

2,000 fewer jobs even at the start of this year in this province, 

some 13,000 fewer than there were in 1991.  So where are the 

people going?  What's happening, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I guess what we're finding out is the reason that the 

unemployment rates have gone down is there are two things.  

Number one, people have finally given up hope of finding jobs, 

because there aren't jobs available and they've gone on welfare.  

Or else they have left the province.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 

reason that there aren't jobs available is because this province 

has become a very uncompetitive place to set up and establish a 

business, and the government may wonder why they're having 

difficulty trying to entice businesses and trying to get people to 

invest money in business opportunities in this province.  Well 

maybe they should take a look at the legislation that they have 

introduced. 

 

And we know what's happened regarding The Workers' 

Compensation Act and we saw The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act of the last session.  And now again we see more 

repressive legislation through The Labour Standards Act and 

The Trade Union Act. 

 

(1130) 

 

This Bill also creates major uncertainly caused by huge powers 

given to politically appointed agents.  The Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business says the government has created an 

historically unprecedented shift in powers to the politically 

appointed Labour Relations Board, as well as to a cadre of 

other politically appointed arbitrators, special mediators, and 

government officials. 

 

And that's one of the concerns we've been raising time and time 

again, and that's why we're calling for a legislative committee, 

Mr. Speaker, that would allow for an all-party committee in 

this legislature, responsible to this legislature, responsible to 

the members of this Assembly, to look at public appointees 

rather than just allowing Executive Council to make those 

appointments. 

 

And I would believe, Mr. Speaker, in view of what the CFIB 

(Canadian Federation of Independent Business) 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

has indicated, it would be appropriate that we continue to push 

for that type of committee.  Because what we will see with the 

Labour Relations Board, it will be a political appointment or a 

committee made up of political appointees, appointed by 

Executive Council, and the wishes of this government and the 

Labour minister and the unions of this province will be forced 

upon us. 

 

They continue: all businesses in Saskatchewan, whether 

currently unionized or not, now will have considerable anxiety 

and fear over the possible abuse of power by these political 

appointees. 

 

Because I don't believe there's anything in the Bill that really 

makes the . . . and causes the Labour Relations Board to be 

answerable to labour or to the business community, but to 

Executive Council.  And they have a right to be concerned. 

 

They point out another problem they see.  For example, the 

Labour Relations Board will soon have extra powers to 

automatically declare a small business unionized or to stop 

decertifications regardless of any low number of union cards 

signed and notwithstanding any vote of the majority of workers 

which resulted in rejection of union proposals.  Automatic 

certification and decertification will be based on the judgement 

of these political appointees as to whether or not an unfair 

labour practice interfered with the process. 

 

Again as I indicated earlier, look at what happened to the 

employees in Moose Jaw.  They went to the Labour Relations 

Board.  It was their avenue of appeal.  They were 

overwhelmingly in favour of decertifying so they could 

guarantee their jobs. 

 

But what do we see, Mr. Speaker?  The Labour Relations 

Board decided instead of listening to the majority, of listening 

to a few heavy-handed union organizers and wouldn't allow the 

decertification.  So today we find that people are just living one 

day at a time, wondering how long that they will have a job. 

 

What we see, politically appointed bureaucrats will determine 

whether contracting out from any unionized employer or other 

non-unionized employers should be prevented.  And the 

interesting part about this process, Mr. Speaker, as well, is the 

fact that the appointment of the members on the Labour 

Relations Board is for a period of, I believe it's 5 or 6 years. 

 

And what could happen and possibly will happen and no doubt 

will happen -- I shouldn't say possibly will -- no doubt will 

happen, is that the government will wait until just prior to 

calling an election to appoint the new Labour Relations Board. 

 

Now I guess the only action if the government is defeated and a 

new party comes to power, they will have to take the same 

initiative that this government has taken over the past number 

of years to retroactively change The Trade Union Act so that 

they can take a look at removing the political appointees 

that this government will put in place on the Labour Relations 

Board. 

 

Politically appointed bureaucrats will also be able to 

unilaterally impose a first union contract upon a newly certified 

employer.  They will also gain new powers to unilaterally 

determine successorship obligations to continue the unionized 

status on contracts of businesses after sale, spin-off, or transfer. 

 

You have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, how many people are 

going to look at purchasing a business already in existence if 

they are going to be forced to continue the unionized status, 

continue the contracts of businesses after sale, spin-off, or 

transfer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think anybody, I don't think anyone with 

the ability, and has the financial status, would want to come 

into this province and continue or to take over a business or to 

buy out a business if he's faced with these restrictions. 

 

Another issue they raised, the politically appointed Labour 

Relations Board will be given enormous other powers 

including the right to make interim and rectification orders, 

order fiscal compensation, amend court orders, etc.  These 

enormous powers would be vested in full-time political 

appointments that would be locked in with absolute immunity 

and job protection for up to five years. 

 

And that was the argument I just presented a moment ago.  

What option will a new government have, should the 

government change at the next provincial election?  I guess the 

only option is to look at what this government has done over 

the past number of years and institute the same type of 

retroactive legislation to change these policies so that we can 

make it a more democratic process. 

 

And there are a number of other major concerns.  The new Act 

amendments will put a permanent halt to any government 

attempt to downsize and save the taxpayers money through 

contracting out to several categories of low-cost, non-unionized 

workers.  And, Mr. Speaker, this amazes me and I'm totally 

amazed that the government themselves would not realize that 

they are tying their own hands through this Trade Union Act; 

that at a time of fiscal restraint, a time when a government is 

talking about deficit reduction, that they would bring in an Act 

that would even tie their own hands.  And that is certainly 

unthinkable and unquestionable. 

 

And I think I would ask the minister and I would ask the 

Premier and I would ask the members of the Executive Council 

and government members to take a serious look at what they 

are doing to themselves.  Are they so tied in to the George 

Rosenau's and the demands of the Barb Byers's that they're 

going to overlook even the fiscal restraints and the deficit 

reduction and their commitment to reducing the deficit in this 

province by tying themselves into contracts where, if they have 

an opportunity to tender out to and receive a service at a lower 

cost, that they will not be able to do it because The Trade 

Union Act 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

does not allow them to do that?  I think that's unthinkable. 

 

The new Act also tips the balance in several other areas, 

including less managerial exclusions, less employer rights to 

communications and free speech, greater employer delays and 

difficulties in implementing technological change, and the 

taking away of employer's right to request supervised strike 

votes. 

 

Finally, the new Act still does not give individual workers the 

fundamental, democratic right to mandatory secret ballot votes 

or any basic rights of full informational disclosure about the 

costs and implications of union fees and operations. 

 

Huge fines and penalties can now be imposed by unions on 

individuals, which may further add to big union intimidations.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a headline here; this is from the 

Regina Leader-Post, "Union fines will now be debts." 

 

Or actually it is the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, April 13: 

 

 Workers who cross their own picket line could find 

themselves in court if they don't pay fines imposed by their 

union under proposed changes to The Trade Union Act. 

 

Who's running this province?  Or who will be running this 

province?  Who is in control? 

 

 For years, unions have fined members who work during a 

strike but never had the power to collect. 

 

 The Trade Union Act amendments introduced Monday say 

union-imposed fines will now be a debt due and may be 

recovered through the courts. 

 

 Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union president 

George Rosenau says the bill should help, but he's 

disappointed it doesn't force employers to deduct fines from 

employees' pay on the union's behalf. 

 

This appears to me, Mr. Speaker, to be a big bullying tactic by 

the unions of this province.  Why should people who want to 

work and who are happy with the workplace, who are happy 

with the work environment, who are happy with their wages, 

who are happy with the benefits -- why should they be forced 

to stay at home simply because a handful of people want to 

strike and demand higher salaries? 

 

And what I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 

this striking, remember the debate going on between the 

teachers of this province and the STF, and bargaining.  It wasn't 

that long ago they were threatening of going out on strike.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they were threatening of going out on strike 

while this government was cutting back payments to local 

school boards -- payments, Mr. Speaker, which were going to 

lead to the reduction of teaching positions in 

this province.  And yet the union had the audacity to go to their 

membership and say, we've got to go on strike to demand more 

time and more . . . we've got to demand more from our 

employers, from the school boards across this province. 

 

Well how can you demand more when there will be less?  Isn't 

it time that unions recognized that maybe job opportunities and 

the ability to a solid and sound job is more important than 

demanding more from a society that doesn't have more to give?  

And what they are going to be able to do under this legislation 

is they're going to be able to tell people, whether they be health 

care workers, whether they be educators, whether they be 

employees of a manufacturing business in this province that is 

just on the verge of making it and just struggling to survive -- if 

the union decides they want to strike and people decide that 

they want to go to work, they will not be able to because the 

union will be able to bully them into going on strike, because 

the union themselves will fine their own membership.  Well 

that is democracy at its fullest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no wonder the chamber, the business community, 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business, and even the 

government itself should be concerned with its own legislation 

when we look at the repressive acts and the repressive forms of 

government and democracy that this government is showing us. 

 

In summary, the CFIB says: 

 

 These amendments, along with the uncertainty caused by 

massive new powers to make regulations under the new 

Labour Standards Act, combine to place a dark cloud over 

Saskatchewan.  The NDP government has now created a very 

unstable labour climate that will weaken investor confidence 

and cost the province jobs. 

 

 The CFIB and other business groups are determined to 

continue efforts to bring greater clarity, balance, and 

democratic accountability to this labour legislation.  We shall 

be relentless in our fight for fairness. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason that my colleagues and I 

are standing in this Assembly and will continue to stand to 

address a number of these issues, to bring to the forefront the 

concerns of business people, and it should be the concerns of 

individuals looking for employment in this province as well.  

When we look at the labour rolls, when we look at the fact that 

we have fewer jobs and we look at the number of people who 

are looking for work, it should be a concern to them that they 

would allow a government to bring in more repressive labour 

legislation that would take away the job opportunities or their 

job opportunities and that would take away from their future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the rate increases that 

we've seen through the Crown corporations and 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

we look at the . . . the auditor pointed out the other day the 

unfunded pension liabilities that are . . . that we have in this 

province.  And we look at the debt of this province, Mr. 

Speaker; someone has to pay for that debt.  People without 

money cannot pay the taxes that are needed to pay for the debt. 

 

And the members opposite are suggesting we should have 

thought of that 10 years ago.  Well it should have started about 

20 years ago.  And I continue, as I indicated, as my colleague 

indicated earlier on today, where the Minister of Finance said 

it's not appropriate to raise the unfunded pension liabilities and 

bring them forward as deficit problems, as part of the debt.  

Well that's what the former government of Mr. Blakeney did, 

Mr. Speaker.  They said it wasn't appropriate.  That's why they 

didn't include the unfunded pension liabilities; that's why they 

didn't include the debt in the Crowns prior to 1982. 

 

And again, they do the same thing.  They are just trying to put a 

cloud over the people's eyes so they don't realize what they're 

really doing.  And that's why it's so difficult for the auditor to 

bring out those points -- the same thing. 

 

(1145) 

 

And I just want to relate one issue that took place recently in 

the federal parliament, where the media all of sudden finally 

realized that what the federal government -- doing no different 

that what this NDP government has done -- what the federal 

government did was inflate the debt to make it look as if the 

former government wasn't even on track in their deficit 

reduction.  And now even the Reform Party has finally been 

able to point out the fact that Mr. Martin did inflate the debt, 

just like the minister responsible and the Deputy Premier in his 

first budget of 1990 -- or '91-92, pardon me -- where he inflated 

the deficit; when if he would have followed the deficit 

reduction plan set out by the former minister of Finance, we 

would have a balance on the operational side of government. 

 

And the minister of Community Services laughs from her seat, 

when she was part of a committee that was continually 

lobbying government for more financing for her community 

and policing services, and in infrastructure and in water and 

sewer, Mr. Speaker.  And the minister talks about wasting 

money. 

 

Who was there lobbying the government?  And I happened to 

be part of a . . . chairing the committee that she was part of 

where she was lobbying the government for more money, 

rather than accepting her responsibility as the mayor for 

Melfort at the time and arguing that maybe the government 

should be looking at ways of reducing the debt, not trying to 

hand out more money to community governments, or local 

governments at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the minister responsible 

for Community Services would like to chirp from her seat and 

would stand and defend the legislation, the regressive 

legislation, that this 

government, her government, is bringing forward. 

 

I don't know, I'm not exactly certain, but maybe that minister 

never did have a business.  I know that her husband's in law, in 

a field, a profession, that finds it very easy to draw from the 

taxpayers and from the people of this province by continually 

working for an organization that certainly almost seems at 

times preys upon innocent individuals. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Act, it's 

important that we realize that if we are going to build this 

province, if we are going to encourage individuals to come to 

this community or to this province and to build and to enhance 

business and job opportunities, that the two pieces of 

legislation before us today certainly do anything but enhance 

that opportunity. 

 

And they create an atmosphere where I believe, Mr. Speaker, it 

is even going to be more difficult, and I predict more difficult 

in the future to encourage investment in the province of 

Saskatchewan, with such repressive legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is certainly more that I could add, 

but I know my colleagues want to get into the debate at this 

time.  So I thank you for the opportunity for having had to 

stand in this Assembly and address this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my great pleasure 

today to enter into this debate, the debate on The Trade Union 

Act. 

 

I've listened with great care while the member for Moosomin 

has espoused the opposition view, their understanding of 

organized working people and of corporations and how the 

economies of Saskatchewan and other places have worked. 

 

It was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, in that I heard the 

member talking about the Conservative and Liberal view of 

organized labour and of The Trade Union Act and of the 

proposed changes that we're making and how they're opposed 

to every single thing that we're doing in this Act. 

 

And I couldn't help but reflect on the nine and a half years that 

they formed the government. And I was thinking of all the 

hundreds and thousands of people across the province that I 

spoke to in that nine and a half years.  And there was precious 

few that felt that the rules were fair.  There was a large number 

certainly of working men and women that felt they were being 

very, very unfairly treated under the rules of the day. 

 

But it was interesting to me to note that there was a fair number 

of business people that also were expressing concerns that our 

labour legislation in Saskatchewan had been allowed to become 

obsolete or to become not as clearly effective as it should and 

could be. 

 

It seems to me that even though we think that 1994 is the same 

as 1993 only you add one, and 1993 was the 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

same as 1992 only you add one more year, even though the 

years may seem to be exactly the same, if you take a snapshot 

of Saskatchewan in 1994 and a snapshot of Saskatchewan in 

1984 and a snapshot in 1974, you find very, very major 

differences. 

 

In 1984 we were very clearly on the way down economically.  

There were at that time fewer jobs available.  The economy had 

clearly stalled or gone into reverse in some ways. 

 

In 1974, 10 years before that, the absolute opposite was true; 

Saskatchewan was just a boom province.  Jobs were plentiful.  

Farmers were making money hand over fist.  We were at that 

time in a very high inflationary cycle; that's something that we 

were not in in 1984, although in 1984 we were in a high 

interest rate period. 

 

And now in 1994 we have relatively low inflation and 

relatively low interest rates. 

 

Point being, you can't simply say that because -- I'll use a very 

extreme -- because at one time there was child labour allowed, 

that there should always be child labour allowed.  Our societies 

evolve.  The Trade Union Act is an evolutionary Act and one 

that, simply put, requires some modest updating from time to 

time to keep it in tune with the realities of the day.  This Bill, 

this Trade Union Act, does just that in a very, very effective 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amongst other things, this Trade Union Act is to 

promote productive collective bargaining and cooperative 

dispute resolution by doing a number of things.  It requires 

parties to bargain collectively and to apply agreements in good 

faith.  I'll be addressing the methods in which we administer 

and enforce that Act a little later on, but it requires that the 

bargaining take place and the agreements be applied in good 

faith. 

 

It provides assistance now, very real and meaningful assistance, 

in reaching a first agreement.  That is, where an operation is 

newly organized, it is not terribly unusual for both the newly 

formed union and the management to have some difficulties in 

attaining that first agreement.  Part of it is there's no history of a 

working relationship between the union and the management.  

But we provide some very real assistance that is not just a help 

to those newly organized working women and men, but it's a 

very real help to the newly organized company and the 

management of that company because frankly it takes two to 

fight.  It takes two to get into any significant difficulty and 

often it takes a steady, outside, third hand provided for in this 

Trade Union Act to get things back on an even keel so that that 

business place can do what it does best and continue to make 

money.  And of course if the business place is making money, 

the employees are working and things are relatively good.  Not 

to say there aren't individual problems crop up everywhere; 

indeed we all have problems from time to time. 

 

The Act will be providing more labour relations 

services that include the appointment of mediators to assist in 

resolving disputes.  It will provide for faster and less costly 

arbitration procedures to help settle disputes over the 

interpretation or application of agreements.  And I think it's 

important to note here: faster and less costly arbitration 

procedures -- now show me any self-respecting business person 

that would object to a faster, less costly, dispute settlement 

mechanism and I'll show you a business owner that is on the 

way out. 

 

Businesses have to operate more effectively now than they 

perhaps had to in the past.  Certainly the most proactive 

businesses are the ones that are on the leading edge, that are 

looking for ways to do things better, faster, in a less costly 

manner; because they know that improves their bottom line.  

And that's provided for in this Trade Union Act. 

 

We also are going to be dealing with grievances through 

mediation and there's improvements in the Act on how that can 

take place.  There will be improving arbitration provisions that 

will require settlement by arbitration for disputes over the 

application or interpretation of an agreement.  There will be 

arbitration procedures if none are available in an agreement, 

those arbitrations procedures provided for through the 

Department of Labour -- that again to the benefit of working 

women and men and to the benefit of the companies. 

 

There are a number of other things, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not going 

to talk about all of it because I'm sure there's others that are 

wanting to get into this debate.  I'm not trying to signal that I'm 

nearing the end of my comments, but I'm not trying trying to be 

all-inclusive and I want to make that clear; not trying to be 

all-inclusive in this Bill. 

 

We will be ensuring that the terms and conditions of collective 

agreements remain in force until replaced by a new agreement.  

And that is very important -- a very important and key 

consideration for organized people, organized women and men 

throughout Saskatchewan.  So in the Act the terms and 

conditions of collective agreements will remain in force until 

replaced by a new agreement, and that is written right in and 

part of this Act. 

 

We'll be updating the rules governing strikes and lockouts 

which nobody, but nobody, enjoys going on a picket line.  I've 

yet to walk a picket line with an employee that said gee, it sure 

is fun out here.  I have walked many picket lines and many of 

my friends, throughout organized labour particularly, will know 

that.  They will know that I don't simply walk with them; I'm 

asking, as we walk the picket line, for what is it precisely that is 

needed to end this labour dispute, this strike, or this lockout. 

 

I've always been impressed, Mr. Speaker, by the fortitude, the 

future vision of people, women and men, walking the picket 

lines.  They don't do so lightly.  You must recognize that to be 

in a strike or a lockout position all too often means your 

income drops to zero. 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

Now there are some unions that have set aside strike fund 

reserves and they're able to provide some very limited grocery 

money at least in a short-term basis, but all too often on a 

picket line workers are walking a picket line with no hope of 

receiving any remuneration.  They are there for a principle; 

they are there to try and improve not only their own personal 

position, if I may describe it that way, in life, be it financial or 

something else. 

 

But they're there to try and make our Saskatchewan a better 

place for all people, including for the sons and daughters of 

opposition members who may wind up working in some of 

those workplaces.  The easiest thing in the world to do when 

you have a problem is to just fold up your tent and move on 

and go somewhere else.  The more difficult and the more 

long-range view is to take a problem and attack it head on, try 

and resolve that problem, and sometimes that is done at a very 

huge expense. 

 

The rules governing strikes and lockouts, we're also in this Act 

going to be permitting parties to request the appointment of a 

special mediator after a strike has lasted 30 days and allowing 

for final offer votes on the recommendation of the special 

mediator. 

 

(1200) 

 

This, too, is new, and it should enhance the end of disputes by 

providing for mediation after a 30-day strike.  Clearly after 30 

days, both sides are usually locked quite firmly into positions.  

The mediator at that point will have a very huge job to try and 

get the two parties to reach some agreement, but we are 

providing that mediator in the hopes of avoiding very 

prolonged lockouts or strikes. 

 

There are a few that come to mind -- the Pineland Co-op in 

Nipawin, of course, being the longest lockout in the history of 

Saskatchewan.  And it's unfortunate that that happened and my 

heart goes out, every time I think of it, my heart goes out to the 

working women and men that were involved in that dispute.  

But there are a number of others; I don't want to beat them to 

death. 

 

In this legislation, this new Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, we 

are providing mechanisms for workers and employers to 

address major workplace change.  We're doing so by ensuring 

collective agreements remain in force after the changes in 

ownership, management or jurisdiction by empowering the 

Labour Relations Board to determine what rights and 

obligations continue after a successorship. 

 

We are also ensuring that contractors who are awarded . . . 

servicing contractors respect existing collective bargaining 

obligations.  We're confirming that an employer will continue 

to be bound by any existing collective bargaining obligations 

when a business becomes subject to Saskatchewan jurisdiction, 

and we're preventing employers from avoiding collective 

bargaining obligations by operating through related companies. 

In other words we are saying, no more of the spin-off 

companies that were so prevalent in the decade that the 

Conservative administration formed the government.  No more 

simply setting up a spin-off company because you want to 

avoid dealing with a union.  That is enshrined in this 

legislation, and it is something that many of us have fought and 

tried for a goodly number of years to get.  And I'm delighted, in 

this Trade Union Act, to see that the rules have been levelled 

out, if you like. 

 

There of course will continue to be disputes.  The world has 

ever been thus.  But our job is to provide as even-handed rules 

for dealing with those disputes as we possibly can. 

 

The Trade Union Act will improve the administration and 

enforcement of the Act, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that this is 

one of the very most important parts of the new Act because 

any set of rules that anybody can devise are absolutely useless 

unless you have in place a mechanism and clear outline of how 

it will be administered. 

 

This Act pays a great deal of attention to the administration and 

enforcement of the Act.  In The Trade Union Act, we are 

clarifying the Labour Relations Board's remedial powers 

regarding orders issued on an interim basis pending final 

hearings.  We clarify the Labour Relations Board's remedial 

powers regarding orders to rectify contraventions under this 

Act.  We clarify the Labour Relations Board's remedial powers 

regarding compensation for monetary loss suffered by 

employees, employers, and trade unions as a result of violations 

of this Act as well as amendment or correction of orders. 

 

We are doing other things, again I'm not going to hit the whole 

list, but we are clarifying and limiting exclusions from 

bargaining units.  I know from having been involved in more 

than one organizing drive that there's always some question as 

to who should be in scope and who should be out of scope.  

Now we are clarifying and limiting exclusions from these 

bargaining units, and that will serve everybody well, knowing 

with some greater degree of definition what is in and what is 

out of scope. 

 

Now does that mean that every single position is going to be 

named?  Probably not.  But if . . . to the extent that we can 

narrow the gap, the grey area, I think it's a very, very positive 

thing. 

 

We will also be providing a mechanism for collection of fines 

by unions from their members.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the 

member from Moosomin talking about that and asking, well 

who in the world is running the province?  Well who does the 

member from Moosomin think runs the trade unions?  The 

trade union membership through their meetings, be they 

monthly, quarterly, or certainly annual, run their unions.  Who 

does the member for Moosomin think votes in a strike vote?  

Who does the Leader of the Opposition think votes in a strike 

vote?  I see you chirping from your seat.  It's the very union 

members 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

who vote. 

 

In any democracy you hold a vote, you hold a vote, the 

majority carries the day.  Unions are very tough in terms of 

they must have a relatively high percentage before they 

consider themselves to have a strike mandate.  I know of no 

instances that come to mind where 50 per cent plus one vote 

has led to a strike.  Indeed many, many trade unions won't even 

consider going on strike until they have a 75 per cent-plus; I 

think that's more the norm. 

 

Now when you have three out of four saying, we must on 

principle go on strike, we must on principle withhold our 

services to try and get the employer's attention, I think that 

recognizing that the trade union is a democratic organization, 

that you must give that trade union an ability to run its own 

affairs.  Divided, working women and men fall -- divided we 

fall; together we stand.  Another way of putting it is, a union 

can hang together and win, or hang individually and lose. 

 

And this Trade Union Act, I think goes a long ways to creating 

the fairness that is needed in 1994 and indeed into the future.  I 

think these changes should take us, hopefully, into the next 

millennium, past the year 2000, before there's any more major 

changes required into The Trade Union Act.  But if I may look 

into the future, frankly I suspect that some time shortly after the 

year 2000 there will be a need again to make some amendments 

to The Trade Union Act. 

 

And I say that not out of any sense of it being my party forming 

the government at that stage; I don't know that.  The voters will 

decide.  I think my view is it really doesn't matter who is in 

power, some time shortly after the year 2000, The Trade Union 

Act will need to be revised again. 

 

Now this is where it gets important for people of 

Saskatchewan. Businesses need rules and need a method of 

operation that is straightforward and understandable.  They 

need mechanisms to resolve disputes; they need a sense of 

fairness; they need order.  That, I think, this Trade Union Act 

goes a long way to providing. 

 

There are a few, a select few, who decry these changes. In 

many cases it's the same select few, Mr. Speaker, who in 1972 

said that when The Trade Union Act was last amended in . . . 

major amendment in 1972, they said this is going to grind 

business to a halt; this is going to stop employment. 

 

Well that was 1972.  You remember early in my speech I talked 

about 1974, two years later, everything is booming in 

Saskatchewan.  Jobs galore; businesses making money 

hand-over-fist.  It seemed -- and unfortunately it wasn't so - 

_ but it seemed in 1974 that the good times could never 

possibly end.  That's what it seemed like, although I confess a 

great many people knew otherwise, and they were wise. 

 

But in 1972 I also remember . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

and I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for suggesting I was still in diapers; indeed I like to 

consider myself relatively young but wasn't quite that young. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You weren't walking too many picket 

lines. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- The Leader of the Opposition says in 1972 I 

wasn't walking any picket lines, and he's absolutely correct.  

But in 1974 I was part of my first union organization drive and 

I played a part in that on behalf of the Grain Services Union, 

that I will be perpetually proud of because of the part that I and 

a great many other people played.  We got the livestock 

division of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool into the Grain 

Services Union fold.  And the working women and men in the 

livestock division of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool have been far 

better off in the ensuing 20 years for that particular 

unionization drive.  And I'm very proud of the job that I had 

then. 

 

In 1972 there was opposition members and there was some 

employers -- some; I emphasize some, a select few -- that said 

under The Occupational Health and Safety Act that was 

introduced then, that there would never again be an honest 

day's work done by a working person in Saskatchewan. 

 

Why did they say that?  Amongst other things, was the rallying 

cry of that legislation, and I can still recall vividly Bob Sass 

going around Saskatchewan saying, you have the right to refuse 

dangerous work.  And that became the rallying cry for some 

employers and the opposition.  They predicted that no worker 

would ever again do a job they didn't like.  How wrong they 

were.   How absolutely dead wrong they were, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They predicted the sky was falling when The Trade Union Act 

was changed in '72.  When The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act was introduced in 1972, the sky was falling, they said.  By 

1974 Saskatchewan was booming -- jobs galore. A good labour 

management working relationship was the rule rather than the 

exception. 

 

And then I come even . . . I'm going to skip to much more 

current, where in 1973 we introduced changes to The Workers' 

Compensation Act.  Opposition Conservatives and Liberals 

said, this is going to be the end of employment; this is going to 

be the end of any gains in Saskatchewan.  Together the 

Tweedledum and Tweedledummers said, this is the end for 

Saskatchewan.  How wrong they were, Mr. Speaker, how 

wrong. 

 

The same year we introduced amendments to occupational 

health and safety -- same people saying, no this is no good; you 

can't do this.  You can't provide workers with a right to go to 

work and come home just as healthy as they were when they 

went to work.  You can't make sure to the extent that it's 

humanly possible for people to be able to go to work and not 

lose their life or risk major injury.  How wrong they were.  

We're proving that in a daily way and those pieces of 

legislation have been beneficial to everyone.  Certainly in terms 

of occupational health and safety, 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

any -- any injury, any incident that can be prevented is a dollar, 

many dollars, saved.  And employers, good employers, know 

that and many of them do. 

 

(1215) 

 

Now we've got 1994.  We introduced labour standards.  Again 

we have the opposition Conservatives and Liberals standing 

together saying Labour Standards Act is going to end 

everything. 

 

In 1994 we introduced this, The Trade Union Act, and we have 

opposition Conservatives and opposition Liberals standing 

together saying this is a flawed Act; this is going to shut down 

Saskatchewan.  They would have us believe that if we could 

just somehow return to the nine and a half years of the former 

administration that everything would be all right.  Well 

working people and many corporations, many business owners, 

know that . . . I mean, it's patently obvious that that is not 

correct. 

 

They look at themselves in 1982 when the former government 

took office; 1991, nine and a half years later, and we all ask 

ourselves, am I better off or worse off?  Unfortunately for a 

great many, far too many people and far too many businesses, 

the answer is quite clearly no, they're not better off.  They were 

not better off after nine and a half years of floundering around 

doing everything you could to make Saskatchewan 

unmanageable; to create a fiscal mess that is impossible or next 

to impossible to work its way out of; and doing everything you 

could to make labour legislation match that of third-world 

countries.  Everything they could.  They talked about the need 

for us to be competitive. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, competitive.  Let's look at perhaps some 

Asian countries.  We see pictures of farmers tending their rice 

paddies.  They've got a water buffalo in front and somebody 

walking along behind the plough, eking out the barest existence 

they possibly could.  Do members opposite propose that our 

farmers hitch up a mule and walk behind a plough like the very 

earliest settlers in this province did?  I don't think so.  I don't 

think that's what they're really advocating. 

 

And I just can't for the life of me understand why it is that the 

Conservatives and the Tories will say look, farmers are the 

most efficient farmers in the world right here in Saskatchewan.  

Would you agree with that, Mr. Leader of the Opposition -- that 

farmers in Saskatchewan are the most efficient farmers in the 

world?  I see you nodding in the affirmative. 

 

Now I don't know why it is that farmers can become so 

efficient.  And we do agree on that -- we've got some of the 

very best farmers in the entire world right here in 

Saskatchewan.  Why is it that you think farmers should be 

moving ahead, moving forward, moving into the future, 

moving into the next millennium, and yet you would have 

working women and working men going back to the days of 

child labour?  Why is it you would not have working people 

progress?  Why do you have so little faith 

in the working women and men of Saskatchewan?  Why is it 

you have so little faith you think that workers are somehow not 

competitive? 

 

Workers in Saskatchewan are very well educated, highly 

motivated, want the businesses to do well.  Why?  Because in 

Saskatchewan we're all -- I have a bit of a theory on this -- 

we're all either straight from the farm, straight from the farm or 

one generation from the farm.  And we understand the 

relationship directly between the work you do and the result.  

You do good work, the employer makes money, and you then 

have the ability to go to that employer and ask for what you 

perceive to be a fairer share.  And under The Trade Union Act 

we are providing the mechanisms to settle, help settle disputes, 

help resolve disputes, and make it work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's clear to me that the trickle-down theory 

subscribed to by Conservatives and Liberals over the years -- 

the trickle-down theory that has if you feed an elephant enough 

oats, eventually some birdseed will come out the other end and 

the birds can get fed -- that doesn't work terribly well for birds.  

It clearly does not work well for people, clearly does not work 

well for people. 

 

And this Act, along with some of the other . . . for instance The 

Labour Standards Act, to me, Mr. Speaker, this really 

highlights the differences between opposition Liberals and 

Conservatives who are lock-step in this and their understanding 

of workers, their understanding of the economy, their 

understanding of life.  And it's a philosophical difference. 

 

They have every right to hold that view that this is bad 

legislation.  They have every right in the world to stand up and 

point out where they think this is flawed.  But I think it's 

incumbent on us all to understand the differences of 

understanding.  Who is it that is standing up for, in addition to 

the working women and working men, the working people of 

Saskatchewan, but also trying to make that relationship work in 

a better manner?  Who is it?  It's this government. 

 

We are doing that.  We've done good things in the past in 

labour relations, in occupational health and safety, and in The 

Trade Union Act and other labour legislations in the past.  This 

is the fourth major piece of labour legislation introduced by this 

government.  It's one that I'm very proud of, as with other 

labour legislation that we have introduced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only minor regret I have in this Trade Union Act is that it's 

introduced in 1994 and wasn't in 1993.  Now that is history and 

there is no way that I'm going to make a big thing of that. 

 

I'm very, very proud.  The Minister of Labour, the broad 

consultation he has done throughout the trade union 

community, working community, with the business 

community, the thought that has been put into this Trade Union 

Act is something that is just phenomenal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to end my comments.  But I want to 

end by saying again how very proud I am of 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

this Trade Union Act, this fourth star in our labour legislation; 

how very proud I am of the Minister of Labour for doing so; 

how very proud I am of organized trade unions for their 

lobbying efforts, their discussion, their input.  I think it's a 

wonderful effort all the way around. 

 

I recognize that mine is not the last word on this issue and that 

there are still a great many naysayers out there.  But the goal 

for us all is to achieve a set of rules that are even-handed, that 

are workable for, in this case, both parties, and that will allow 

for some years of fairness to working people, of fairness to 

business, and of labour rest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will take my place now, having said my piece on 

this Trade Union Act.  I will of course be supporting this Act at 

every turn.  I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just have a few 

very brief comments I want to make about this Act. 

 

In some countries where there has been a long tradition of 

industrial peace, they quite readily accept the notion that people 

should have the right to organize.  Because it's only through 

organized discussions between employers and employees that 

people are able to discuss issues of common concern in the 

economy, matters of productivity, matters of the particular 

economic health of a particular business. 

 

When there is an organized workplace, there becomes a forum 

for those discussions and a forum in which the workers don't 

have to feel necessarily victimized by changes in the economy, 

but can take an active role in positive response and positive 

adjustment to the economy. 

 

This has not always been the case.  But I think we see a lot of 

examples now in Canada where employees are saying, rather 

than let a workplace go out of business or rather than let a 

particular industry go out of business, they make the decision to 

instead make some voluntary changes in their contracts.  And I 

think that creates a much more positive environment for those 

kinds of changes than if one group simply imposes them on 

another group. 

 

We do have in the Canadian Constitution clauses that guarantee 

freedom of association.  It's very difficult to have freedom of 

association unless you have a balance of power in the 

relationships within that association.  So another thing that a 

trade union Act does is it helps balance out those relationships 

of power within the economy so that freedom of association 

can in fact be free and be true to that principle. 

 

So I really didn't have too much to add to this debate but those 

kind of two key principles, of the very positive role that a good 

structured relationship between employee and employers can 

bring to the workplace and to the economy, as well as the 

notice 

of the benefits of free association.  I think these are two 

principles that are very fundamental to this Act.  And with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I'll take my seat.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it was 

interesting, as I enter the debate today, to listen to some of the 

comments made previously in the Assembly this morning.  And 

I think I would like to pick up where the member from Regina 

Albert North left off when he was talking about the 

consultation process that went into building this wonderful 

Trade Union Act that we're discussing this morning, and about 

how people all over the province had bought into the process. 

 

In today's paper there's a nice list, Mr. Speaker, of the folks that 

said no, I don't think I've bought into the process at all; we 

think that there's a great deal of trouble with what we have 

before us in this Assembly. 

 

And I would just remind the member that the Saskatchewan 

Chamber, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business 

have been joined today by the Saskatchewan home builders, the 

Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices Association.  You can 

put the Saskatchewan Mining Association on that, the Prairie 

Implement Manufacturers Association.  It's to the point, Mr. 

Speaker, where just about everybody that employs somebody in 

the province of Saskatchewan says that the government hasn't 

done their job. 

 

And when you tack on the public sector, Mr. Speaker, as we 

have seen already with The Labour Standards Act, where 

SUMA and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations) and just about the entire public sector -- 

I believe the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) had a few choice comments for the minister also 

-- are saying: we don't like this process, because quite frankly, 

nobody's talked to us.  Here we are; we supposedly have had 16 

months of consultation in the province of Saskatchewan for 

everybody that employs somebody, and they're all saying no, 

nobody bothered to talk to us. 

 

The minister would come out and he would give us a 

dissertation about ancient history, about labour law in Britain in 

the last century and about labour law in the United States in the 

1930s.  And as I reminded the member from Regina Albert 

North there, they should have dragged him along to give us the 

gospel according to that member for 1972, because he seems to 

have that down pretty pat. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we're in 1994 and there's a 

whole lot of things going on in the world that are different 

today than they were even 20 years ago.  And the folks, the 

good folks that are saying we haven't been properly consulted 

with here; the folks that pay the pay cheques, take the 

deductions on behalf of everybody; the folks that employ most 

of the workers in the province of Saskatchewan, are saying 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

no, we haven't been consulted with.  We need time.  We need 

to sit down with this government and explain the facts of life to 

them.  That's what's before us today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1230) 

 

You hear the member talk about how this is going to be so 

good for the economy and the workers in our economy.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we have repeatedly asked the minister -- we've 

repeatedly asked the Premier -- to show us where one person is 

going to drop off those welfare rolls of over 81,000 because of 

these two Acts, one of them. 

 

The 12,000 jobs that have disappeared in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, since these people came to power in October of 1991 

-- 12,000 of them gone, poof -- is one of those jobs going to 

come back because of these two pieces of legislation?  And 

particularly given what we are seeing in the amendments of 

The Trade Union Act and the powers that the minister and his 

friends in cabinet are going to bestow upon the Labour 

Relations Board, can they show us where there is one new job? 

 

And you know what?  Every time that question has been asked, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister dekes and dives and comes up with 

some other excuse of why he doesn't have to answer that 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are pretty fundamental questions for the 

folks out there that are on UI (Unemployment Insurance), that 

are on the welfare rolls, or had to run off to Alberta or British 

Columbia or somewhere else in order to get a job.  Those are 

fundamental questions. 

 

The member from Albert North also talks about how my 

children someday might like the protection of The Trade Union 

Act.  Well, Mr. Speaker, my children someday might like the 

prospect of a job in their own province.  I'd like to get them 

employed as gainful taxpayers before I really start worrying 

about some of the other issues in front of them.  They've got to 

get the first job.  And if you don't have job creation, if 

everybody has run out of this province because of the economic 

climate these people create, then there isn't a chance, Mr. 

Speaker, that my children are going to stay here, because there 

will be no jobs for them. 

 

So the question begs, Mr. Speaker, the Partnership for 

Renewal -- the Partnership for Renewal.  How many times 

do we ask or do we hear the minister from Elphinstone, the 

Premier, the twin ministers of Finance, tell us about the 

Partnership for Renewal and how that is going to rebuild the 

Saskatchewan economy and employ people? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how in the world do they square these two 

pieces of legislation with that?  Because everything that is in 

the Partnership for Renewal, the NDP's own document, 

government document, talks about value added; it talks about 

processing; it talks about all of these new initiatives; talks 

about the red meat sector.  I mean we've got the Agriculture 

minister with his own little game plan there called Ag 2000. 

Mr. Speaker, none of those things will square with what the 

Minister of Labour is bringing forward in this province, 

because all of those things are predicated on trade, on free 

trade, on provincial barriers dropping; that the flow of goods 

and services and people back and forth into this new reality of 

the 21st century will help out the province of Saskatchewan.  

It's all written there in their own document. 

 

And instead we've got the Minister of Labour here, after 16 

months of we're-not-sure-what, bringing forward a couple of 

Bills that take Saskatchewan out of the mix entirely.  That take 

this jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, out of the western Canadian 

context and the North American context and change the rules 

significantly enough that we will not see one investment dollar, 

I predict, Mr. Speaker, because of what's going on.  There isn't 

a company in their right mind is going to come into this 

jurisdiction with a Labour Relations Board that has the kind of 

power that the minister is proposing to this House. 

 

I mean if you want to take this to the extreme, Mr. Speaker, as I 

understand the legislation, and the minister can correct me if 

he's wrong, but in the last year of their term -- and these are 

politically appointed bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker -- in the last year 

of their term, they could appoint the now-distinguished 

president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour to the 

chairmanship of that committee. 

 

I'm just using hypothetical circumstances here, Mr. Speaker, 

but say they wanted to take the now-president of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and appoint that individual 

to the chairmanship of the board.  That particular position, Mr. 

Speaker, is then filled for the next five years, the next five 

years.  So even if these people are thrown out of office -- which 

I predict they will be in the next general election in this 

province -- they get themselves turfed out of office so the next 

government, Mr. Speaker, has to live with that individual and 

the pronouncements of that individual over the entire term of 

their government. 

 

So it amazes me, Mr. Speaker, that this supposedly new, 

reformed bunch of social democrats over here, these new-found 

democrats as they liked to call themselves in opposition, would 

bring in labour legislation that absolutely tied the hands of 

anyone else in a rapidly changing economy, in a rapidly 

changing world, with the most Draconian rule ever presented in 

this province, vis-a-vis the Labour Relations Board. 

 

And I ask that question then very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, to 

them, is that 81,000-plus on welfare, those 12,000 disappeared 

jobs, the people on UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) and the young people who flee this province on a 

daily basis, why should they have any confidence?  Why 

should they have any confidence in this government?  They say 

one thing when they want someone to listen on one side and 

they do something on the other. 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

And the minister's absolutely right. He's got a pendulum going 

and the old pendulum swings over and it pays off a few 

political debts and then it comes swinging back and it just 

wipes out a whole bunch of people.  That's what it does, Mr. 

Speaker. It's a good analogy.  It's a good analogy.  It just 

swings right back over and it just says, you don't have a hope of 

economic recovery in this province because no one in their 

right mind is going to invest in a jurisdiction that is far more 

expensive than all those around them. 

 

It's simple, Mr. Speaker. At the end of the day you still have to 

generate a profit if you're going to treat your employees and 

your shareholders, your potential investors, properly. 

 

A healthy financial company, Mr. Speaker, has got far more 

ability to be a good employer than a company that is going 

broke, a company that can't pay its bills; a company, Mr. 

Speaker, that has to look at other jurisdictions in order to 

survive.  It's very simple. 

 

My colleague from Moosomin this morning pointed out a 

number of areas to the minister.  And these are real concerns -- 

they're not made-up concerns, they're not something that people 

are pulling out of the air. 

 

I mean there's no way that the Saskatchewan Home Builders' 

Association, which is primarily small, non-union companies, 

would even get into this fray if they don't see the damage that is 

done to the Saskatchewan economy, which is only beginning to 

recover in a small way, Mr. Speaker, from the national 

recession that Canada's been in, because of the strength that 

we're seeing south of the 49th parallel.  There's no way they 

would have gotten into the fray. 

 

The Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices Association, it was 

only two and a half short years ago, Mr. Speaker, that many 

people in the restaurant business in this province were happily 

laying petitions against harmonization of the PST (provincial 

sales tax) and the GST (goods and services tax) on their 

counters for their customers to sign so that these people, in 

their narrow political drive for power in this province, could 

benefit. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, they speak out loudly against this minister 

and this government because of the damage that will be done to 

the food industry and to the tourism industry in this province.  

And they are organizing and standing shoulder to shoulder, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the betrayal, the broken promises that these 

people made, while in opposition, to them, and what would 

happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don't want their employees added to that 

81,000-plus welfare role.  They don't want their employees and 

the jobs that go with them added to that minus 12,000 jobs that 

have disappeared in this province since 1991.  And they don't 

want their employees, Mr. Speaker, added to the UIC rolls of 

this country. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the employees that they still have at the end 

of the day don't want anything to do with the $2,600 in extra 

taxation which these people have levied upon them since 

October of 1991. 

 

Now is there any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that people are 

coalescing together to fight this legislation?  The minister says 

he consulted.  At the end of the consultation process, both of 

the commissions put together by the minister were either 

ignored or cherry-picked.  Both of these supposedly 

independent  commissions that would study the affected 

changes were either ignored or cherry-picked. 

 

And the minister in his second reading speech very carefully 

chose what he wished from the Ish commission and what was 

rejected.  And it was the same with Priel and that report, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So at the end of the day one only has to surmise that this whole 

exercise is tied to some type of political agenda.  Otherwise the 

fact that no one could come forward with a unanimous 

recommendation to this government would have been 

recognized and the process would have been started again.  If 

the recommendations that had come forward had been truly 

listened to, Mr. Speaker, this legislation wouldn't be here 

because obviously the consensus-building process in this 

province hadn't occurred -- hadn't occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in this province, the declining tax base of 

this province, are becoming fearful.  They are fearful of their 

ability to contribute enough to this government's insatiable 

appetite for revenue and at the same time keep their home fires 

burning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I listened on television the other night to the 

committee member on the GST committee from Ottawa saying, 

I don't understand why people in the streets of this province are 

not in open revolt, it made me really understand the opposition 

being brought forward by various groups and organizations to 

this government and this legislation. 

 

I mean others outside our province recognize the load that 

people are under here.  And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

Saskatchewan people being what they are, they're tough, they're 

resilient.  The member from Regina Albert North and I agree 

on a few things there, that these Saskatchewan people we 

represent in this Chamber are good, hard-working, honest 

citizens. 

 

But the fact that they have shouldered the burden to this point 

without a lot of whining and complaining, Mr. Speaker, is a 

tribute to them.  It has nothing to do with this government.  It's 

a tribute to the folks who shoulder the load.  It has nothing to 

do with these people.  These people just add the burden every 

time they come into this House.  First it was agriculture and 

farmers, Mr. Speaker, then it was health care workers, and now 

we're into the general employed population of the province. 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, there's no reason for anyone belonging to the 

chamber or the Federation of Independent Business or the 

home builders or the restaurant and food service association or 

the mining association or PEBA (Public Employees Benefits 

Agency) or anybody else to employ anybody at some point in 

time.  Why would you work 18 hours a day, as some people do 

that own businesses, why would you go through all of that, 

given the mounting load that's being placed upon them in every 

sector, and then continue to do that with these two pieces of 

legislation coming down on your head?  Why would you do 

that? 

 

(1245) 

 

It doesn't make any sense sometimes, Mr. Speaker, to work and 

work and work if at the end of the day a politically appointed 

board sitting over here can say, your place of business, your 

workplace, is now certified, and there hasn't even been a 

democratically held vote.  I mean at some place, Mr. Speaker, 

there has to be some basic democracy in this whole business.  

Fifty per cent plus one is how we elect just about everything we 

do in our lives in this province, Mr. Speaker, and it is a secret 

ballot held in a neutral place, supervised by neutral people.  

That is the premiss of our democratic system. 

 

Now if the minister had come forward with that in his proposal, 

no one would have complained, Mr. Speaker.  Because then the 

power of this politically appointed bureaucratic organization 

called the Labour Relations Board at least would have been 

balanced by the democratic right of individuals to exercise that 

right, in a secret ballot, in a neutral place, supervised by neutral 

people. 

 

But that's not the case, Mr. Speaker.  This board or body who 

are going to have ultimate authority over people's lives for up 

to five years, are going to be able to certify, decertify, play with 

the lives of people and taxpayers in this province as we've 

never seen before.  And the minister says the pendulum has to 

swing that way.  Mr. Speaker, that's bunk, absolute bunk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can't believe that there is a workplace in this 

province that would not appreciate that opportunity.  I know 

some people in the union leadership, Mr. Speaker, who don't 

appreciate that opportunity because it might affect their job.  

But I for the life of me, and the folks that I know and I 

represent in my constituency, I know that they understand 50 

per cent plus one, Mr. Speaker.  I know they understand that 

fundamental principle.  And I cannot understand why this 

bunch of new-found democrats that are now in government 

would not want to understand that principle. 

 

We are a changing society, Mr. Speaker.  There are global 

issues brought into our homes every night at 6 o'clock, in the 

news.  The world around us changes.  And that's not to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that a lot of those things are particularly nice or things 

that we should adopt.  But the fact is that our workplace and 

our population is changing.  They're more educated, they have 

had more disposable income by and large, and 

they have had more free time on their hands than ever before in 

our history. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it means that you have to change with those 

times.  You maintain some basic principles, but you have to 

change with those times.  And I cannot understand a 

government that faces a very difficult financial situation - 

_ I give them that, a very difficult financial situation -- wanting 

to put impediments in the place of resolving that situation. 

 

The problem with New Democrats is on one hand they are 

going to make the leap, but then we have the member from 

Regina Albert North getting up and reminding us about that 

darker side that resists change in that political party. 

 

It makes me think of the way that that political party selects 

leaders, Mr. Speaker, and all the special interest groups that get 

guaranteed allotments of voting delegates at conventions.  And 

then I understand why there's this reluctance for 50 per cent 

plus one voting privileges by people in a workplace in neutral 

jurisdictions supervised by neutral people, because it doesn't 

even exist in the New Democratic Party in the way they choose 

their delegates for leadership selection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this list of people that I have read out this 

morning in organizations are saying to the government, you've 

got another chance.  There isn't one of them that hasn't agreed 

to come back and sit down.  Not one of these organizations isn't 

willing to sit down with the minister and with cabinet, with 

whoever, and work toward change. 

 

I'm amazed that people haven't drawn a line in the sand and just 

said, to heck with it.  I really am, Mr. Speaker.  I mean, that 

was always the approach that these people advocated in 

opposition.  They were constantly running around this province 

drawing lines in the sand and encouraging people to be 

disobedient and to -- how do they say? -- make the place 

ungovernable.  You know, the more rabble-rousers you could 

drag out at a one given time was seen as a credence of your 

political capability.  They constantly encouraged that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the organizations I've talked about don't act 

that way.  They know there's a process and they're willing to sit 

down, and time after time they've said to these people, why 

don't you pull this stuff off the agenda, at least until the fall 

session.  Until we honestly can sit down and see how it fits in 

with the Partnership for Renewal.  How we see it fits in with 

Ag 2000.  How we see it fit in with SOC (Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation).  How we see it fit in with SAHO 

and the changes that are occurring in the health sector.  How 

we see it fit in with contracting out, which is going to be a big 

issue in the health care sector.  All of these issues are on the 

table and the minister has not given us one answer -- not one. 

 

We asked him to table the regulations.  Oh no, I can't do that.  

He says, pass the Bill first and then we'll design the regulations.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's 



April 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

asking to get drifted -- one high, hard, one right in the left ear.  

That's what the minister is asking people to do.  Because at the 

end of the day, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we still will 

have this almighty Labour Relations Board sitting there 

adjudicating the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government believes for one minute that it's 

all rosy out there, then they'd better go back to the drawing 

board and listen again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of comments to make on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people.  And I believe the minister and his 

government as well as members of the opposition, who have to 

be cognizant of both sides in this argument, should take the 

opportunity over the weekend and go back and listen to what 

people are saying.  They should listen to what people are 

saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:52 p.m. 

 


