




















































Hansard: April 13, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1517 

 April 13, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 

present a petition.  I'll read the prayer to you: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

We have petitions from my constituency, a small town of Fox 

Valley.  We also have from Piapot several signatures, as well as 

from the town of Maple Creek and surrounding area.  And we 

also have a few from the Climax, Swift Current, and Bracken 

areas of the province, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm proud to present 

them on behalf of these petitioners today. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost-sharing or other alternative agreed 

upon by all parties. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Carnduff and Alida in 

my constituency; also from Stoughton, Weyburn, Heward, 

Creelman, Mr. Speaker; Ridgedale and Tisdale and Zenon Park 

in the north-east.  I present these. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions I would like to lay on the Table today.  I will read the 

prayer also: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put 

aside any consideration of forcing small-business owners to 

pay 100 per cent of the cost involved with digging up 

underground storage tanks and replacing them, and instead 

offer alternatives through abandoning regulations calling for 

digging up of underground tanks, with the exception of those 

tanks which have been proved to be leaking, cost sharing or 

other alternatives agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these signatures range all the way from Cupar, 

Lanigan, Qu'Appelle, Saskatoon, as far north as Meadow Lake, 

Mr. Speaker, and Muskeg Lake.  They range almost as far 

north as we go.  And I so present them. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a petition I'd 

like to present to the Assembly.  I'd like to read into the records 

the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from the 

communities of Wawota, Fairlight, Moosomin, Yorkton, 

Canora, Buchanan, Saltcoats, Saskatoon -- across this province.  

I so present them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

with regard to underground storage tanks and the cost of 

replacing them and digging them up.  These petitioners from, 

actually from the minister's constituency, some of them are 

from Elrose, Wartime, a number of them from the Elrose area 

particularly; and within my constituency, Hoosier, Smiley, 

Kindersley, Eatonia, Flaxcombe, and a number of other places, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I present them now. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have petitions 

to present to the Assembly today, and I'll just read the prayer 

into the records, sir. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

underground storage tanks or replacing them, and instead 

offer alternatives through abandoning regulations calling for 

digging up underground tanks, with the exception of those 

tanks which have been proven to be leaking, cost sharing or 

another alternative agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the communities of 

Rouleau, Hearne, Spring Valley, Briercrest, Moose Jaw, 

Biggar, Saskatchewan; Springside, Yorkton, Saskatchewan -- 

citizens from all over the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have petitions to present 

today with respect to the digging up of underground tanks.  

And these people are from across the province: certainly from 

my riding, Torquay and Estevan; several from the north-east 

part of the province, Carrot River and Nipawin; Cumberland 

House as well; a large number from Prince Albert; and 

Buchanan, Mr. Speaker, from Pelly constituency.  And these 

citizens obviously have agreed with other petitioners and would 

like some reason put back into the legislation and to the 

government's efforts with respect to tanks. 

 

I do so table now. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Government Organization Act (Executive Council 

Reduction). 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 

a group of 25 students from Athabasca School.  Athabasca is so 

close to my back door that I can lean out and help with 

playground supervision during the times when they get to get 

out and play.  They're accompanied today by Mrs. 

McCutcheon, Mrs. Martin, Mrs. Dayton, Mrs. Schentag, and 

Mrs. Soriano.  Mrs. McCutcheon is the teacher. 

 

I'll meet you for a photo at 2:20 and then we'll visit after.  And I 

hope you'll have some hard questions for me.  Would 

everybody join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce some 23 grade 4 students from St. Pius X school in 

Regina.  They are seated in your gallery; and I will be meeting 

with them after question period for pictures and refreshments.  

They are accompanied by Ms. Nathalie Brissette, their teacher; 

and I would also ask all members in the House to join me in 

welcoming the students and their teacher. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

House three high school students who are involved in the 

young public servant for a day program.  Mr. Speaker, these 

students are seated in your gallery. 

 

The purpose of this program is to increase the awareness of the 

value of the public service amongst high school students and 

the general public as well.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this 

program . . . this is the third year of this program, it has been 

very successful; and I am told that it's very popular amongst the 

students and the public servants who act as their mentors for 

the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have with us Teresa Drew, Brad Miller, and 

Kimberly Kovacs, and I ask all members to join with us in 

welcoming these students to the House today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have 

proof positive for you today that people don't always leave 

Saskatchewan to go to B.C. (British Columbia).  We have in 

our gallery a cousin of mine from B.C. who is here visiting us 

in Saskatchewan today.  I would like all members to welcome 

my cousin, Jerome Capelle, from Dawson Creek, B.C., who is 

here to enjoy the proceedings and visit a bit later on.  So if you 

join with me, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

for recognizing me.  And I want to say that I sincerely mean 

that, especially today, because I have my sister and her husband 

from Saskatoon with me.  She was thinking . . . might be a bit 

worried about whether or not I had any influence with the 

Speaker at all.  Of course I know that I don't, but thank you for 

recognizing me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and to the members of the House, I'd like 

to introduce my sister -- there are two of us in the family -- Ann 

Koral and her husband Walter.  They are accompanied by two 

of their friends from Saskatoon, Regena and Nicholas Blocka. 

 

They've come down to check up on me and to see whether or 

not I'm doing the job.  And they're in the Speaker's gallery and 

I'd like the members to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to introduce a special person this afternoon, a grade 

12 student, Janine Jeworski, who is here with us today seated in 

the west gallery as part of the Institute of Public Administration 

of Canada's program and Regina's regional 5th annual young 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

public-servant-for-a-day event.  I want to say a special 

welcome to Janine. She's here from the Greenall High School 

in Balgonie. 

 

And accompanying her today is a special friend of ours, 

Hermine Pluimers, who is the director of communications from 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation).  

And they will be spending the day overviewing SEDCO's role 

in the provincial economy and the actions that it is taking to 

help the recovery we're now involved in. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just 

noticed two additional guests in your gallery, Kelly Miner and 

Mark Hollyoak, who are representatives for RWDSU (Retail, 

Wholesale and Department Store Union) and are long-time 

work associates.  I'd like everybody to join me in welcoming 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I hope the members will allow the Speaker 

to also welcome a couple of people.  I would be remiss in not 

welcoming the sister of the Premier.  Even though it's 

important that she is the sister of the Premier, it's more 

important that she is a constituent of the Speaker.  So I do want 

to welcome you and your husband to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Opening of Uncle Mac's Variety Shack in Kamsack 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to inform the Assembly of an exceptional example of 

community development, the recent opening of the Uncle 

Mac's Variety Shack at Kamsack organized by the MacKenzie 

Society. 

 

The Uncle Mac's used-clothing store is contributing to the 

community in two important areas -- providing employment for 

people with disabilities and helping the environment through 

recycling.  Uncle Mac's has given the opportunity to disabled 

people to do very important and valuable work.  Jobs will 

include sorting, repairing, and preparing used clothing for sale 

in their store.  It will also recycle unsold clothing into rags. 

 

The profits from the Uncle Mac's store will return to the 

MacKenzie Society, a non-profit organization, to improve the 

services it provides for people with disabilities.  The 

MacKenzie Society provides the services for people at their 

training centre located in Preeceville; the vocational services, 

as well as planning and management activities.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to congratulate the board in this very 

important initiative and wish them luck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Jeux Canada Games 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday in 

Saskatoon the Jeux Canada Games Foundation held a press 

conference to give some good news to Saskatchewan sports 

organizations.  For four years I was proud to be on the 

organizing committee of the Jeux Canada Games held in 

Saskatoon in 1989.  One of the legacies of those games was the 

creation of an endowment fund.  This fund provides annual 

grants equal to the accumulated interest on the fund.  The 

grants announced yesterday are the fourth set since the games. 

 

An ongoing goal of the Jeux Canada Games, wherever they are 

held, is to leave a permanent heritage to the host community.  

We certainly did this in Saskatoon.  Hosting the 1989 games 

left us with a fine legacy in facilities and development 

opportunities in sport.  The foundation is following the lead of 

the games by targeting its grants towards projects which assist 

in the development of sport in Saskatchewan. 

 

This year the legacy of the games carries on well beyond the 

year 1989.  Grants in the amount of $122,600 were awarded to 

seven community based groups, 17 provincial sports governing 

bodies, five zone sports councils, and two service 

organizations.  These grants covered the province from Estevan 

to Meadow Lake.  Saskatoon hosted the games from 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan shares the benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to have been involved at the beginning.  

I am pleased to see the goals of the foundation being carried on, 

and I congratulate President Marty Irwin and his executive for 

their wise stewardship of this fund to further Saskatchewan 

amateur sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Milestone Indoor Rodeo 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Last weekend the third annual Milestone 

indoor rodeo took place.  This event is sanctioned by the 

Canadian Cowboy Association.  It involves over 200 

contestants who ride, rope, bulldog, and race.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, contestants came from all over Saskatchewan, 

Manitoba, Alberta, Montana, and North Dakota. 

 

This was not just a sporting event, Mr. Speaker.  This was a 

community get-together which involved the whole town and 

district.  More signs of that Saskatchewan vibrancy members 

have been talking about.  During the three days there were two 

dances, three professional rodeo competitions, a bingo, a ranch 

rodeo, and a church service. 

 

The ranch rodeo was a new event introduced this year.  It 

allowed local up-and-coming cowboys and cowgirls to get a 

taste of participation and competition in a number of fun 

events.  Over 2,000 participants and spectators alike enjoyed 

the competition, the hospitality, and the food.  And as a matter 

of fact, over 500 pounds of beef was served on kaiser buns 

during 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

the weekend. 

 

An event like this did not just happen.  The Milestone Rodeo 

Association planned and ran the rodeo, but volunteers far too 

numerous to name, did their bit as well.  The fire-fighters, 

curling club, hockey and figure skating associations, and 

dozens of individuals, made the event a success. 

 

The Milestone ambulance was there, and fortunately was not 

needed. 

 

Congratulations to the rodeo association and community and I 

look forward to next year's event.  Happy trails to you.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agricultural Technology Agreements 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I am 

pleased to announce to the Assembly that two very important 

and exciting agreements for Saskatchewan were confirmed this 

week. 

 

First, the province, along with the Monsanto Company of St. 

Louis, Missouri, have signed a memorandum of understanding 

to cooperate in areas of mutual interest and benefit, which 

include conservation and farming practices and biotechnology.  

There were three proposals under the agreement, which 

included a long-term joint initiative for the genetic 

transformation of cereal grains for industrial applications, 

promotion of dry land conservation farming practices and 

technologies, and establishment of an agricultural soil 

conservation information network. 

 

Secondly, a three-year, $1.6 million program which involved 

the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association, Agri-Food 

Canada, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, Monsanto, 

TransAlta Corporation, and the PFRA (Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Administration) is going to enhance soil 

conservation by promoting the benefits of direct seeding among 

Saskatchewan farmers.  The program will offer direct seeding 

workshops to farmers and provide farm visits and consultation 

services to assist farmers in making this transition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two agreements have the potential to create 

hundreds of jobs province-wide, while at the same time helping 

the environment of the province.  Through alliances with global 

companies such as these, Saskatchewan is able to grow by 

building on its own strength.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ambassador Program for Esterhazy 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  So far in my 

young life I've been a teacher; I'm currently an MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) and a farmer;  I am widely 

recognized as an innovative and highly disciplined motivator of 

some hockey players 

of dubious skills and talent. 

 

And tonight, Mr. Speaker, I will have an opportunity to become 

an ambassador.  Tonight the Esterhazy Town Council is 

hosting a dinner at which Esterhazy's ambassadorship program 

will be kicked off.  A minimum of 10 residents will share the 

honour and be declared economic ambassadors for Esterhazy -- 

a very worthy honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, official certificates will be issued to the 

ambassadors indicating the high status of the program.  That's 

not quite a car and a chauffeur, but a great privilege none the 

less. 

 

Our special guest for this innovative program will be Laurier 

LaPierre, a well-known Canadian journalist and current Max 

Bell visiting professor at the School of Journalism at the 

University of Regina. 

 

Our role as ambassadors will be to promote economic 

development in and for Esterhazy, and we all hope that our 

efforts will enhance the community.  In real terms, Mr. 

Speaker, this event is one more piece of evidence that the 

people of Saskatchewan and their communities are actively 

involved in working to improve economic viability of our 

province and the quality of life we like to call the 

Saskatchewan way. 

 

They are doing it themselves, not depending on outside 

megaprojects or government hand-outs or manna from heaven.  

I am proud to be a participating ambassador.  As a team, we all 

intend to take our duties very seriously.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Visit of Roberta Bondar 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it has 

truly been said that to really appreciate something you must 

first leave it.  We have as a visitor to Saskatchewan yesterday 

and today, a person who has tested that statement in a highly 

original way.  Dr. Roberta Bondar, Canada's first female 

astronaut and a true friend of the earth, is in Regina today after 

spending yesterday in Saskatoon.  We were to have had the 

opportunity of having Dr. Bondar introduced to the Assembly 

later this afternoon, but her busy schedule will not permit a 

side-trip here.  Besides, Mr. Speaker, her work here is to meet 

as many school children as possible to talk about the 

environment and that, I think we can all agree, is more 

important than receiving one more recognition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 90 seconds one cannot begin to list Dr. 

Bondar's accomplishments which are well-known.  Her visit 

here has two main purposes, one of which I have alluded to.  

She is the spokesperson for the Friends of the Environment 

Foundation which is supported by Canada Trust and its 

customers.  The foundation is giving a grant to the 

Saskatchewan Science Centre today. 

 

And very appropriately, during National Wildlife Week, she is 

talking to schools, promoting 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

environmental common sense by suggesting projects such as 

the ones we have heard mentioned in the last two days. 

 

I had the honour to meet Dr. Bondar this morning.  I was 

impressed.  I welcome her to Saskatchewan for us all.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskPower Contracts 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Mr. 

Minister, could you tell me how many contracts SaskPower has 

awarded to a company called Advanced Ag & Industrial Ltd., 

of Biggar, and what is the total value of those contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't know the specific answer to that 

question; it's quite detailed.  If the member would have given 

me notice prior to question period I would have been more than 

happy to have had that information here for him.  But as a 

result, I'll take notice of the question, Mr. Speaker, and provide 

the answer at a later date. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I have 

here a letter from SaskPower confirming that Advanced Ag & 

Industrial Ltd. recently received a SaskPower contract to install 

a number of fuel storage tanks at Whitesand dam in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The significance of this is that one of the owners and the 

general manager of this company is Jack Messer's son, Mike.  

Mr. Minister, Jack Messer is awarding a major SaskPower 

contract to his son's company.  Mr. Minister, is this not a clear 

case of conflict of interest, something your party roundly 

criticized when you were in opposition? 

 

Mr. Minister, what actions are you going to take against Jack 

Messer for awarding contracts to his son? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- As in the previous question, Mr. 

Speaker, I'll take notice of that and certainly get back to the 

member.  And if there's something inappropriate, we'll discuss 

the action to be taken at that time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the facts 

on this are very clear.  Jack Messer's son is one of the owners 

of Advanced Ag & Industrial Ltd.  Advanced Ag & Industrial 

Ltd. has received contracts to sell fuel tanks to SaskPower. 

 

They're even quite proud of this fact, Mr. Minister.  I have here 

a copy of the company's beautiful colour flyer which is with a 

picture of one of their SaskPower tanks right on the front.  And 

the flyer says: get an envirotank advantage. 

And I have to admit, if your father is Jack Messer, your 

company does have quite an advantage in this province.  The 

problem is, Mr. Minister, the rest of Saskatchewan taxpayers 

wind up paying for that advantage through higher taxes and 

higher power bills. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you allowing Jack Messer to hand out 

major SaskPower contracts to his son? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- As I stated, Mr. Speaker, it would have 

been nice if the member would have given me advance notice 

of that kind of a detailed question.  I will find out the 

information and report back to the member. 

 

But I think it should be kept in mind if the situation is a tender 

situation and the company is low tender, I see nothing wrong 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The minister has taken notice. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, let's just go over a few of Jack 

Messer's accomplishments in the last couple of months.  First, 

he single-handedly rips one of the economic cornerstones of 

your government's 1993 throne speech by cancelling 

co-generation.  Done.  Gone. 

 

Then he gets the government to pay $20,000 in taxpayers' 

money so he can take over his neighbour's farm.  Then he gives 

his business partner, David Dombowsky, a big, fat personal 

services contract with SaskPower.  And now he's doling out 

SaskPower contracts to his son. 

 

That's a pretty impressive record, Mr. Minister.  And who 

winds up paying for Jack Messer's little empire-building 

agenda?  Saskatchewan taxpayers through increased taxes and 

increased power rates. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's time for Jack Messer's little tin pot . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Order.  Member, ask his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, it's time for you to do something 

about Jack Messer and his little dictatorship over at SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you stand up for the people of Saskatchewan 

and the taxpayers oaf Saskatchewan and fire Jack Messer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well in terms of the number of issues 

that the hon. member raises, I'd first point out that Jack Messer 

did not cancel co-generation.  I take full responsibility.  I made 

the decision to defer co-generation at this point in time. 

 

In regard to dollars to Jack Messer for his farm, Jack Messer 

got not one cent in the issue the member refers 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

to.  In the case of David Dombowsky, David Dombowsky's 

credentials are in excess of what it would require to do the job 

that he's been contracted to do.  And I don't know why you 

would run down Mr. Dombowsky in this legislature. 

 

In terms of paying for things by the rate increase that was 

announced for April 1, I point out to the hon. member opposite 

that in 1992 the Crown corporations that could declare a 

dividend to the Crown Investments Corporation in excess of 

about $170 million, not one cent of that got from CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) into the 

Consolidated Fund.  In fact the Consolidated Fund still had to 

put into Crown Investments Corporation in excess of $4 

million because the money that went in there went to pay for 

the bad deals that your administration made when you were 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I guess it 

was a little naive of me to expect you to do something about 

Jack Messer.  It's a little bit like asking the chimp to fire the 

organ-grinder.  So I'll direct my next question to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, you campaigned long and hard against political 

appointees taking advantage of Saskatchewan taxpayers, and 

now your NDP (New Democratic Party) campaign manager is 

making a mockery of your government and the people of this 

province . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I know that a number of 

members aren't interested in the question, but the member does 

have a right to ask a question, and I please . . . will members 

please just settle down and allow him to ask his question.  And 

I wish the member would cut down on his preamble just a bit.  

Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Premier, your NDP campaign 

manager is making a mockery of your government and the 

people of the province by using SaskPower as his own personal 

patronage machine.  Surely you must recognize that Jack 

Messer doling out contracts to his son's company is a conflict 

of interest in the highest order and simply cannot be allowed. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you do the right thing, will you stand up for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and fire Jack Messer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I find the hon. member opposite very 

entertaining.  I've been called a chump before but I've never 

been called a chimp, and I certainly have now. 

 

But I have indicated to the hon. member, I'll take notice of 

those questions that you've posed here this afternoon and I'll 

report back to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Underground Fuel Tanks 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of the Environment.  Mr. Minister, I understand 

you met this morning with members of the Environmental 

Fairness Association, service station owners who are being 

forced to spend thousands of dollars to replace their 

underground fuel tanks. 

 

It's kind of an interesting coincidence that these business 

owners are being forced to replace their tanks with exactly the 

same kind of tank that Jack Messer's son is now manufacturing. 

 

Mr. Minister, after hearing the tremendous hardship this policy 

is placing on those businesses and communities all over 

Saskatchewan, what changes will you be making to this policy 

as a result of this morning's meeting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind the 

members of the history of this issue; that this was in fact the 

regulatory matter that your colleagues in government 

introduced in the late '80s.  And when I took over the 

department, we put a committee in place to examine the 

regulations that were in place and came forward with an action 

plan last spring to address some of the shortcomings that you 

had left there. 

 

Part of that action plan was to establish an advisory committee 

of which the members you speak of are a part.  And after the 

meeting this morning, they agreed to take the issues that they 

had raised with me back to the committee so that when they are 

done consulting with all the members at the table, they can give 

me a collective committee report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's nice to 

hear that you're consulting.  But are you listening?  Because 

once again we see your government carrying through on a 

policy that's going to drive businesses and jobs out of this 

province. 

 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

estimates that between 2 and 300 service stations will close 

down in Saskatchewan as a result of this tank policy.  And not 

only will service stations close, but municipalities and school 

boards will have added costs and there will be an enormous tax 

loss to municipalities and school boards at a time when their 

funding is being cut back by the government.  And these 

cut-backs will also cost jobs. 

 

There are no new jobs being created to replace those lost, other 

than the jobs created by Jack Messer's son.  Mr. Minister, what 

are you going to do to cushion the blow to small businesses and 

municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, again may I remind the 

members opposite that this is a difficult circumstance and one 

that I wish the members opposite wouldn't begin to politicize. 

 

The fact is that the danger from leaking underground storage 

tanks is the danger resulting from worn-out equipment and the 

cost of replacing that equipment.  The members opposite raised 

regulations in the last session during their term of government 

that obviously were inadequate because they left the 

circumstances in such a way that it caused difficulties for 

owners without a clear plan to consult to resolve the problem.  

The members opposite have a history of leaving the province 

with messes that we are left to clean up. 

 

I am telling the members opposite that we created an advisory 

committee and we expect the report from them.  And I can tell 

you that unless you mistrust the people on the committee, with 

whom you have spoken, you ought to wait like the rest of us for 

the recommendations they will bring us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Bankruptcy Legislation 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, yesterday 

we attempted again to raise the issue of needed changes to The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act in this Assembly.  Rather 

than put forward a cooperative effort and speak to the urgency 

of issues, members opposite were confrontational and 

derogatory. 

 

Mr. Minister, hundreds of farm families face eviction from 

their land if you do not move quickly to introduce an 

amendment to this legislation.  So, Mr. Minister, if you're not 

going to support our changes to the Saskatchewan legislation, 

tell us today what you will do.  When will you give us a 

commitment to change the Saskatchewan legislation to fix this 

problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member opposite for that question.  We indeed are 

working on this very serious problem and we will be bringing 

amendments that will do the job properly with the 

Saskatchewan legislation. 

 

Our major problem with this is that most of this legislation is 

federal -- the Bankruptcy Act is federal -- and the definition of 

farmer in that Act is one of the biggest problems, and we have 

been urging the federal government to clean up their Act to 

protect farmers.  We will do what we have to do and we will do 

it right here in Saskatchewan; but I would call on the federal 

Liberals to clean up the federal Act, which is where the major 

problem is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr Minister, the problem is 

not with the federal government; it's with 

your government.  It's your legislation that has the problem.  

Mr. Minister, you have hundreds of bureaucrats and legal 

experts working for the Department of Justice and the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

Your government has been in power for two and a half years 

and has known for months the problems with The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act.  You have made it a priority 

to draft 28 pages of amendments to the labour standards 

legislation and 22 pages of amendments to The Trade Union 

Act, because you obviously consider these to be priorities.  

Well, Mr. Minister, we consider the eviction of farm families 

from their land to be a priority. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, with all the staff you have in the Department 

of Justice, can you tell me exactly what legal advice you have 

on your government's responsibilities to address the loopholes 

in The Farm Security Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the legal advice that 

we have is that the protection of farm families and the 

Bankruptcy Act rest primarily with the federal government.  

We will act within our jurisdiction and we think we can plug 

those loopholes.  We have been working on that diligently 

since the results of the Mulatz case in the court case which 

creates the problem. 

 

Again I reiterate that most of the problem, and particularly with 

the definition of farmer, is in the federal Bankruptcy Act over 

which we have no jurisdiction.  And I think it's the federal 

Liberals who are ignoring the farmers, not us -- as they're 

ignoring the farmers on the durum war and on the Crow rate 

and a whole lot of other issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, that's what 

we're asking you, to do what is within your own jurisdiction, 

not to always lay blame onto the federal government.  It's what 

you can do with your legislation.  It's that provincial 

government that brought in leaseback rights in the first place. 

 

We've had numerous calls from people who deal with farm 

insolvency, and they're all very supportive of the amendments 

that we've put forward.  And some suggestions have even . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm just simply going to tack on 

the extra time that the government members are taking in 

interfering with the member asking, because I cannot hear the 

question.  And I wish members would give him the privilege 

and the right to ask his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Of all the people 

that we've been dealing with, who themselves deal within the 

farm insolvency laws, all of them agree that it is fully within 

the power and the mandate of the provincial government, 

which created leaseback rights in the first place, to protect them 

within their 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

own Farm Security Act, regardless of what may be done at the 

federal level.  What no one can understand is why your 

government has acted so negatively towards amending The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you table with the House the 

records of legal advice and consultation that demonstrates that 

it is not possible to close a small but crucial loophole to The 

Farm Security Act.  Will you table that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I reiterate, we are 

trying to close that loophole.  The legal advice that we have is 

that the legislation proposed by the member opposite would not 

stop the loophole.  It is not good legislation, would not be 

constitutional, would not work. 

 

We are working on legislation that will work.  We're going to 

attempt to plug that loophole.  But to say that farm land 

security and bankruptcy is a provincial jurisdiction is totally 

wrong.  Ask the federal government what they did with our 

leaseback provisions and how FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) 

has complied with it. 

 

And again, we are working with the federal government to get 

them to comply with our leaseback legislation.  There is a court 

case now over the jurisdiction of whether or not the provincial 

or the federal government has jurisdiction over forcing FCC to 

comply with the leaseback.  The farmer that took the Farm 

Credit to court lost on that issue, and we have appealed it.  That 

is pending.  We are working with the federal government to try 

to work another court settlement on that.  And we wish the 

members opposite would try to constructively plug loopholes 

and protect farm families rather than grandstanding here in the 

legislature with legislation that is not practical, and written by 

somebody who has no knowledge of the law. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

find it amazing that the Minister of Agriculture can't put 

forward a legal opinion on our amendment.  We've put forward 

amendments. He can't put forward an amendment or a legal 

opinion on their own Bill. 

 

Mr. Minister, this change is needed; this change is doable; this 

change is within your power to fix; and this change should be 

done now.  So, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do, right 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Right today, Mr. Speaker, we are 

working on an amendment that will do the job, and in due 

course we will have an amendment in here and it will be one 

that we think will do the job and that will work. 

 

Again, I would give the member opposite Mr. Goodale's 

number:  585-2202.  If you want to really plug the loophole and 

protect farmers, do what I do 

and call Mr. Goodale. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, while your 

government is bending over backwards to appease the union 

leaders responsible for your election victory, other jurisdictions 

are recognizing that the powerful and overpaid unions must be 

a part of the fight against the deficit. 

 

In Prince Edward Island the provincial government is moving 

to reduce salaries, including the union salaries, by 7.5 per cent.  

Now a 7.5 per cent decrease in salaries in Saskatchewan would 

save taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars.  In fact, 

Minister, as much as $180 million could be saved. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you promoting salary increases, 

extended benefits, and increasing the powers of the union in 

this province while other jurisdictions are moving in exactly the 

opposite direction within our country? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question on behalf of the government because to me this points 

out the fundamental contradiction of both the Progressive 

Conservative official opposition and the third party Liberal 

opposition as well. 

 

For days on end in this legislature, they have been attacking 

this government for presumably breaking contracts and other 

statutory provisions with respect in one case in point, the 

judges, as an example.  Here we have the Progressive 

Conservative critic getting up and saying, break the contracts; 

break the statutory obligations when it comes to working men 

and women. 

 

And he cites as an example, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal 

government that is doing it exactly.  The Liberal government is 

doing it, which tells me and tells the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan this: as far as Liberals and Conservatives are 

concerned, break the contracts of working men and women, 

those at the bottom end of the scale, protect the 24 per cent 

increases for the judges.  I say that's hypocrisy and it's wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Bob Rae did it, Mr. 

Premier.  And there appears to be only one contract that you're 

prepared to consider to be sacred in this province, and that is 

the contract that you have with your political friends in the 

unions.  You stomped all over nearly every other contract but 

you wouldn't dare touch the unions, who are the single largest 

contributors to the NDP in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, your union-preference policies and your 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

changes to The Trade Union Act are a slap in the face for small 

business, for local governments, for health, for education 

boards, and for Saskatchewan taxpayers in general.  The people 

of Prince Edward Island are rolling back wages across the 

board and they have no qualms about including the unions. 

 

Mr. Minister, very simply, will you consider rolling back the 

union benefits and wages, and reduce the deficit and save the 

taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars?  And also, do 

something to offset the negative effects of Bill 32 and Bill 54 in 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member persists 

in his position.  I want to say the civil servants in this province 

and the trade union movement in this province has acted 

responsibly.  We are proud of the fact that we were able to 

negotiate freely, collective bargaining agreements with, for 

example, the Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union, on 

a three-year contract in which the members, the civil servants, 

members of this government -- both as citizens and workers of 

the government, citizens of the province and workers of the 

government -- recognized their obligation.  They did it by a 

freely collective bargaining agreement, and I might add that in 

the consequence our budget is bang on. 

 

The Prince Edward Island budget of the Liberal government is 

180 per cent off base.  And instead of looking to the large 

corporations, instead of looking to the large corporations, 

instead of looking to fair taxation, what the Liberals are doing 

and the Conservatives are doing, is they're trying to squeeze the 

last ounce of decency and livelihood out of the working men 

and women of their province.  I say shame on the Liberals and 

shame on the Conservatives for taking that position.  That's not 

our position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, shame 

on you for distorting the facts in this province that are clear.  

And the facts are clearly this.  Your province's test for your 

government is simply this: your two election promises.  First of 

all, you promised jobs.  You said you'd wipe out poverty and 

you'd create jobs.  You said you would create a different 

approach to financing; that there would be no more deficits; 

and that we would be free and clear of all that.  You haven't 

done either. 

 

Show me, Mr. Premier, where you have created one job in this 

province with your legislation.  Show me where you have made 

one dollar to pay off the deficit through the legislation that's 

going to drive jobs out of this province in Bill 32 or Bill 54. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member again 

refuses, as do both of the opposition 

parties, to be bothered by any of the facts.  One has to simply 

take a look at the job creation record over the last little while, 

and I think the honest assessment is that jobs are being created.  

They're not being created as quickly as we'd like them to be 

created, that is for sure, but we have a game plan and it is 

beginning to work. 

 

But the key point here about this debate, Mr. Speaker, as far as 

the Conservatives and the Liberals are concerned, is simply 

this: how in the world are they going to balance this budget and 

how do their priorities fit up against our priorities?  And I say 

that Liberals in the Maritimes as shown by the P.E.I. (Prince 

Edward Island) and Conservatives in Alberta . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . If the hon. member would simply stop chirping 

from his seat and listen to the facts, he might learn something 

here. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Maple Creek can't 

come up and ask his question and then yell at the Premier when 

he's answering the question.  Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll simply conclude my 

answer by saying two things.  First of all, the hon. member 

from Maple Creek and the opposition of the Conservatives and 

the Liberals, they seem to have an aversion to truth every time 

that it's said in this legislature as justified and evidenced by 

their actions. 

 

But I want to tell the member -- he asked about jobs -- we've 

created 3,000 new manufacturing jobs alone under the 

Partnership for Renewal program under the Statistics 

Canadian documents which were released a few days ago.  We 

need to do more about this and we're going to pursue it. 

 

But I'll tell you this, if the hon. member says that fair and 

honest and decent legislation for working men and women -- 

part-timers, those who are at the bottom of the scale, those who 

need the protection -- if they cast the blame on economic 

recovery on those people and on the trade union people, I say 

we've got a major philosophical difference.  That's not the way 

they built this province.  These are the men and the women 

who built this province with their hard labour and we're 

supporting them and you should be joining us instead of 

attacking them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier 

wanted to be reminded of the facts.  His NDP buddy Bob Rae 

had no problem rolling back salaries in the great province of 

Ontario because of the economic mess that he made there. 

 

Mr. Premier, you talk about people at the low end.  I'll remind 

you of the facts: over 81,000 of the citizens of this province are 

on welfare, sir; 12,000 less jobs than when you took office, sir; 

the average family's taxes up $2,600 a year, sir.  Those are the 

facts. 

 

Your Minister of Labour refuses to bring into this 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

Assembly any indication that these two Bills will take one 

person off of welfare or add one new job or drop those taxes 

one dollar, Mr. Premier.  Those are the facts. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, stand in this House and tell us that these 

two pieces of legislation are going to help those people on 

welfare, they're going to take down those taxes, or they're going 

to bring one new job to this province, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the 

question is yes, we think that this is going to help all people in 

the province of Saskatchewan, not only those who are working 

on a part-time basis but trade unionists and those who are on 

welfare and the job opportunities that are going flow for them 

as a result of Partnership for Renewal. 

 

But the hon. member in his preamble to the question talks 

about the people on welfare.  Yes, there's been an increase in 

the numbers of people on welfare.  Why?  Because once again 

the Conservatives and the Liberals -- two different legs, one 

being Tory out of office, one being Liberal in office, they're 

two same legs but the same old chicken -- they produced this 

result. 

 

You offloaded by the changes to the UI (Unemployment 

Insurance) and the status treaty Indians, resulting in increased 

numbers across Canada and the amount in the thousands in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and the Liberals did the same by 

their changes to the UI.  And then the member has the audacity 

of saying that somehow that's our fault. 

 

I say to the hon. member, why don't you two people get your 

act together, make the marriage complete, join the 

Liberal-Conservative, have a caucus and decide what your line 

is, but please stop this inconsistent and brutal attack on the 

working people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Carrot River Saw Mill Expansion 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I'm pleased to inform the Assembly of an announcement I 

made this morning for a major capital investment in Carrot 

River and the Carrot River saw mill, an investment that protects 

jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, this government is 

committed to protecting and creating jobs and I ask the 

members opposite to listen up.  This week alone we have seen 

hope for new jobs from the signing of an MOU, a 

memorandum of 

understanding, with Monsanto that holds the promise for 

hundreds of jobs in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We have seen the announcement of 

new mining jobs in La Ronge with the Cameco gold mine.  

And today I am announcing a promise of security for more than 

200 people working in the forest industry in Hudson Bay and 

Carrot River. 

 

We believe communities like Carrot River are communities 

with a future and that is why I was pleased to announce 

Saskatchewan Forest Products will be investing $11.7 million 

to upgrade and modernize the Carrot River saw mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this upgrade will convert the mill to a high-speed, 

10-inch stud mill.  Further to this, the capital expansion plan 

will be funded through the reinvestment of profits -- and I 

underline profits -- from Saskatchewan Forest Products 

operations and will be of no additional cost to the taxpayers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This capital upgrade will ensure the long-term viability of the 

Carrot River saw mill and the protection of 275 jobs.  If no 

modernization were done, Mr. Speaker, SFPC (Saskatchewan 

Forest Products Corporation) would run out of lumber within 

five to seven years and this would have forced the lay-off of 

275 people and the closure of plants in both Hudson Bay and 

Carrot River.  With the earlier modernization of the Hudson 

Bay plant, we have secured the future of Saskatchewan Forest 

Products in north-eastern Saskatchewan, the future of its 

employees, and the future of these communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, forestry, as we all know, is an important industry.  

It impacts on our economy and on our environment.  And that's 

why we must remain vigilant in our commitment to modernize 

so that our operations remain both competitive and sustainable.  

This expansion will do both. 

 

The upgraded mill will reduce the wastage of wood and 

increase the utilization of our valuable timber resources.  There 

will be improvements in operating efficiency and reduced 

operating costs.  Finally, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

the new stud mill will protect the jobs by utilizing smaller logs 

that are found in abundance in this forest block and by allowing 

the mill to operate on a sustainable yield basis in perpetuity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this investment is an investment of the future of 

Carrot River, an investment in the future of our province, and it 

will certainly permit us to continue to build a secure foundation 

and operate with certainty into the next century.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

to thank the minister for sending across his statement earlier, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the minister is going to be able 

to elaborate a little bit on this issue down the road.  I see a 

fairly significant expenditure of funds here.  And I appreciate 

that the minister is talking about the guaranteeing of jobs in 

north-east of the province, and I applaud that. 

 

However, a number of the issues that have been around for a 

long time in that area haven't been answered.  The minister is 

well aware that the issue of the declining softwood lumber 

resources in that area mean that choices are going to have be 

made.  A lot of people in that area have maintained for a long 

time that the distribution of the timber resources have to be 

sorted out better than they have in the past. 

 

The minister is talking about a very short-term fix here -- five 

to seven years -- compared to what is actually needed.  The 

minister knows full well that the predominance of trees in that 

area are hardwood and that the use of that hardwood resource 

has to be figured out.  There was a lot of that, Mr. Speaker, 

around the Simpson Timber mill that was in Hudson Bay.  The 

minister hasn't answered any of those questions today.  And I 

would have thought that if we had an announcement covering 

over $11 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money that some 

of these issues would have been brought to the fore. 

 

With the decline in the number of the larger trees -- I believe 

they're referred to as peeler bolts -- that were in use in that 

particular area and the fact that people were having to go 

further and further afield, it says to me, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government has come up with a short-term fix for what is a 

long-term problem in the timber industry in north-east 

Saskatchewan.  And I would hope that the minister will be able 

to bring more explanation to the Legislation Assembly about 

the details surrounding this particular initiative so that we can 

make sure that those 200 jobs simply don't get this government 

past the next provincial election in north-east Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- By leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  She 

arrived late on the date of our birth and she's arrived late again.  

I would like to introduce to you in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, my 

twin sister who's just arrived a few minutes ago.  And I would 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming her here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Electoral Boundaries Commission Report 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- At the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I will be making a motion that the report of the 

Electoral Boundaries Commission be approved and adopted by 

this Assembly. 

 

On behalf of all members of the Saskatchewan legislature, I 

want to thank the commission for the work that they have done.  

The Constituency Boundaries Commission was composed of 

three highly qualified individuals.  Judge Malone, a respected 

member of our Court of Queen's Bench, chaired the 

commission.  He was joined by Professor Dan de Vlieger, dean 

of the Faculty of Arts at the University of Regina, and Nancy 

Kent, executive director of the Prince Albert Regional 

Economic Development Authority. 

 

The commission was handed the difficult task of reducing the 

number of constituencies in the province from 66 to 58.  This 

reduction is in keeping with our government's commitment to 

fiscal restraint.  This is the first time since the Depression that 

the number of seats have been reduced and results in the lowest 

number of members since 1964. 

 

Since being elected in 1991, all of our ministers and members 

have heard over and over again from Saskatchewan people that 

our government is too large.  They have told us that 66 

members are too many considering the size of the province.  

We have heard this everywhere from individuals and groups 

representing every point on the political and economic 

spectrum of the province. 

 

The government has responded by reducing the number of 

members from 66 to 58.  This is a significant reduction -- a 

reduction of 12 per cent.  This legislation also moves us closer 

to the principle of one person, one vote.  The commission was 

given the mandate of setting electoral boundaries based on the 

democratic principles of effective and equal representation.  

The principle of one person, one vote, is therefore the 

overriding principle that guided the work of the commission. 

 

The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, moved us closer to 

this principle by reducing the acceptable variation from the 

constituency population quotient from the current plus or minus 

25 per cent to plus or minus 5 per cent.  Over the past 20 years 

the concept of one person, one vote, has suffered in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1971, 69 per cent of the seats in the Assembly fell within the 

5 per cent population variance.  This situation continued to 

worsen and by 1987 only 24 per cent of the seats fell within the 

5 per cent population variance. 

 

Another important principle that the government 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

instituted in the legislation that established the commission is 

that Saskatchewan is a single community of interests.  The 

government realized that nothing is to be gained from making a 

distinction between urban and rural constituencies.  The 

legislation therefore removed all reference to predetermined 

numbers of rural and urban constituencies. 

 

Previously a set number of rural seats and a set number of 

urban seats were specified.  This government saw that that 

division was artificial.  Nothing is accomplished by the attempt 

to create an artificial division.  The majority of Saskatchewan 

citizens come from a rural background, where they were either 

born and raised on a farm or in a small town.  Forty-one out of 

the 54 members on the government side of this Assembly come 

from rural and small town backgrounds.  Rural and urban 

people share the same interests in this province, and we must 

all work together with a singularity of purpose. 

 

The Constituency Boundaries Commission held hearings 

around the province to solicit input from Saskatchewan people.  

The commission heard many presentations from many 

interested parties and some changes were made to the final 

report of the commission.  There are, however, two alterations 

we propose to the commission's final recommendations.  Those 

two changes have no impact on boundaries.  It is not 

appropriate to attempt to substitute our judgement for that of 

the commission when it comes to the boundaries. 

 

Instead, we propose two name changes:  Wolf Willow to Wood 

Mountain, and Regina Victoria-University to Regina Victoria.  

Both of these changes are in the interests of making the 

constituency names relevant and the areas more identifiable to 

constituents. 

 

Aside from these two changes, we put forward the report of the 

commission as a substantial improvement to the electoral map 

of our province.  I believe the three members of the 

commission did a commendable job and deserve the thanks and 

gratitude of all members of this Assembly. 

 

I would like to conclude in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by 

making the following motion: 

 

 That the final report of the Constituency Boundaries 

Commission, established pursuant to The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, 1993, laid before this Assembly by the Hon. 

Mr. Speaker (sessional paper no. 40 of 1994), be altered by 

deleting the constituency name Regina Victoria-University 

and substituting therefor Regina Victoria, and by deleting the 

constituency name Wolf Willow and substituting therefor 

Wood Mountain, and that the report, as so altered, be 

approved and adopted by the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I will be making a few remarks in regards to the 

comments just made by the minister, and after that I will be 

proposing an amendment to one of the name changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're a long ways down the road in this process 

now and I . . . it is pretty well a fait accompli.  And I also 

would like to join with the minister in thanking our commission 

members who set out to perform a task which certainly wasn't 

easy, and of which they had very little latitude to deal with.  

The rules of the game were determined by this NDP 

government in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, some time ago.  

And certainly no one on that commission can be blamed for the 

havoc that is being wrought in rural Saskatchewan by this NDP 

government.  This is just another example of what is 

happening, and that basically, Mr. Speaker, is the 

disenfranchising of a lot of people in this province. 

 

And I say that with a great deal of honesty, Mr. Speaker, 

because one only has to look at what this government has done 

over the last two and a half years to the rural areas.  And we've 

seen the debates in here because, Mr. Speaker, they've gone on 

and on; there's been agriculture issues, there's been health 

issues, there's been bus issues -- there have been so many 

issues, Mr. Speaker, that have dealt with rural people being 

marginalized. 

 

And once again in the electoral boundaries process, the 

government came in with a very narrow agenda.  It made sure 

that all of the seat reduction . . . and no one in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, disagrees with the government that we need fewer 

MLAs in this province.  But these rules were specifically 

designed to make sure that all eight seats came out of rural 

areas. 

 

I mean northern Saskatchewan can be set aside because of its 

distance, and its diversity, and its natural boundaries, and its 

trading areas, and be guaranteed its seats; so in effect, Mr. 

Speaker, we took eight seats away from 64 not 66.  And that 

was all carefully thought out by the members of this NDP 

government when they laid out the rules for the commission to 

work by. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what should have happened in this Legislative 

Assembly with this process is that one that would have allowed 

the commission the freedom to determine the best way of 

representing people in the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

that's why they should have gone around and they should have 

held hearings and they should have listened to people and they 

should have talked to the folks who vote and elect and send 

people to this Assembly about what type of representation they 

wish to have, instead of the other way around, with very narrow 

rules being put in place. 

 

I mean it didn't bother this government at all, Mr. Speaker, as 

they take away so much from rural Saskatchewan; they turn 

around and spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on an 

Electoral Commission who don't have any latitude. 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

It's like this health, this one-man health commission that we're 

seeing with Garf Stevenson.  I mean we'll go out and spend 2 to 

$300,000 to go around this province to come up with the proper 

excuse why we can't elect people to our health boards.  We'll 

pay the man $500 a day. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, people don't like the process.  

Once again it has been driven from within Executive Council 

and it is being forced upon the people of this province.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is no reflection at all on the members of that 

commission who dealt with what they had. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there were alternatives.  There were 

alternatives to depoliticize.  And for once and for all, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province take this process out of the hands of 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Our caucus, our party, put forward a proposal.  I'm not saying 

that it is the right one, that it was the be- and the end-all, but at 

least it should have been presented to the commission, and the 

commission could have taken it forward to the people, and the 

people could have judged. 

 

As you remember, Mr. Speaker, that proposal called for not 58 

but 56 members of this House -- 56.  And if the government's 

argument here, which I heard again from the minister, that it 

was time to cut back on the number of MLAs to save money, 

that would have even saved more. 

 

But the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that that is not the biggest 

issue.  Because we all know that MLAs' remuneration of 

anything beyond their basic salary is based on the number of 

people that they represent.  And in each and every case the 

voters didn't disappear.  So the riding goes from 10,000 to 

17,000; then that means that the travel allowance and the 

postage and everything else that goes along with being an MLA 

in this province is going to have to reflect the fact that you now 

represent more constituents. 

 

So the only saving we're talking about here, Mr. Speaker, are 

the base salaries of eight MLAs.  Well what this government 

has already spent on a commission, in which they'll spend on 

this nonsense with Mr. Stevenson running around the province 

on health care, far outweigh any cost-savings to the taxpayers 

of this province.  A couple of less cabinet ministers, Mr. 

Speaker, as we all know, would save the taxpayer as much 

money as what we're talking about with the reduction of eight 

base salaries.  That is fact and reality.  That is fact and reality. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it would have been most appropriate 

if we could have used our federal boundaries, a jurisdiction 

outside of the control of any political party in this province, a 

respected commission and process which every 10 years 

re-evaluates and split that up so that MLAs and MPs (Member 

of Parliament) could coordinate and work together and save 

taxpayers' money.  That's what people expected in the 1990s, 

Mr. Speaker, not this 

process that we see being rammed through this House and 

rammed down the throats of people in this province. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, we have the spectre of huge rural ridings, 

no consideration for natural boundaries, trading areas, very, 

very difficult to service, and we've got 11 MLAs in both 

Regina and Saskatoon -- we've got more MLAs than we've got 

aldermen.  People that walk across their ridings in 20 minutes, 

Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it has been upheld time and time 

and time again in this country that the basis of Canadian 

Confederation and the ability to access your political 

representative has been one defined not by narrow population 

figures, but by all the considerations of this vast land. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, any time it is put to the test it has won.  And 

in the face of that we have an NDP government who said we 

must decrease the political power of rural Saskatchewan, we 

must make sure that never again does rural Saskatchewan have 

the ability to influence public policy in this province.  That's 

basically what they've done over their last two and a half years 

and that's what they do with this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is one of the most clever gerrymanders that I have ever seen 

take place and it is nothing but that, Mr. Speaker, it is nothing 

but that.  Those are harsh words, but they are reality and they 

are what people in rural Saskatchewan, particularly, are saying 

about this government more and more every day, Mr. Speaker, 

as they realize the circumstance under which they will function.  

And increasingly, Mr. Speaker, that function is one of a 

second-class citizen -- a second 

_class citizen.  Because they know their ability to access their 

elected representative is far more difficult than someone living 

in an urban area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that simply is unfair.  I say it is unconscionable.  

And it is something that people do not expect of their elected 

representatives in the 1990s.  That was the politics of the '20s 

and '30s and '40s, but it is not the politics of the 1990s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, saving taxpayers money is a laudable goal; 

denying taxpayers access to their political representatives is 

not.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think it has been a shame and a sham 

that we have gone through this process over the last year in this 

province and not taken this province into the 21st century in the 

way that we determine electoral representation. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to rural Saskatchewan and the 

appropriateness of people being comfortable with the areas that 

they represent, I would propose to the Assembly today: 

 

 That the words "Wood Mountain" be deleted and the words 

"Wood River" be substituted therefor in the motion presented 

by the hon. minister. 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

And I believe that this is appropriate, given the fact that Wood 

River is a well-known entity throughout that particular riding, 

and Wood Mountain is only one community within that riding.  

And I think, Mr. Speaker, people in that part of Saskatchewan 

would appreciate the fact that that name change be afforded. 

 

That is seconded by my colleague, the member from 

Souris-Cannington. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to raise some concerns about the changes in the 

constituency boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is proposing the changes, as we 

all know, and cutting down on the number of MLAs in 

Saskatchewan and suggesting that the reason for doing it is to 

save taxpayers' dollars.  And I guess that certainly is a laudable 

goal, and I think people in Saskatchewan recognize that and 

believe that that's an important issue, particularly in these days 

of financial restraint. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, let's make no mistake about what the 

real reason behind what they're planning on doing here is.  The 

real reason is to preserve the electoral base of the NDP Party, 

and that's the only reason that they would do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If they thought for one moment increasing the number of 

constituencies in Saskatchewan was in their best interests, 

they'd do it and do it in a minute, Mr. Speaker.  But they feel 

that the way to do this and to make people believe that what 

they're doing is right is to cut down on the number of 

constituencies and try and convince people that saving money 

is the motive behind this, Mr. Speaker.  But it most certainly 

isn't. 

 

I think people in Saskatchewan believe far more likely the 

reason is to protect the NDP's electoral base, Mr. Speaker.  

They realize that this is a government that does anything and 

everything to protect their chances in the next election 

upcoming, probably in the next couple of years, Mr. Speaker.  

And they realize, the people of Saskatchewan, that by taking 

away constituencies from rural Saskatchewan and having more 

constituencies in urban Saskatchewan is the way that NDP 

believe -- at least believe -- is the way to enhance their electoral 

chances. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see as well that the government is 

dividing up the number of constituencies set by the number of 

residents within that constituency.  And one has to wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, at constituencies in . . . particularly some of them in 

urban Saskatchewan that are growing quickly; certainly they 

have a lot of people in them, Mr. Speaker, they have young 

families and therefore have lots of residents.  But that doesn't 

translate directly to the number of voters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You look at a constituency like the one I represent, and I think 

of one of the RMs (rural municipality) within my constituency, 

the RM of Chesterfield, where the average age is 67 years old, 

Mr. Speaker.  Obviously there isn't too many children running 

around that RM in my constituency, Mr. Speaker.  And 

therefore those people have less influence on the government 

policies and less influence on the government process than a 

constituency with a high number of young families and 

children, like Regina North West for example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then you have to also start looking at some of the other 

criteria.  They recognize the two constituencies in the North 

because of the vast distances and the vast travel that's necessary 

to service one of those constituencies, Mr. Speaker. But 

somehow or another that same kind of criteria isn't extended to 

the rest of the province.  Somehow it's acceptable for members 

in the north-west of this province, not including the far north, 

but the north-west of this province.  But that same criteria and 

same consideration isn't extended to them, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

think that that's wrong. 

 

The constituency of Maple Creek for example, or the new 

constituency as proposed of Kindersley, are huge ridings, Mr. 

Speaker.  I don't know what the new constituency at Kindersley 

will have when we look at RM councils but it will probably be 

in the neighbourhood of 20, something like that. 

 

We'll have I believe, three to four, maybe even five schools 

boards that we'll have to make representations and talk to on a 

regular basis.  We'll have health boards; we'll be looking at 

probably two at least, health boards that we'll be dealing with 

on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then you compare it to a constituency in one of the major 

cities where they don't have those kinds of things. And in some 

cases don't have a single school, don't have a single council to 

deal with other than the umbrella city council, or don't have a 

single health board other than the umbrella health board for the 

entire city to deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of things that we deal with on 

a regular basis.  When we leave here at the end of the day or at 

the end of the week, some of us, Mr. Speaker, drive in excess 

of five hours to get home, whereas some members walk out the 

building, jump on their bicycle and drive home in 10 minutes 

on a bicycle, or less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one has to wonder somehow about the opportunity for 

rural members particularly, to service their constituency 

compared to an urban member, Mr. Speaker, who can walk 

across their constituency, walk across their constituency in 20 

minutes. 

 

Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it's difficult to represent a rural 

constituency.  It's not easy.  It takes, as I said, some of us four 

to five hours just to get home from Regina. And then to the 

furthest corner of my constituency prior to the changes, was 

about two hours. Now it will be an additional hour to an hour 

and a half, Mr. Speaker, just to get there. 

 

We can't even make it to some functions on a Friday night 

because of the distances that we have to look at, Mr. Speaker.  

We can't even make it to a dinner in 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

Kindersley at 6 o'clock on a Friday afternoon unless we leave 

here at 1 o'clock right on the dot, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's a big, big difference than someone representing the 

constituency in Regina here, who walks out the door and takes 

a leisurely stroll home and then has four or five hours before 

they have to go to a function that evening.  And that happens 

on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's an interesting thing when you represent a constituency that 

isn't within the confines of Regina, Mr. Speaker.  Some people 

say to us when we're at home -- and it's interesting what 

happens -- they'll say to you, well why aren't you in Regina; 

isn't that where everything's happening?  And then the next 

time you see them they'll say, well why weren't you at the 

dinner in Kindersley last evening? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you look at a constituency like mine, and 

I'll tell the people of Saskatchewan the reason for it is because 

the distances are simply too great.  We can't physically move 

that quickly, to be back and forth and back and forth constantly, 

as our constituents would like us.  But somehow or another the 

Government of Saskatchewan now believes that constituencies 

like that should even be bigger -- even be bigger.  And they use 

the unjustified argument of suggesting that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to cut down on money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I believe they could cut down on the level of expenditures 

in this province in a whole lot of other ways, Mr. Speaker.  

Garf Stevenson's $200,000 alone would cover off a number of 

ridings in this constituency.  That's $200,000.  Another 

$200,000 for this other commission that the minister has 

commissioned to run around the province and find out whether 

her health care reform is going okay.  And another $500,000, 

Mr. Speaker, to deal with the question of having the health 

board elections outside the municipal process. 

 

Nine hundred thousand dollars just in those three things alone 

that this minister . . . the only reason she wants to hold off on 

those kinds of things is because she feels her and her party's 

political hide is on the line, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 

elections of health board district people, Mr. Speaker.  Nine 

hundred thousand dollars in three single expenditures that I can 

think of just off the top of my head, and I could think of 

probably a whole lot more, given a little time to research them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Three things, $900,000; they're suggesting that these changes in 

MLA boundaries will be something in the order of 900 to $1 

million per year.  Same kind of expenditures, Mr. Speaker, 

same money in one year, and we could find numerous 

examples of this if the government would like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Twenty thousand dollars to Jack Messer, and now we're finding 

out today that he's giving away contracts to his son.  One has to 

wonder about how much that's going to cost the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer, 

Mr. Speaker.  The $107 million SaskPower two years ago made 

-- last year they made $87 million -- somehow or another it's 

acceptable to cream off that kind of money from the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer; but on the other hand, to have 

representation, to have people that will hold this government 

accountable is wrong, Mr. Speaker.  And I say to the 

government, shame on you for that kind of thing, Mr. Speaker.  

The only reason you're doing it is to try to promote the interests 

of the NDP Party, and everybody realizes that. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, there's some interesting things will develop 

out of this.  I think the people in Saskatchewan recognize it for 

what it is -- a gerrymander, Mr. Speaker.  And I think they also 

will be watching with extreme glee, extreme glee, as these 

NDP back-benchers and front-benchers, for that matter, fight it 

out for nominations for the NDP.  It will be interesting to see 

the member for Rosetown-Elrose and the member for the 

current seat of Biggar fighting it out in a nomination. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I was a betting man, and I am from time 

to time, I'd be betting on the member from Biggar.  Because the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose at the moment, Mr. Speaker, is 

probably the most disrespected politician in Saskatchewan, in 

probably the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the people that deal with him in the environmental field 

understand that, understand that, Mr. Speaker, and particularly, 

and particularly the farmers of Saskatchewan understand that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That minister is done like dinner and he knows it, Mr. Speaker 

-- he's done like dinner.  He won't last another term and it'll be 

. . . I will be watching and in fact I think I'm going to make a 

special trip to Rosetown that night when they have that 

election. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may want to do that but I can't 

see on the contents of the Bill that that has . . . very pertinent to 

the Bill and I would . . . or to the motion, and I'd ask the 

member to get back to the motion. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

changes in the electoral boundaries will result in a lot of 

interesting battles for the NDP, a lot of interesting battles.  And 

I think that the . . . I would invite probably the whole, entire 

Conservative caucus to attend that nomination and we'll watch 

with great joy as that member goes down to defeat by his own 

party members; own party members will take him out finally, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and there's other ones shaping up too, as I 

understand it.  There's other nomination battles shaping up all 

over Saskatchewan.  Maybe that . . . maybe in some funny way 

that's the Premier's way of dealing with some of the 

incompetent people in your party; maybe that's the motive 

behind it all, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe he realizes that people like 

the member from Rosetown-Elrose and the gross 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

incompetence that he shows in here on a daily basis, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why Biggar and Rosetown are combined 

into the next . . . into a constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of legislation is wrong.  They say it's to 

save money but we all know that's not the case, Mr. Speaker.  

We all know it's to hopefully enhance the electoral chances of 

the NDP.  The people of rural Saskatchewan aren't being fooled 

by this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada a couple of years 

ago suggested to the people of Canada that population alone 

should not be the only determinant when setting constituencies 

in the province of Saskatchewan, when they were referred that 

piece of legislation back in '91, I believe it was. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they were right then and I believe that they 

would rule the same way today, given the opportunity.  They 

would believe that there's more to representing a constituency 

than equal numbers of people, Mr. Speaker.  The one person, 

one vote, certainly has a lot of merit, Mr. Speaker, but there's 

also other things -- to offset the balance of population centres 

with the more rural areas of a province is important as well.  To 

allow members to have the opportunity to serve those 

constituents in a good way, Mr. Speaker, is important as well.  

And this government has overlooked that in their quest for 

power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see constituencies with several thousand 

square miles now that have to be represented by one lone MLA 

compared to a city of Regina with, what is it going to be, 

something like 11.  There's only, I believe, 7 or 8, 9  maybe it 

is, council members in all of Regina and they only do it on a 

part-time basis and are able to service the needs of the city of 

Regina, but somehow or another it takes 11 MLAs working full 

time and about three or four cabinet ministers out of Regina to 

serve the interests of Regina.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that if 

they believed in fairness in any way, they'd be dealing with 

those two issues as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately in the province of Saskatchewan 

there's other ways that this could have been dealt with.  They 

could have looked into our proposal which was simply to 

divide up the number of federal constituencies into four so 

you'd have coterminous boundaries so the people of 

Saskatchewan would know who represents them in a provincial 

constituency and would know who represents them in a federal 

constituency.  And you wouldn't have this overlap that you do 

right now, Mr. Speaker, with people not knowing who is their 

federal member or who is not, not knowing who their 

provincial member is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it would have further reduced the number of constituencies 

-- if that was the goal.  If the goal was to reduce the number of 

constituencies to deal with the 

financial constraints that the province finds itself under, Mr. 

Speaker, it would have further reduced the number of 

constituencies by two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But somehow or another that doesn't fit the mould for the NDP.  

When they're dividing up the constituencies and sitting down 

with the map and drawing all the squiggly lines around the 

constituencies and finding out where their interests were best 

served, federal constituencies aren't divided up the best way in 

their way of looking at it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The commission did a great job, Mr. Speaker, considering the 

constraints and the legislation that they were faced with and the 

legislation that they had to work under, Mr. Speaker.  They did 

a great job.  They did it the best they possibly good.  But their 

hands were tied by legislation that was politically motivated, 

Mr. Speaker, and everyone in Saskatchewan understands that 

now I believe, Mr. Speaker.  And I say to the government 

members opposite, that they should be ashamed of themselves 

for the gerrymander that they've put on to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan won't forget it, Mr. Speaker.  

They won't forget it in the next election.  I would say to them, 

Mr. Speaker, that there'll be member after member in rural and 

urban Saskatchewan within their caucus that will go down to 

defeat because of the kinds of things that they are doing.  And 

this is just one more example of the kinds of shameful actions 

that this government has done. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak in support of the amended motion regarding the 

Constituency Boundaries Commission report. 

 

The Leader of the Third Party has spoken in this House 

previously on the formation of the commission whose result is 

before us today in the form of a final report. 

 

In her previous remarks she commended the government on 

taking the initiative to reduce the number of members.  I don't 

think any one of us can justify the cost of 66 elected members 

for a province of less than 1 million people. 

 

The Act that established the commission contained some 

reforms which I think reduced partisanship.  One of the 

significant changes involved providing for the nomination of 

the commission chair by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan  

and selection of the other two members in consultation with the 

leaders of the opposition parties. 

 

In speaking to the legislation that established this commission, 

the Leader of the Third Party urged the government to give the 

commission a full mandate to determine the boundaries and to 

determine the number of seats as well as to develop a process 

for setting future election dates.  But her comments fell on deaf 

ears.  She was told that the government was doing what had 

always been done, as though that is some justification for 

action. 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

Ten months after that debate we have before us the results of 

the commission's work.  Unfortunately the outcome of the 

commission is flawed because the mandate to do the fullest job 

possible was missing from the very beginning.  The legislation 

that set up the commission placed serious constraints upon it.  

These constraints included forcing the commission to find a 

way of reducing the overall number of seats from 66 to 58.  All 

reductions, by the way, came at the expense of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Under the formula provided them, they were not to touch the 

two northern seats of Athabasca and Cumberland.  In the 

process of setting the boundaries, the Act forced the 

commission to stay within a plus or minus 5 per cent of a 

constituency population quotient. 

 

The remaining constraint imposed was that the figures on 

which the constituencies are based, are census population 

figures rather than voter population.  This means some 

constituencies may have a significant variation in the number 

of actual voters because of the way our population is dispersed 

demographically. 

 

Secondly, it means the constituencies are based on small census 

units or enumeration areas.  The commission was, once again, 

limited because it did not draw boundaries such that they cut 

these areas apart.  These questionable regulations created 

several difficulties for the commission.  Despite these 

constraints the commission produced good work and I thank 

and commend the members and staff for their diligence and 

commitment to their task. 

 

I am pleased to see that the commission incorporated several 

recommendations that were made to it during its series of 

public hearings.  However, I am disappointed that the 

government did not offer it a greater chance to serve the 

Saskatchewan people.  Real consultation must involve an 

element of responsiveness and I believe that the commission's 

hands were tied to a great extent in terms of how responsive 

they could be due to the nature of their assignment. 

 

I know that one of the other problems brought to the attention 

of the commission during their public hearings was with 

respect to the names of some of the constituencies.  In most 

cases the names are appropriate but in others not enough 

attention was paid to maintaining some of the historic names or 

to the names of the centre which dominates the area. 

 

Historic names now gone include Maple Creek and Assiniboia.  

Maple Creek is in the new constituency of Cypress Hills and 

Assiniboia is in Wolf Willow or Wood Mountain according to 

today's motion, or Wood River.  While the loss of these 

traditional names might seem trivial, these are historic names 

and one must remember that in the case of Assiniboia, for 

example, that was the name of the original territory which 

covered all of southern Saskatchewan before this province was 

ever founded. 

Several other problems exist, a number of which have been 

brought to our attention by individual voters in this province.  

We have been contacted by individuals who are troubled by the 

changes that these boundaries will mean for them; communities 

for example who are isolated from the trading centre in their 

constituency.  These people feel that they have been thrust into 

a constituency with which they have no natural connections and 

no intercommunity allegiances.  This is not a trivial concern.  

This is a real concern that affects real people and we should not 

dismiss it. 

 

In another case, people from the existing constituency of 

Moosomin have contacted us with their concerns about feeling 

displaced because for the first time since the province was 

formed, they have been thrust into a different constituency.  

These people no longer live in the constituency of Moosomin 

where they and their families have lived all their lives.  In 

Saskatchewan, where we have such a deep sense of history and 

tradition, this is not a trivial matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as legislators should be sensitive to these 

concerns.  People have asked us for sensible and practical 

changes and we should be prepared to give them that as a 

minimum.  The changes requested would have no bearing on 

the plus and minus 5 per cent variance. 

 

With respect to today's motion, Mr. Speaker, I intend to support 

it so that the boundaries on which we will campaign in the 

coming year can be finalized. 

 

On behalf of the Liberal caucus, I want to say that our party is 

very anxious to take our message and the record of the current 

government before the people of Saskatchewan.  Whether the 

boundaries are as proposed will make little difference to what 

we anticipate the outcome to be.  In order to expedite that 

eventuality, Mr. Speaker, this caucus will support today's 

motion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To start off 

with, I'd like to talk a little bit about the amendment proposed 

by my colleague, the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

His amendment would change the name of what is now the 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency along with part of the 

Shaunavon constituency into the name Wood River.  The 

current proposed name for that constituency is Wolf Willow.  

And I think perhaps what the problem with the name Wolf 

Willow is, for the government opposite and particularly for the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, is the wolf part of it 

perhaps refers to one of that member's potential competitors or 

challengers for the position of MLA.  And perhaps he's 

somewhat afraid that with the name Wolf Willow for that 

constituency, it would give his opponent somewhat of an 

advantage because the constituency would therefore be named 

after him. 

 

To change the name, as the government has proposed, to Wood 

Mountain, while it doesn't perhaps reflect the name of any 

particular person 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

involved, it does represent the name of one individual 

community, an individual community amongst a large number 

of communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I personally have a problem with that kind 

of a naming system for a constituency because when you name 

one particular community you exclude all the others. 

 

If you look at my own constituency, which under the proposed 

changes will cover a fairly extensive area in south-east 

Saskatchewan, but if you were to pick the name of one 

particular community in that area to name that constituency, all 

of the other communities would feel offended. 

 

The name that the commission has proposed for my new 

constituency, being Cannington, does represent a village site 

but it's a village site in which no one lives, Mr. Speaker.  

Therefore none of the other communities are affected or 

offended by that.  But by naming a constituency after one 

particular community, you exclude all others. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Like me. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Take the constituency of my colleague, 

the member from Estevan.  Certainly it identifies the major 

centre within that constituency, but what of the centres of 

Lampman and Torquay and North Portal and Midale?  Should 

not something also identify them?  And an appropriate name 

for that constituency is perhaps Souris, because the Souris 

River meanders throughout that whole constituency.  And you 

can pick the names of almost any constituency around this 

province, and if that name identifies one community, then it 

excludes all of the others. 

 

The amendment proposed by my colleague, the member from 

Thunder Creek, would change the name from Wolf Willow to 

Wood River.  Wood River crosses that entire constituency.  

Everyone therefore would know.  If you're from Regina you 

would know that geographically where that constituency 

resides, and the people of that constituency would not be 

offended because one community was picked as the name for 

that constituency.  Therefore I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 

my colleague's amendment is a good one. 

 

I have no problems with the amendment to the report proposed 

by the Minister of Health in dealing with the Regina 

Victoria-University.  If the members feel that Regina Victoria 

better represents the name of that constituency as compared 

with Regina Victoria Avenue, so be it.  I have no problems 

with that because it's within one single community, the city of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole scenario of the boundary changes has 

been very political.  It has followed a particular political agenda 

of the government.  And when you look at the results of it and 

how it was done, it's pretty easy to see that that was indeed the 

case. 

 

Because when the government said that the two 

northern ridings were excluded from any considerations 

because of their particular factors of geography and distance, 

but that the rest of Saskatchewan was not to be given that 

consideration, there was a reason for that.  And the reason was 

the fact that those two ridings are held by government 

members, and have been for some time held by government 

members.  But the rest of Saskatchewan was to be denied that 

there was some geographic considerations to be given to them. 

 

(1515) 

 

The government proposed -- and the minister talked about it in 

her address -- one member . . . not one member, one person, 

one vote.  Very good concept, Mr. Speaker, except that's not 

what they did.  That's not what the commission did.  That's not 

how the legislation was drawn up.  The legislation was drawn 

up that you take the census of the area; you take the entire 

population and subdivide it into 56 ridings across the province. 

 

Well the member from Kindersley suggested that some areas of 

the province have a high proportion of seniors, and that is 

indeed the case.  And yet other areas of the province have a 

high number of children.  And he mentioned Regina North 

West.  The demographics of Regina North West, Mr. Speaker, 

are that 20 per cent of the population in that riding currently are 

under the age of six. 

 

Not one of those children is entitled to vote, nor will they be 

entitled to vote in the next election or the one after that.  And 

yet they are counted as the total number of people within the 

constituency, which is 17,000-and-some.  So 20 per cent of 

that, that's approximately 3,400 people, Mr. Speaker, children 

in that riding. 

 

When you look at the other constituencies, particularly the rural 

constituencies, you will have a very low number of children in 

those constituencies.  Therefore when you start looking at the 

numbers of voters, there will be some dramatic differences. 

 

And the government members, while in opposition, protested 

and complained and fought hard against the idea that there 

would be differences in numbers of voters.  In fact they had a 

couple of their supporters take the previous government to 

court and challenge their redistribution in saying that the 

numbers were too spread out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 Senator Gerald Beaudoin considered the 

possible impact on the democratic rights of people as enshrined 

in section 3 in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms as 

it comes to the distribution of constituencies and the number of 

voters that were placed in each constituency.  Those that know 

Senator Beaudoin know that he is both a law professor and a 

lawyer, and that he was the former joint chairman of the 

amending procedures for the Constitution of Canada.  Mr. 

Speaker, this gentleman knows something of which he speaks. 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

He said it was unfortunate that section 3 of the charter does not 

refer to equal suffrage, and he was working towards that 

direction because at the time in the United States the courts had 

mandated that equal representation for equal number of people 

be put in place -- what the minister talked of as one person, one 

vote -- and that he expected our courts would rule in a similar 

manner at some time. 

 

Senator Beaudoin went on to predict that in the event of the 

importation of the one person, one vote principle in Canada, 

that it would be changed and it would be Canadianized to a 

certain extent under section 1, as resulting from our particular 

circumstances across Canada when you consider our entire 

geography east to west and north to south, that we have large 

urban centres and sparsely, sparsely populated areas. 

 

And the particular situation that he was speaking of was indeed 

sparse populations and the great distances which make it 

extremely difficult, if not impossible, to obtain equality 

between the ridings.  And when you look at that consideration 

across Canada, you see an island of 200,000 people in Prince 

Edward Island with approximately 120,000 voters having four 

seats -- four seats, Mr. Speaker.  And yet in Toronto, you have 

3 million people and a large number of seats, and yet those 

seats are probably representing 70 to 80,000 voters -- double 

the number in P.E.I.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the provincial 

constituencies in Ontario, in Toronto in particular, hold more 

voters than do the federal ridings in Prince Edward Island. 

 

You look at Yukon with a very small population, Mr. Speaker, 

and yet they have one MP.  And yet the government of the day 

in Saskatchewan says no, we cannot give any considerations 

whatsoever to geography and distance in the province of 

Saskatchewan unless you live in the area of northern 

Saskatchewan.  That is the only area we will give any 

consideration to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the friends of the members opposite which took 

the Saskatchewan government to court in 1991 to strike down 

Saskatchewan's electoral map led to a decision by that court 

that indeed the electoral boundaries of that day were improper 

because of the differences in the numbers of voters.  The 

province appealed that to the Supreme Court and, Mr. Speaker, 

we all know the outcome of that.  The Supreme Court upheld 

Saskatchewan's electoral boundaries and the electoral boundary 

map, concluding that what Beaudoin had called Canada's 

particular situation required the interpretation of section 3, right 

to vote, which comprehended effective representation. 

 

And that's the same issue we're dealing with today.  It's the 

same issue which the Boundaries Commission was not allowed 

to deal with; the same issue, Mr. Speaker, that was considered 

by the Supreme Court a couple of years ago. 

 

There were a large number of interveners in that court case 

before the Supreme Court, and those interveners, Mr. Speaker, 

included the Government of Canada, 

five provinces, two territories, and two cities.  And the court's 

decision in the question of one person, one vote, and the 

differences in different constituencies was a six to three 

decision on June 1, 1991.  And the courts upheld the proposed 

changes to Saskatchewan boundaries for the following reasons. 

 

The question before the court, as stated by the majority, was to 

what extent, if at all, does the right to vote enshrined in the 

charter permit deviation from the one person, one vote rule?  

And two differing views on this question were presented to the 

court. 

 

According to the first view, equality of voting power was the 

right protected in section 3 of the charter, and deviations from 

the state of equality should be minimal.  According to the 

second point of view, effective representation was the protected 

right and equality of voting power was but one consideration 

among several. 

 

The second view became the court's view, Mr. Speaker.  The 

purpose of the right to vote enshrined in section 3 of the charter 

is not equality of voting power per se, but the right to effective 

representation.  One of the Supreme Court, Justice McLachlin, 

reiterated the positions she had taken that the strict principle of 

one person, one vote, was neither appropriate for Canada nor 

part of its experience.  And there was no evidence that the 

framers of the charter had contemplated the reading of such a 

principle into the provisions of that document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers were the weak side of the case 

against the Saskatchewan electoral map.  The fact that there 

was a difference between different constituencies was the 

weakest part of the argument.  The Supreme Court not only 

condoned the distinction between rural and urban electors, 

which was reflected in the outcome, but the Supreme Court 

also underwrote that distinction by treating as fact the 

proposition that rural constituencies are more difficult to 

represent than urban ones.  That's what the court decided, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And when you take into consideration the differences between 

rural and urban constituencies, no one can deny that it is more 

difficult to represent a rural constituency.  I had the occasion to 

discuss electoral boundaries with the member from Regina 

Lake Centre, and she stated at that time that she could walk 

across her constituency in two hours. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can't drive across my constituency in two 

hours, let alone stop and talk to anyone.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

under these proposals, should I be fortunate enough to win 

re-election, it's going to take me even significantly longer to 

drive across my constituency, whereas the member from 

Regina Lake Centre's riding will not have changed 

dramatically.  Mr. Speaker, if I was to attempt to walk across 

my constituency, I would have to spend a number of weeks 

doing so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not only just the geographic distances that 

must be travelled in a rural constituency, it is also 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

the number of communities and other governmental 

jurisdictions that one deals with.  I currently have two school 

boards within my constituency, and under the proposed 

changes I will have two more. 

 

I have health board districts -- 20-some communities, Mr. 

Speaker, and that will grow.  I'll probably have in the 

neighbourhood of 25 to 30 communities, whereas the members 

from Regina and Saskatoon deal with one town council -- one 

city council, rather than a town council; they'll deal with one 

school board, perhaps two with a separate school board, and 

let's not forget the possibilities of a third, French school board, 

because I'll have one of those in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet when you deal with all of these separate and varied 

jurisdictions, the members from an urban setting do not have 

that.  And while it's not that difficult to deal with them on an 

individual basis, Mr. Speaker, it does take a significant amount 

of time to travel around to visit all of the communities to deal 

with those different problems in jurisdictions that are involved. 

 

One of the other items that happens with the larger, expanded 

boundaries in rural constituencies is we now have to deal with 

more reserves, more first nations.  And again it's a challenging 

experience and an enjoyable one to work with our native 

friends, Mr. Speaker, but when you're looking at a rural riding 

as compared to an urban riding, that difficulty is not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has said that there is no need for 

a strong voice from rural Saskatchewan, but that we won't 

touch the northern ridings.  They are sacrosanct and must be 

maintained, as they are under the legislation.  But yet the rural 

constituencies were not given that same consideration.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is suspect. 

 

Because what's the reason for that?  Why were the two northern 

ridings so special that they could not be considered?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said earlier, it's because those two constituencies 

are represented by government members.  And when the 

government made their appointments of the commissioners, 

they set out the guidelines so stringently that those members' 

hands were tied and were not permitted to make any variations. 

 

Let's take a look at the proposal that was made by the member 

from Thunder Creek in his amendment to the legislation that 

was proposed, that we deal with the 14 federal ridings and 

subdivide them four ways, four equal ways, to make the 

ridings.  It would have taken the boundaries, the commission, 

the setting of those boundaries, out of the hands of the 

provincial government because those boundaries are set 

federally; so it would have limited any possibilities of 

gerrymandering by the provincial government. 

 

If you simply divide them four equal ways, then the variance of 

5 per cent would have been met.  But that did not appeal to the 

members opposite because they 

could not control the process. 

 

The federal government, in the normal course of events, 

redistributes the federal ridings approximately every 10 years 

after the census.  And yet the legislation as proposed by the 

government would do that every five years.  So we're doubling 

the number of times redistribution will happen -- Saskatchewan 

bears the entire cost -- whereas if we used the federal ridings, 

they would cover their cost and we would simply impose over 

top of their decisions the provincial constituency boundaries. 

 

And it would have eliminated two more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 

But those eliminations would have taken place equally within 

rural and urban Saskatchewan, rather than simply being cut out 

of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

(1530) 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post had some interesting 

comments on our proposal, and I would like to quote from 

them: 

 

 The PCs' proposal of taking the existing federal boundaries 

and dividing each into four provincial ridings is even better 

than what the NDP legislation proposes, for a few reasons. 

 

 One, it pares the Assembly down to 56 seats from the 58 

MLAs proposed in the Bill.  Two, it could enhance 

federal-provincial cooperation by establishing a regional 

basis, and it could result in all of the ridings coming 

surprisingly close to the plus or minus 5 per cent variance the 

NDP Bill proposes.  Eliminating the inherent unfairness of 

two special northern seats where votes are worth twice what 

they are in the South, is the real genius of the Tory proposal. 

 

End of quote. 

 

And that's from the Leader-Post of May 22, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was but one article which supported the 

proposal as put forward by this caucus.  And the people, Mr. 

Speaker, also seem to be in favour of it.  So it's difficult to 

understand on a logical basis why the members opposite would 

reject it. 

 

On a political basis it's entirely understandable why they would 

have rejected it.  A quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Star-Phoenix 

of May 25, 1993, and I quote: 

 

 The legislative opposition has detected the aroma of fish.  For 

the government to stubbornly stick to the magic 58 after 

admitting it chose the number more or less at random, would 

serve only to convince the real people that the opposition is 

right and something fishy is indeed going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people recognize what the government 

opposite is doing, that they are simply gerrymandering the 

entire electoral boundary 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

process.  When questioned, the Minister of Justice, where did 

he get the number 58, why was the number 58 chosen, he just 

reached up and said, I grabbed it out of the air.  And he picked 

it for no particular reason other than for some reason he liked 

the number 58. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he had already done his numbers; he had 

already looked at how the population of Saskatchewan was 

spread, where the children were, where the seniors were, and 

what would be to the best advantage of the NDP opposite.  And 

that's why the number 58 was chosen, and for no other reason, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and because he chose the number 58, the 

boundary commission had no choice to choose any other 

number.  They were forced, they were bound by legislation.  

And while the minister opposite may break the legislation, the 

boundary commission cannot do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would urge the members opposite to reconsider 

what they are proposing with this legislation.  I would urge 

them to be fair, to be fair to all of Saskatchewan, to rural 

Saskatchewan, instead of doing what is best politically for the 

NDP.  Consider, Mr. Speaker, what is best representation for 

all of Saskatchewan people, not just what political capital the 

government opposite can contain. 

 

For that reason, I will be supporting my colleague's amendment 

and I will be opposing the main motion as presented by the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:35 p.m. until 3:45 p.m. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Calvert 

Van Mulligen Renaud 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Teichrob Scott 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Upshall Jess 

Hagel Langford 

Koenker McPherson 

Lyons Bergman 

Lautermilch  

- 39 

Nays 

Swenson Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

-- 7 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada-United States Trade Dispute 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I intend to move a motion: 

 

 That this Assembly strongly urge the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, at his upcoming meetings at Marrakech with 

his U.S. counterpart, to vigorously defend Canadian 

interests against U.S. threats to restrict Canadian exports of 

wheat and durum and ensure that there is an early and 

appropriate resolution to this serious trade dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give the Assembly a little bit of 

background and explanation of the serious problem that 

Saskatchewan farmers are facing.  We're into an international 

wheat war with the United States, and this is a very serious 

situation for Saskatchewan farmers who depend very heavily 

on the export into world markets of our wheat and other 

commodities. 

 

This is the result of actions by the Americans which we feel is 

unfair and unjustified.  We have in this country a free trade 

agreement which, with all its warts and shortcomings, has been 

signed.  This agreement is to allow for free movement of 

commodities back and forth across the border between us and 

the United States. 

 

Since the signing of the deal Canadians have lived up to their 

side of the arrangement.  We have allowed access and lived up 

to our side of the agreement.  On the other hand, the Americans 

have not complied with the agreement, with the spirit of the 

agreement.  They continue to use their export enhancement 

program to subsidize commodities worldwide in our markets, 

which is strictly in contravention of the agreement, and they 

refuse to allow access of our commodities into their markets. 

 

We've had many disputes with hogs and softwood lumber and 

wheat and other commodities, and when we have fair hearings 

at panels, we seem to always win, because there is no 

substantiation for the claims that they make.  However they 

continue to harass us, and this is creating great problems for 

our producers. 

 

And just to explain the background on the wheat situation, 

we're having large exports of Canadian wheat into the United 

States this year.  That is as a result of a number of factors, 

partly because of flooding that occurred in the United States.  

But the main reason for us being able to ship wheat into the 

United States is that they have exported their wheat into the 

world markets at hugely subsidized prices. 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

And they have used their export enhancement program to 

subsidize durum to the tune of $60 a ton into traditional 

Canadian markets; have driven the world price of wheat down 

dramatically with their subsidies; and at the same time they've 

created a shortage at home. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board tells us that the Americans 

produced approximately enough durum for their own use this 

year, but because of the extensive subsidized exports, they've 

created a shortage at home.  That has increased the price and 

Canada has taken advantage of that to back-fill that market. 

And now we are being shut out of that market . . . or the 

Americans are attempting to shut us out of that market. 

 

Essentially what's happening is they're setting up a two-price 

system for wheat in the United States.  We had a two-price 

system for wheat in Canada that we were able to sell our wheat 

on the domestic market for a higher price than the world 

market, and that money was then returned to Canadian farmers 

and was of benefit to Canadian farmers. 

 

But we signed the Free Trade Agreement.  The first thing we 

did was did away with our two-price wheat system.  They said 

two-price wheat is a trade restriction, and by the agreement, 

you're not allowed to have a two-price wheat system. So we 

immediately, like good people, did away with our two-price 

wheat system. 

 

Now the Americans are in effect having a two-price system.  

They've got one price, a very subsidized price in world 

markets, and a high domestic price.  And they are attempting to 

maintain that at the expense of Canadian farmers and keep us 

out of that market.  So while we have complied with the 

agreement and the spirit of the agreement, they have not 

complied with it.  And that is creating huge problems for our 

farmers. 

 

The provincial government have been in contact with the 

federal government and urged them to stand up to the 

Americans, to take strong action.  Many people say, well 

they're twice as big or they're 10 times as big, and therefore 

there's nothing you can do and we should just concede and roll 

over and play dead. 

 

We think that at some point we have to draw the line in the 

sand and stand up for our rights and make the Americans walk 

the walk instead of talking the talk.  And we have many 

concerns and we certainly have been in contact with the federal 

government, with the Prime Minister, and with the federal 

Minister of Agriculture at a recent provincial and federal 

Agriculture ministers' meeting.  All the provincial ministers 

urged the federal minister to take a strong stand and to stand up 

to the Americans. And we continue to urge them to do that. 

 

Part of the attack that Americans are making is on our 

marketing system, on our Canadian Wheat Board.  Their 

argument that our wheat is subsidized is not substantiated.  All 

the figures would show that American wheat is subsidized at a 

greater rate than 

Canadian wheat is, and much of what occurs is a problem that 

they seem to have with our marketing system, claiming 

Canadian Wheat Board to be a subsidy. 

 

We have had numerous audits which show this not to be the 

case; that this is simply cooperation between farmers trying to 

get the best price in the world market for their grain.  It is not a 

penny of government money going into farmers; it is farmers 

working together to market the grain.  It is not a subsidy, and 

that is being undermined by the American action. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we continue to call on them not to trade off 

Saskatchewan farmers particularly.  There are a number of 

trade disputes on the table, including sugar and peanut butter 

and a number of other items.  And certainly we do not in 

Saskatchewan in any way want to trade off the commodities 

that we produce, such as wheat, for other commodities.  And 

we urge the federal government to do that. 

 

We certainly do not want a cap on our production.  Although 

we are selling record amounts of wheat this year, caps might 

not seem that dangerous that we'll probably drop back to lower 

levels.  But if we allow the Americans to maintain a two-price 

system and subsidize wheat in the world markets and not have 

access to back-fill their markets, we certainly stand the risk of 

having our producers only one market to sell in, and that 

market being a very poor global market that's been depressed 

by American wheat. 

 

So we had a lot of rhetoric from Mr. Chrtien during the 

election campaign, that he was going to renegotiate NAFTA 

(North American Free Trade Agreement), that he was going to 

stand up to the Americans.  And so far we've heard very little. 

It sounds very much like the old Mulroney singing: when Irish 

eyes are shining.  We haven't had the strong response after the 

election that we had the talk of before the election. 

 

So we strongly urge the members of this Assembly to support 

this motion to send a message on behalf of Saskatchewan 

farmers to Ottawa -- that we will not be betrayed, that we are 

fair traders, that we are competitive, and that the Americans 

need to know that if there's going to be free trade, it must work 

both ways. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would make the motion, seconded by the 

member for Swift Current: 

 

 That this Assembly strongly urge the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, at his upcoming meeting in Marrakech with his 

U.S. counterpart, to vigorously defend Canadian interests 

against U.S. threats to restrict Canadian exports of wheat 

and durum and to ensure that there is an early and 

appropriate resolution to this serious trade dispute. 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

I'm very pleased to have the opportunity to rise and speak in 

support of the motion before the 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

House at this time. 

 

As we know, at this time the federal Minister of Agriculture, 

Mr. Goodale, is attending meetings in Morocco with his 

American counterpart Mike Espy, and they're about to sign the 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) trade 

agreement which will establish the parameters, define the 

parameters for world trade for a long time to come, ending the 

Uruguay round which has been in process for a number of 

years now. 

 

The provisions that are made in the agreements that are 

enshrined in that document, the documents that they will sign, 

will affect trade and the prosperity of Canada very 

fundamentally.  And I do want to support the minister in his 

call for the federal minister to take a very tough stand in terms 

of protecting Canadian interests. 

 

I want to refer to a phone-in program that was on the CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), an extended phone-in on 

the noon hour a couple of days ago.  And I wasn't able to listen 

to all of it but there were stations linked from Minot, North 

Dakota, Montana, and Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba.  

And I was concerned about some of the American callers in 

particular who seemed to be very misinformed. 

 

And I think that's one of the important roles that government 

can play in agriculture, is in making sure that farmers have 

accurate information; that people at the federal levels and 

people who are interacting with trading partners at international 

levels convey the appropriate market signals to producers of all 

agriculture commodities. And with the correct information in 

hand, farmers will make the right decisions. 

 

So when you hear producers at the grass roots level phoning in 

to public broadcasts and saying things which indicate that 

they're grossly misinformed is really worrisome.  They said 

things like, the American farmers said things like, they 

described the flow of durum into the U.S. (United States) from 

Canada as being, in their words, an avalanche, a deluge, and so 

on. Where actually the figures that I have here, which are -- the 

source is the Canadian Grain Commission - 

_ there has been an increase in durum for some of the reasons 

spelled out by the minister, where the U.S. has used their 

export enhancement program to sell their durum abroad, and 

the Canadian exports are required by their milling and pasta 

industry now to back-fill that void.  But at the same time, 

barley exports to the U.S. have dropped considerably. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I want to quote from . . . And these are American numbers, 

so Americans wouldn't be able to dispute these.  This comes 

from a paper prepared by the agricultural economics 

department of the North Dakota State University.  And they say 

that, for instance: 

Canada is the leading importer of U.S. bakery products, with 

a 68 per cent share of U.S. bakery exports in 1983 and a 65 

per cent share in 1991.  U.S. exports to Canada grew 162 per 

cent, from 25,000 million tons in 1983 to 66 million tons in 

1991. 

 

Breakfast cereals is the second most important category of 

wheat exports, accounting for 33 per cent of the quantity and 

33 per cent of the value of exports in 1991.  The largest 

importer of U.S. breakfast cereals was Canada.  U.S. exports 

to Canada increased 410 per cent over this time period (that's 

'83 to '91) with Canada's share of U.S. exports increasing 

from 33 to 42 per cent. 

 

Pasta exports from the U.S. to Canada grew from 10,000 

million tons in 1983 to 30,000 in 1991 -- a 190 per cent 

increase.  Canada was the only country with a significant 

growth in demand for U.S. pasta products. 

 

And remember, here we're not talking about raw commodities.  

We're talking about value added products which result in a high 

number of jobs and economic activity in the United States. 

 

Snack food was another interesting one where a volume of 

13,000 was exported in 1991 from the United States to Canada, 

and it accounted for 49 per cent of U.S. exports in 1991.  It's an 

enormous percentage growth. 

 

There are of course, as they suggest here, several aggregate 

trade and agricultural policies that impact product trade, not the 

least of which is the pending -- well not pending now -- but 

NAFTA, which was initiated of course by the Mulroney 

government and has been formalized and completed by the 

federal Liberals.  The U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement of 

course reduced tariffs on products from 10 per cent over a 

five-year period, which is another factor for the increased 

exports from the U.S. to Canada. 

 

And more importantly, before 1989 Canada operated, as the 

minister referred to, under a two-price wheat system on wheat.  

So during much of that time during the 1980s, Canadian 

domestic wheat prices exceeded those in the United States, 

thereby increasing ingredient costs for Canadian food 

manufacturers. 

 

So now that there's a North American wheat price defined in 

relation to the Minneapolis Grain Exchange price, it lowers the 

cost of raw materials to Canadian food manufacturers and 

should eliminate that source of competition.  Of course the 

exchange rate on currency, the fluctuations in that rate impact 

dramatically. 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

They summarize, Mr. Speaker, in this paper by talking about 

the changes in the market-place and referring to the enormous 

increases in value added grain products.  The flow from the 

United States to Canada has really increased dramatically. 

 

As we know that there are . . . That kind of facts never came 

out.  The people that phoned the radio program . . . the 

American producers didn't seem to be at all aware.  They 

seemed to feel it's completely a one-way street with Canadian 

products flowing into the U.S.  And I think it's important, if the 

American authorities don't want to take the responsibility for 

making sure that their farmers are well-informed, then we 

should make sure that our farmers are well-informed and that 

they know the truth and that there is some rationale for the kind 

of movement that's happening. 

 

Quite a bit of the grain, we're told by the Wheat Board right 

now, that is moving from Canada into the U.S., is as a result of 

the flooding earlier this year in the U.S. Midwest where their 

corn and soy bean crops were severely affected.  So a great deal 

of the grain that's moving in outside of durum -- Canadian 

grain that's moving in -- is low-grade feed wheat destined, with 

an end-user's certificate, to feed lots in California, Arizona and 

Texas.  And it's going in there to fill a real need that was 

created by some anomalies in the weather.  And I submit that 

that's a normal and desirable type of movement to have, and 

that if we had a similar disaster in this country that we would 

certainly want to be able to replace the lost production to keep 

our livestock industry going. 

 

So I think in all ways that it can be demonstrated that we are 

fair, that the U.S. is crying foul on a very shaky basis and that 

they should, they should really attempt, in spite of all their talk 

about being free traders, they should attempt to realistically and 

objectively look at those movements and accept that, if we are 

to live in a freer trade environment, that it has to be a two-way 

street, Mr. Speaker.  That is what we call a level playing-field. 

 

And I think it's important to address competitiveness.  I want to 

quote from an article written by an economist, Paul Krugman 

from MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) -- again 

another American institution -- and the article is entitled: 

Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession, and he talks about 

the difference between competitiveness and comparative 

advantage.  And I think that is a very important element when 

we're talking about a level playing-field, is that there are 

commodities in which countries and regions have a natural 

advantage. 

 

For instance, we're not about to start growing oranges here.  

We do have an advantage in some areas, for instance in terms 

of weather, in terms of the ingenuity of scientists to come up 

with improved plant breeding.  We have a number of other 

advantages that are . . . well for instance in swine breeding, for 

example, where we have a quality product that's in demand in 

different parts of the world because of superior genetics, so 

there are different ways of having an advantage. 

 

But a competitive advantage -- those are comparative 

advantages -- but the competitive advantage that is achieved 

through artificial means, whether political or economic or 

subsidized movement, that kind of a competitive advantage 

only leads to a downward 

spiral where people are bashing their brains out in idiotic trade 

wars, lowering the income levels on both sides of the war, and 

creating lower standards of living, reducing margins, and in the 

end benefiting no one. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Farmers get hurt. 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- And my colleague says, farmers get hurt.  

And they do.  And the interesting thing is that a lot of people 

look at farmers or talk about farmers as being at the bottom of 

that totem pole.  And they are not; they are right in the middle. 

 

When farmers hurt and they can't afford to invest in the inputs 

they should have, then fertilizer dealers, fuel dealers, livestock 

feed manufacturers, and all of those industries that put input 

into the agricultural-producing community are hurt as well.  So 

the farmer is not on the bottom of that totem pole.  He's right in 

the middle.  And when he hurts so does a very large part of our 

economy that's related to agricultural inputs. 

 

And Mr. Krugman says at the end, in his conclusion, he says: 

 

 . . . the focus on the supposedly competitive nature of 

international economic relations greases the rails for those 

who want confrontational if not frankly protectionist 

policies. 

 

And this is an American economist talking about and being 

critical, highly critical, about the U.S. approach to trade issues 

with their trading partners in the world, including Canada. 

 

And I can't help but wonder recently, in the course of events, 

where the Liberals have been -- the provincial Liberals, the 

third party in Saskatchewan who has now, I hope . . . 

particularly since our minister supplied them with the telephone 

number of Ralph Goodale today so that they might 

communicate with him -- where they have been on any of these 

issues.  We have the issue of the termination of the North 

Dakota check-off rebate on wheat and durum imports from 

Canada.  A small thing economically, but having, I think, a 

political posturing but raising the profile again of Canadian 

trade into the U.S.  And this happened recently.  There was no 

comment from them. 

 

There are hearings in Montana state on the impact of Montana's 

transportation system -- the road and rail -- of increasing 

Canadian grain exports to the United States.  We haven't heard 

the Liberals in Saskatchewan mention anything about the 

impact or the input of Saskatchewan farmers on that issue. 

 

In January when the Montana farmers blockaded elevators 

against Canadian producers, we didn't hear the federal minister 

or the provincial Liberals, who talk about supporting 

Saskatchewan farmers, on trade issues.  But when there is an 

issue that we should be speaking out on, we speak; the Liberals 

are silent and 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

they say nothing about whether they've communicated with the 

federal minister, because it is his jurisdiction.  And surely they 

should have that pipeline, be using it, and keeping it open in the 

interests of Canadian farmers and Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

We certainly wish Mr. Goodale well in the critical negotiations 

that are taking place right now.  But Canada is an exporting 

nation; we do a good job; we have quality products.  And we 

hope that he will not back down, not take a back seat to any of 

the other signatories to that agreement which has . . . it will 

have such a vital impact on the future of the agricultural 

industry in this province. 

 

And I think that it would be positive if the Liberal opposition in 

Saskatchewan would make their positions publicly known on 

these issues, would talk about the issues and not leave us with 

the impression that the emperor, being our federal Minister of 

Agriculture over in Marrakech, has no clothes.  We want to 

make sure that he defends the interests of Saskatchewan and 

Canadian producers of all agricultural commodities very, very 

strongly. 

 

So I think with that, Mr. Speaker, I just want to close by saying 

that we need to have a balanced approach.  We have a very 

diverse production base in Canada and in Saskatchewan.  We 

have a growing explosion in diversification, a huge number of 

growing opportunities for value added and further processing 

and exporting and trading in those goods and products in which 

we truly do have a comparative advantage. 

 

And I think that it's important at all levels of government and 

industry that we make that known and that we support and 

defend our position in world markets as vigorously as possible.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. member 

has made a motion urging the federal government to defend 

Canadian interests -- indeed, Saskatchewan interests -- in the 

export of our grain.  I enthusiastically support the idea of this 

motion.  And upon the conclusion of my remarks, I will pose 

an amendment that underscores my support to this motion. 

 

We support cooperative, coordinated efforts to stabilize and 

improve Canadian grain exports.  We want this government to 

vigorously support the federal government's efforts in 

agriculture.  I believe that this desire to seek out opportunities 

to be positive and cooperative should be the driving force in all 

of our efforts.  We believe that every member should evaluate 

all issues and policies on the basis of their value to the people 

of Saskatchewan.  We should work together to improve this 

province, not bicker or rant and rave to score Brownie points. 

In his motion the hon. member urges the federal Agriculture 

minister to vigorously defend Canadian interests.  Obviously 

Ralph Goodale would not travel all the way to Marrakech 

unless the minister was unquestionably committed to defending 

Canadian interests.  It is clear that the western grain exports are 

a top priority to the minister.  In spite of a heavy schedule, 

handling all of Canada's agricultural issues, he is unreservedly 

willing to go halfway around the world to meet face to face 

with one person who can resolve the issue.  There is no 

question that the federal minister is committed to defending our 

interests internationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister of Agriculture deserves the 

open support of all the members of this House and all the 

producers across the province.  His efforts cannot be made 

easier by the vast variety of demands on his time, the 

complexity of all of Canada's agricultural issues, and the 

volume of work to be done.  In spite of all these things he has 

shown great tenacity and conviction in an extremely difficult 

task. 

 

Therefore I move, seconded by the member from Shaunavon: 

 

 That we remove all the words after "Assembly" and replace 

them with the following: 

 

 commend the federal Minister of Agriculture for his actions 

to date to strengthen Canadian agriculture -- through such 

initiatives as renewed vigour in the GATT talks, developing 

new international markets for food products, and pursuing a 

new, whole-farm income stabilization program -- and 

commend his actions to date to defend Canadian interests 

against U.S threats to restrict Canadian exports of wheat 

and durum, and ensure, in his upcoming meeting in 

Marrakech with his U.S counterpart, that there is an early 

and appropriate resolution to this serious trade dispute. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's certainly a 

challenge to enter into the debate on this motion, Mr. Speaker, 

because of course we have before us an issue that is so 

critically important to all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The particular things that happen individually to the durum 

markets, wheat markets, and our barley markets, may not affect 

a lot of folks in the city right away, but eventually the spin-off 

effects will affect everyone in our province.  If we lose the 

ability to market a large part of our export product, certainly 

the lack of cash flow that that will create will be of significant 

consequence to all people in our province. 

 

And so noting that, it should not be a surprise that on 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

this very rare occasion we will join and support the government 

in their general principle of what they are attempting to 

accomplish here.  We will always, of course, have some parts 

of the issue that we would want to debate and discuss and 

perhaps even disagree with, but the general principle we do 

have to support. 

 

And it would obviously be against the best interests of 

Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan people for us to argue 

too significantly against the amendment either.  Although I 

think it's a red herring that is not necessary. The fundamental 

principle at stake is the more important part of what we're 

talking about today. 

 

That fundamental principle, of course, has to be the right of our 

Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers to be able to export their 

products into the world in the atmosphere of the Free Trade 

Agreement that we talked about and discussed and went 

through a federal election on as a main campaign issue back in 

the '80s.  All of those things were considered and talked about, 

and the necessity for that trade to go on in order for the world 

to continue to function in a better way. 

 

And the voters of this country voted for the government that 

was in favour of free trade because they believed at that time it 

would be better for us as Canadian citizens.  And now we see 

our trading partners reneging on their part of that agreement.  

We see them attempting to take advantage of those parts of the 

agreement that suit them, and they then want to stop those parts 

of the agreement that are not quite so nice for them that would 

benefit us. And that is poor sportsmanship, to put it mildly. 

 

And the Americans are of course the brunt of this issue at the 

moment, but the whole problem wasn't just caused by the 

Americans.  The problem has to go back -- and we need to 

include all of the players in this discussion -- the problem goes 

back to the Europeans dumping their products on the world 

market to begin with, which caused the frustration and 

infuriation of the American administration, and as a result they 

decided to enter into a trade war with Europe in the food 

markets. 

 

We as Canadians, and particularly we as Saskatchewan 

farmers, have suffered as a result of that trade war to a point 

that can never be measured in dollars, and certainly could never 

be measured in the human misery that it has caused for many of 

the families especially in rural Saskatchewan, and that spin-off 

effect to all of society, that we have seen.  We have seen a 

devastation of rural Saskatchewan as a result of that trade war 

simply because we've watched the sky fall in on many people. 

 

Yesterday I heard a minister allude to Chicken Little and the 

fact that we were crying about the sky falling in and that it was 

a laughable kind of a fairy tale joke.  It's no joke, Mr. Speaker, 

if you're the farmer who's losing your farm.  And it's no joke if 

you're the  businessman who's going into receivership.  It's no 

joke if your family is a part of one of those families or 

businesses that is economically destroyed as a result of the 

policies of the world around us. 

 

The free traders of this country and the free traders of North 

America have got to learn flat out for sure that this is a deal 

that's got to run both ways. And we do have to support the 

Minister of Agriculture in his bid to enforce that message to the 

Americans, the Europeans, and the rest of the world.  We 

cannot allow a free trade agreement to be one-sided.  That's 

why we made an agreement, so that things could flow both 

ways. 

 

And so I'm saying to the Minister of Agriculture, go for it; do 

your thing; do the best you can.  But let's take it a step further.  

There are some things here that need to be dealt with that you 

might as well challenge right away, as you're at it. 

 

We've got the barley issue as well as the durum issue.  Why do 

we have the Canadian Wheat Board stopping the farmers along 

the Saskatchewan border from shipping feed barley into the 

feed lots of the United States of America where they could sell 

it themselves at a huge profit, compared to the restrictions that 

we have with the Canadian Wheat Board? 

 

I've heard the argument, Mr. Speaker, that we can't do that 

because then we would somehow upset the barley growers up 

North in northern Saskatchewan because they would be 

restricted to selling it to the domestic market because of the 

travelling distances and all that. 

 

That is not a fact and it's not true, Mr. Speaker.  The fact of the 

matter is that if the southern farmers were allowed to ship their 

barley into Montana and the other states where the big feed lots 

are, that would loosen up the market for the rest of the 

producers in the province.  That would mean less competition 

for them up North because that barley would be gone; it would 

be out of the country.  And those people that sell malt barley to 

the Biggar malt plant would then have an exclusive market for 

their product.  It would help everybody if we allowed that to 

happen. 

 

So, Minister of Agriculture, we say to you today, take your 

battle to the federal government, take your battle to the world 

and do it well, but let's do it all.  Let's free up this Canadian 

Wheat Board so that people can sell barley in this country.  

Let's free up our borders so that we can truly have international 

trade on an open basis for all people concerned. 

 

There's no use stopping half way on this thing.  If we're going 

to get started on it, let's roll and let's go for it all.  Let's have a 

deal where we can all prosper and let's get these grain prices 

back up where they should be.  Let's open up the markets for 

the Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

We've talked about the flooding in the States and some of the 

causes of some of our present problems.  And it's true, Mr. 

Speaker, that that happened; there was a great flood in the 

United States last year.  It's true that out of the goodness of our 

hearts -- and some business interests, I expect, as well -- that an 

awful lot 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

of our grain cars went into the United States over the past year 

to try to help the Americans to get their grain products moved 

around the country because their water system wasn't workable.  

Quite a fact of life. 

 

I was fortunate enough to fly over some of the Mississippi 

River valley last year, and true enough, there was water all 

over.  And you can understand the frustrations and the terrible 

losses that the people in that area suffered. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

this afternoon, some very important people from my 

constituency in the city of Melfort.  They are in attending 

meetings with the credit union.  And we have in the gallery, 

Harvey Heavin and Joanne Forer and Bruce Bassett and Ralph 

Wagman, Bob Stewart, Neil Morton, Joanne Forer, Bob 

Kirkland. 

 

And I would like . . . did I say David Bonli?  I would like all 

members of the Assembly to welcome them to Regina and to 

the House this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Canada-United States Trade Dispute 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As we continue to 

debate the motion by the Minister of Agriculture, I too hope 

that the visitors will enjoy their stay and that they will realize 

how serious the issue is before us here today. 

 

What we're talking about today is the need to open up our 

borders to the United States without restriction and the need for 

our federal government to go into these negotiations on our 

behalf in a very strong and supported way.  We want them to 

know that we're behind them. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture has shown his desire to show that 

support.  Members of the opposition Liberal Party have spoken, 

and they've shown their support.  And we of course are lending 

our support as well.  So everybody, for a change, is united in at 

least the principle at stake. 

 

We would argue, as I have mentioned, on some of the details 

and how far we should go or shouldn't go, but we wouldn't 

argue on the principle, which is that we have to solve this 

problem in the interests of Saskatchewan farmers and society as 

a whole. 

There is absolutely no question that if we restrict the movement 

of our grains, or have for some reason those movements 

restricted by the Americans, no matter how it happens, if it's by 

agreement or by force or whatever, if that happens or if we 

have tariffs imposed against us or retaliations are taken -- no 

matter what happens in that whole area, we are all going to be 

the losers in the province of Saskatchewan, especially because 

we are this land-locked province where the exports of our food 

products are absolutely crucial to our trade balances and our 

ability to form a tax base, a job base, and a province of 

prosperity. 

 

Most of the things that we enjoy in life are dependent upon our 

exports, and that happens to be a fact of life right now to a large 

extent, those exports to the United States, because they have 

become our most important and largest trading partner. 

 

The details of why that has happened, the minister has alluded 

to.  The fact that they've had short crops and big floods in the 

United States are a fact of life.  The fact that the Americans had 

committed themselves to selling vast volumes of grain before 

the crops were even seeded, and the fact that they had entered 

into those contracts that they were not able to deliver on 

without shorting their own domestic pool of grain for their own 

use -- that is bad management on their part and certainly they 

should pay the price and not be asking Saskatchewan farmers 

to pay the price for them. 

 

(1630) 

 

They oversold their markets, they oversold the amount of 

grains they had, and they did it through a subsidy program that 

we even find bigger fault with.  But they exported all of this 

grain because they were committed to do it and they had to 

back-fill that grain in order to feed their own people.  Where 

were they going to get it?  They came to Canada and bought it 

from us.  And we willingly sold it to them because it was a 

good price. 

 

Now they want to say to us, oh you guys did something wrong 

here.  Well we didn't do anything wrong, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Americans that made the deals to sell the grain that they didn't 

have, they made the mistake.  And it's not our fault and they 

ought not to try to penalize us for the fact that they're running a 

two-price system in the grain markets and in the world markets.  

They ought to be looking at themselves. 

 

I want to mention too that we hear people talk about two-price 

systems in Canada.  And I say just as we couldn't have that "eat 

your cake and have it" sort of a situation in Canada for 

ourselves, neither should the Americans be able to have that for 

themselves.  They shouldn't have anything more for themselves 

than what we've got for ourselves. 

 

If we can't have two-price systems because it interfered with 

world trade and all those things and they took it away from us 

and gave us all those 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

arguments, fine and dandy.  Then the Americans should play 

by the same rules. 

 

So today we're on the same side with the Minister of 

Agriculture.  We think the Americans are being unfair.  We 

know that their farmers are in trouble, and for that I sympathize 

with them, because certainly they are.  I've talked to them; I've 

visited with them.  They've got some serious financial problems 

in the United States with their farming community.  No 

question about it. 

 

But that's not the fault of the Canadian farmers and it's not the 

fault of Saskatchewan as a province.  They did it to themselves 

and they ought to be brave enough to stand up and admit that to 

the world and take their lumps in this case. 

 

They need our grain.  If they don't ship our durum wheat in 

from Saskatchewan into the United States to back-fill the 

vacuum that they need to feed their own people, that wheat will 

be shipped to Italy under a contract by the Canadian Wheat 

Board or anybody else that can do it, and the Americans will 

buy it from the Italians and ship it right straight back to New 

York because their people need the wheat.  They've got to have 

it. 

 

So I don't care what they do.  They're going to back-fill it from 

some place.  So why penalize us?  And the Minister of 

Agriculture should carry that message to the minister of the 

Canadian agriculture organization, Mr. Goodale, and put it to 

him straight and blunt and right out front, that we are united in 

a coalition of politicians of every stripe in this province in 

support of the Saskatchewan farmer and the ability not only of 

to ship durum wheats and wheats into the United States freely 

under a Free Trade Agreement, but also to include the sales of 

barley and other oilseeds and all those other things. 

 

What should we do if they don't capitulate?  We'd better talk a 

little bit about how we're going to run this bluff, because if 

we're going to run a bluff -- and that may be what it is -- then 

we'd better be willing to put up because it's going to maybe get 

miserable.  It might get tough here. 

 

And I'm telling you folks, we might have to shut the gas valves 

off into the United States.  Maybe we'll have to play hardball 

here.  Maybe we'll have to shut off a few of the things they 

can't live without.  Maybe they can live without our durum 

wheat, but they can't live without our gas, and they can't live 

without our coal, and they can't live without our oil, and they 

can't live without our steel, and all of our natural resources.  

They can't even live without the water we ship down in the 

bottles because so much of theirs is polluted.  Let them know 

square flat out here that they need us . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You bet. 

 

But it isn't going to be easy, boys.  This is hardball.  And 

they're going to come back and retaliate, and it won't be easy.  

But let's play it.  Let's go for free trade all the way, wide open, 

both ways, and the highest bidder takes her all, and if they don't 

bid high enough they don't get it any more either.  Slap a tax on 

them, all the 

things that we export.  If we're going to have a trade war, let 

them know that we're in position to win.  And then, then they'll 

leave us alone and they'll let that Free Trade Agreement work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely imperative that we go as a united 

front, defending our farmers and our country and we do 

whatever it takes to win, because we can't afford to lose.  The 

province will go under if we don't win this battle. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to the Minister of Agriculture 

that he ought to take the former premier of this province, his 

own Premier, and go on a delegation right straight down to the 

United States and Washington, and present our case in person.  

I think it's that critical and that important that we ought to all 

do it together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could talk for another hour on this but some of 

my colleagues need to get in a few words about this issue.  So 

I'm going to rest my case in support. But there are certainly 

other times when we will disagree and I'll let you know at the 

time what those things are that we will disagree about.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going 

to take just two or three minutes to enter into this debate to 

echo the support of an urbanite and someone who's associated 

with working people in this province, to throw my support 

behind this resolution. 

 

But I want to caution members of the Assembly that the enemy 

in this particular war is not the American farmer and it's not the 

American working person any more than it's our farmer or our 

working person.  The enemy in this war is precisely those who 

control the grain trade, those who determine where that durum 

wheat goes, those who determine the price set for that durum 

wheat, and those who would manipulate the market-place for 

the benefit, not of those who consume the product, but for their 

own pecuniary benefit, for the benefit of enriching themselves 

at the expense of all the rest of us -- farmer and worker, a 

Canadian and American. 

 

This is not, Mr. Speaker, this is not a question of American 

farmers versus Canadian farmers.  This is not a question of 

American workers versus Canadian workers.  This is a question 

where we talk about building a coalition, where it is to the 

benefit of Canadian and American farmers to join together 

through their organizations to demand democratic control over 

the distribution of the grain that's produced on both sides of the 

border. 

 

We in Canada have done that through organizations like the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  The Americans have done that 

through their own organizations, such as the farmers' union 

cooperatives, through CenEx, through all those organizations 

that they themselves have built in order to insulate their family 

farm unit 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

and their neighbours from those who would, in fact, would 

enrich themselves at their expense. 

 

So when we talk about joining a coalition here, Mr. Speaker, 

when we talk about getting together, it's important to realize 

that we get together with the right folks because it's in our 

benefit, it's in the benefit of Saskatchewan people and 

Saskatchewan farmers, to have the support of American 

farmers when we go to Washington to demand that this kind of 

punitive trade action, initiated because of the manipulation of 

the grain trading corporations . . . that it is in our benefit to 

make the most forceful case possible, that it be a joint 

resolution of the American farmers. 

 

American farmers know full well that the price they get for 

their durum, as in the case of Canadian farmers, that the price 

that they both get for their durum wheat is not adequate, does 

not meet the cost of production, does not ensure that they are 

able to live and their families able to live in a way in which we 

all agree should happen. They know that in fact it is not in their 

benefit, it's not in their benefit to try to carve out and artificially 

inflate a price in a market-place, that it's not in their long-term 

best benefit to do so. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that I think all members of this 

Assembly are going to support this resolution; but in doing so, 

that it be seen not as an attack on American farmers or 

American working people but on those in fact who would pit us 

against the Americans, who would pit Canadian workers 

against American workers or Canadian farmers against 

American workers. 

 

Now perhaps the member from Estevan thinks that it's some 

long- or short-term benefit in fact to create a little kerfuffle 

between Canadian farmers and American farmers.  But I could 

tell the member from Estevan that those of us on this side of the 

House don't believe so.  The resolution is aimed directly at 

bringing people together -- at bringing people together, putting 

forward a solution saying that there is concern that has to be 

addressed; that there are things which are happening on the 

other side of the border which are based not on fact but in fact 

are based on a manipulated version of fact and that these 

resolutions tries to address. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would take it that all members of this House 

would not, would not oppose this resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to take this 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say a few words, then propose an 

amendment to the motion that has been presented today. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it's really interesting to listen to 

New Democrats, whether they're from Rosemont or whether 

they pretend to be representing rural people, and they're 

encouraging fairer trade 

between Canada and the United States. 

 

If I'm not mistaken, Mr. Speaker, members of the New 

Democratic Party were very much against the Free Trade 

Agreement between Canada and the United States.  I believe 

they're on record as being against it.  They're against it, Mr. 

Speaker, against the North American Free Trade Agreement, 

and they introduce a motion today wanting fair trade and free 

trade in durum wheat between Canada and the United States. 

 

Well I'm sure the general public, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

yourself, must begin to wonder what it is that the New 

Democrats really believe in.  I can recall when there was a 

free-trading Republican president in the United States, whether 

it was Mr. Bush -- President Bush -- or President Ronald 

Reagan, the NDP in this House would complain about 

agriculture policy coming from the president of the United 

States and how much they were against free trade. 

 

The member from Rosemont, members and others, would 

bitterly complain about Ronald Reagan or George Bush being 

free traders.  Now isn't it interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we're 

in a trade war now, it's between Democrats in the United States 

and Democrats on the Canadian side, because the Liberals 

didn't support free trade either. 

 

And I haven't heard one New Democrat say, well I would like 

to see that the President of the United States, Mr. Bill Clinton -- 

President Bill Clinton -- I wish he would really live up to the 

principles of free trade.  Not once did you mention that.  You 

are quick to mention Ronald Reagan, quick to mention George 

Bush, but the hypocrisy of you standing in your place, asking 

now for fair trade when you've got a new Democrat in the 

presidency of the United States and you've got New Democrats 

now in this House and you've got Liberals in Ottawa who don't 

support free trade -- and didn't -- is very, very apparent, and 

particularly when members stand up here and say, well we 

want to see fair trade for farmers and free trade now going back 

and forth.  Where were you when it mattered?  Where were you 

when it mattered? 

 

And they now are saying from their seat, the member from 

Rosemont is saying, he doesn't believe in free trade.  He doesn't 

believe in free trade; he says fair trade.  He doesn't know what 

that means.  He doesn't now what it means.  He has no idea 

what it means.  He wouldn't sign an agreement. 

 

If you signed the agreement and said, this is fair as well as free, 

do you think he'd sign it?  No.  Because politically he's so 

hidebound he couldn't come to the conclusion that free might 

mean fair.  He'd have to say, as he just did, Mr. Speaker, we 

have to control it on both sides of the border and then it would 

be fair. 

 

Now show me a controlled market internationally -- at the 

GATT negotiations or in North America -- where it is fair.  The 

control has been unfair, where people have brought in their 

own measures in Europe and their own measures in the United 

States, and they've dreamt up all these 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

bribes, all these inconsistencies.  And we've spent years and 

years and years at GATT to open it up, to make it free, which 

would be more fair. 

 

Well I find it really interesting at this time that the NDP in this 

administration here who were against all the principles of free 

trade, against all the principles of fair trade internationally that 

were written down at the GATT and brought into North 

America, now say they want a resolution where we can support 

them towards having free and fair trade with the United States 

with respect to durum wheat. 

 

Well I just point out to the members opposite, if you would 

stand in your place and have the courage to even mention the 

fact that there's a New Democrat president of the United States 

who has his members, like Senator Max Baucus, a Democrat 

on the other side of the border, who's been against trade with 

Canada, who's stopped every kind of trade issue against 

Canadians . . . it hurt.  And now he has got a president that's a 

New Democrat who is closing trade with Canada time and time 

and time again.  And they won't mention his name and they 

won't mention the fact he's a Democrat.  Now he's in increasing 

trouble because people see through the faade.  He doesn't 

believe in free trade or fair trade.  It's all politics. 

 

(1645) 

 

And we see it now with the NDP.  They will not talk about a 

New Democratic president in the United States.  They've talked 

against a Republican, but not once will they call him down and 

say a New Democratic president in the United States, a 

Democrat president, is the man behind this action against 

Canada.  And that's the truth. 

 

The President of the United States today, President Clinton, 

knows that there's politics behind the fact that he can have 

Montana and North Dakota farmers all upset about Canadian 

imports.  And the minister even knows, even given the fact that 

the United States will be short on durum wheat, the minister 

and the New Democrats will not take the case to the President 

of the United States.  They won't do it.  They won't blame a 

Democrat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosemont can chirp from his 

seat and tell us all he knows about agriculture and trade.  But 

he speaks volumes in this legislature about what the truth is 

with respect to the politics of this issue and New Democrats 

here and New Democrats on the other side of the border. 

 

It's the same thing when it comes to international trade, 

international agreements on water.  I had the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to invite the member for Rosemont down to look at 

water in south-eastern Saskatchewan, financed by both 

Americans and Canadians.  And the joke there, as I've shared 

with the members opposite, they're thinking ironically of 

calling this Bob Lyons Lake in south-eastern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can't mention the member's name 

in here, but it's so ironic because the people know there that he 

did everything possible to stop the water. 

 

And they've invited people -- both people in the United States 

that supported free trade and people in Minot and in North 

Dakota to support an international water development . . . have 

invited any member of the NDP caucus to go down and see if 

they can walk across the valley like they promised without 

getting wet.  Walk across the water. 

 

Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I have heard, I have heard 

that there are people that can walk across water, but believe me, 

I don't think it's the member from Rosemont.  I don't think it's 

the NDP Premier.  But they're invited any time by the people of 

Estevan and the people of Minot that have supported 

international trade agreements, to go down now and look at the 

relationship between Minot and North Dakota and Estevan and 

south-eastern Saskatchewan, as a result of work that took years 

and years to develop a relationship. 

 

And do you know what?  It's free and it's fair, and Democratics 

on either side of the border can take a great deal of pride in 

that.  Democrats in my riding can say, yes I know that it's a 

really good project; and yes, they're going to support it and they 

understand it. 

 

People in Minot that are Democrats said yes, it's a good project.  

Conservatives and Republicans on both side of the border will 

say exactly the same thing, and people who have integrity in 

agriculture will say that free trade in agriculture, the principles 

of it, the principles of free trade and fair trade, should be 

endorsed by this legislature, and not the hypocrisy that is raised 

here in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want the House to remember that when they're bringing 

forward resolutions or motions that encourage more freedom 

internationally in economic development, that the kind of 

economic and political forces that have taken place here and 

activities, say just exactly the opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would just like to ask 

members when they're finished at 5 o'clock, to listen to the tape 

and to see who they can hear on the tape -- whether they can 

hear the member from Estevan or they hear themselves.  And I 

think you will find you will hear yourselves on the tape.  The 

member from Estevan has the floor and I wish members would 

give him that respect. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know it bothers the 

NDP to hear the truth about fair and free trade.  So I'll just 

present my motion, Mr. Speaker, or my amendment to the 

motion.  And I move, and I'll find a seconder here from 

Souris-Cannington: 

 

 That the following words be inserted after the word 

"Assembly": 

 

 wholeheartedly supports the principle and 



April 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

spirit of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and 

 

And then we'll insert that into the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what that says simply, Mr. Speaker, and it adds to the 

main motion, is that the principles of free trade internationally 

between Canada and the United States and internationally 

between other countries, should be respected.  And I'd be 

interested to know if the New Democrats support the principles 

of free trade and the trade agreement between Canada and the 

United States. 

 

And if they do, then maybe we've got a chance.  Maybe we 

would have a chance to get some cooperation.  If they say no to 

this, and the agreement was endorsed by the President of the 

United States, endorsed by the Prime Minister of Canada, then 

what does it say?  It says they're just playing politics,  they're 

just playing games, and they don't want any resolution at all.  

And they really don't care about farmers; they just care about 

politics. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- There's some difficulty in determining 

whether the amendment is foreign . . . or the amendment is 

foreign to the main motion, but . . . Order, order, order.  But I 

do believe that the Free Trade Agreement does concern itself 

with agriculture and in that sense I will say that the amendment 

is in order.  But it is rather doubtful. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have to 

wholeheartedly support the entire motion now, both the 

amendment and the main motion as presented by the Minister 

of Agriculture, because this agreement does deal with avenues 

within the Free Trade Agreement. 

 

And when the Agriculture minister comes forward expressing 

his motion, he is talking about the free movement of goods and 

products across Canadian borders, across the U.S. borders, as 

outlined within the Free Trade Agreement.  And that is exactly 

what the American farmers are complaining about.  All of a 

sudden the Free Trade Agreement, which they wholeheartedly 

supported when they thought it would benefit them solely, is 

now providing a benefit to Canadian farmers. 

 

And the minister, in bringing forward his motion in asking the 

federal Minister of Agriculture to react strongly to the actions 

being taken place by the U.S. farmers and by the U.S. 

government of President Clinton, is supporting -- although he 

may not have entirely wished to do so -- the spirit and the 

principles of the Free Trade Agreement.  And for that I can 

support, Mr. Speaker.  Although it is kind of surprising that the 

members opposite were so vigorously opposed to the Free 

Trade Agreement and to Reagan and Bush when they were the 

American presidents and they were supporting free trade which 

is benefiting Canadian farmers. 

In the case of the Clinton administration, perhaps because the 

name of his party is Democratic, they have not said a thing 

about the American administration and their support of the 

American farmers and the fact that the American 

administration was prepared to bargain away our access to the 

American markets for votes in Texas. 

 

And that's why . . . it's the hypocrisy of the government, 

though, that is at question, I believe, Mr. Speaker, because we 

do support the motion.  And it is surprising when you look at 

what is happening with the grain movements across the U.S. 

 

One of the main aggravants in this thing . . . one of the main 

irritants is the Wheat Pool trucks that are hauling commodities 

across the border.  They pull into the local elevators along the 

border on the U.S. side and plug the system.  And yet it was the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool who opposed cross-border 

shipments of barley when farmers could do it.  They were 

opposed to that. 

 

And yet today that very same company is one of the main 

avenues by which both barley and durum is going across the 

U.S. border.  And, Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder as to what 

their ulterior motives are in this very thing.  Are they trying to 

aggravate the American farmers to such an extent that they can 

convince their government to close the border to U.S. 

shipments, forcing farmers therefore to deal with the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 

 

That's what they did with the barley and perhaps that's what 

they're trying to do with durum, Mr. Speaker.  The minister 

talked that the Americans are operating a two-price system 

right now in their wheat; one price for export for the EEP 

(export enhancement program) program, which we as Canadian 

farmers have to compete against directly. 

 

And so when we sell our durum into the U.S. we're selling it, or 

we're prepared to sell it at a price just above their EEP price but 

the American farmer, because he has a two-price system that 

the minister talked about, is unprepared to do so. 

 

But isn't it somewhat surprising that the member from Canora, 

who talks against the American two-price system that he 

described, supports an organization, the National Farmers 

Union, that calls for a two-price system in Canada.  

Inconsistent, Mr. Speaker, totally inconsistent because on one 

hand it's politically attractive for them to condemn the 

American farmer, to condemn the federal government, and on 

the other side they try to support their political allies in 

National Farmers Union on the two-price system in Canada.  

The two-price system in Canada, Mr. Speaker, benefited only 

the farmers in eastern Canada who sold directly to the mills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we support the amendment in general, 

because I support in particular the amendment as brought 

forward by the member from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

we should express the 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1994 

desires of this House at the present time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:59 p.m. until 5 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Sonntag 

Tchorzewski Scott 

Lingenfelter Crofford 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Teichrob Stanger 

Johnson Harper 

Kowalsky Jess 

MacKinnon Langford 

Penner Devine 

Lyons Boyd 

Lautermilch Toth 

Murray Britton 

Hamilton D'Autremont 

Trew Bergman 

Whitmore  

- 29 

Nays 

-- Nil 

MOTIONS 

 

Forward Votes and Proceedings to Federal Minister of 

Agriculture 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Churchill Downs: 

 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings for today's debate be 

forwarded to the federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 

Goodale. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


