




















































Hansard: March 30, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1251 

 March 30, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority: (1) for all Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority's full-time equivalents: (a) how many of those 

full-time equivalents in Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority are temporary, part-time, labour service, or 

summer students; (b) what is the payroll cost for all of 

those employees in (a); (c) how many of those positions 

will be affected by the proposed changes to The Labour 

Standards Act as contained in Bill 32; (d) what is the 

projected cost to the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority for (c) above; and (e) has the cost stated in (d) 

been factored into the expenditure estimates for the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Public Service Commission: (1) for all 

provincial government full-time equivalents covered by 

The Public Service Act; (a) how many of those full-time 

equivalents government-wide are temporary, part-time, 

labour service, or summer students; (b) in which 

departments are those above-named categories of 

employees located and in what numbers; (c) what is the 

payroll cost for those employees on a department basis; (d) 

how many of these positions will be affected by the 

proposed change to The Labour Standards Act, as 

contained in Bill 32; (e) what is the projected cost for the 

government as a whole and on a department basis, and for 

(d) above; (f) has the cost stated in (e) been factored into 

the expenditure estimates for the government as a whole 

and each government department? 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Water Corporation: (1) for 

all Saskatchewan Water Corporation's full-time 

equivalents; (a) how many of these full-time equivalents in 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation are temporary, 

part-time, labour service, or summer students; (b) what is 

the payroll costs for all those employees in (a); (c) how 

many of these positions will be affected by the proposed 

change to The Labour Standards Act as 

contained in Bill 32; (d) what is the projected cost to 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation for (c) above; and (e) 

has the cost stated in (d) been factored into the expenditure 

estimates for Saskatchewan Water Corporation? 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to remind members that the tradition in 

this House is that you only present one motion per member. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

I'm very pleased to introduce to you and to all members today, 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 12 students who have come from 

the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) Alexandra campus in Moose Jaw.  They are 

visiting today with their instructor, Larry Shaak. 

 

We welcome them to the legislature, hope that they have 

enjoyed their tour, will enjoy question period, and we look 

forward to either the member from Moose Jaw Palliser or 

myself greeting you at 2:30 over some drinks.  So welcome to 

the legislature and have a good trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly, two very good friends who are in your gallery this 

afternoon, Cal and Noreen Mills.  They're from Fleming, 

Saskatchewan.  Cal is in Regina for the next while to receive 

some treatments in Regina.  I want us all to wish them well and 

to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature, 50 grade 4 students seated in the west gallery.  

These 50 students are from Ruth Pawson School in my 

constituency.  Accompanying them are teachers Lois Clarke 

and Gloria Pickard, as well student teachers Mr. Kujaneck and 

Ms. Roziak. 

 

I very much look forward to meeting, greeting, and sharing a 

refreshment with this crew after question period.  I ask all of 

my colleagues to join me in giving a warm welcome to the 

grade 4 students from Ruth Pawson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I'd like to introduce to you 

and through to you to the members of the House, some guests 

from Gravelbourg area.  Debbie McDonald is my constituency 

assistant; and Barb Heinrichs, who helps out part-time there; 

and Flo Bekar, who is a friend of ours and of the family.  

They're seated in your west gallery there and I'd like you to join 

in with me in greeting them here today. 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan-made home shipped to Budapest 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to announce to the Assembly a great moment for Saskatchewan 

business.  Nelson Lumber in Lloydminster will be shipping one 

of their Saskatchewan-made homes to Budapest, Hungary.  The 

1,400 foot-square bi-level house with a two-car garage will be 

sent to Edmonton by truck, then on to Vancouver by rail, and 

sent to Budapest by ship.  This will mark the first time that one 

of Nelson Lumber's home packages will be shipped off the 

continent. 

 

The home's long journey began 15 years ago, when a German 

businesswoman visiting Turtle Lake and Lloydminster met Neil 

Johnson, who is the marketing manager of Nelson Lumber.  

She was very interested in becoming a distributor of the home 

packages for Nelson Lumber.  She believed that by distributing 

the homes in Budapest, an area with a shortage of houses, a 

significant profit could be made.  The first house will actually 

be used as a display and sales office, and from there more will 

be sent.  The houses sent from Saskatchewan are actually 

quicker to build and quite a bit warmer than the traditional 

houses in Budapest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again we see an example of the effort, the 

determination, and the imagination of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Nelson Lumber is reaching across the ocean 

and showing the world a bit of what people of this fair province 

can accomplish. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Bankend and A.J. McPhail 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is often said that one 

can tell of a community's background by some of its 

businesses, like co-ops and credit unions and the Wheat Pool.  

And certainly Bankend is no stranger to social democracy and 

cooperation.  The hamlet of Bankend, with a population of 22, 

boast of their co-op with annual sales approaching $2 million.  

It's quite an accomplishment with a small population base. 

 

And just north of Bankend, there is an historic point of interest.  

The historic site is the homestead of Alexander James McPhail, 

and he was very active in promoting cooperation and was 

instrumental in the creation of a new, grass-roots farm 

movement.  In the year 1924, through his hard work and 

dedication, he became the first president of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, which is celebrating its 70th anniversary this year.  

From people's ideas and thoughts grew the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, which for 70 years now has exceptionally served 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Thanks to A.J. McPhail and Bankend for being leaders in social 

democracy and cooperation.  And, Mr. Speaker, being from 

Bankend, it certainly makes it 

quite practical for me to be a politician. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sophia House 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today today 

to commend the women of vision who have established Sophia 

House in Regina: Sister Yvonne; Doris Sheldon, the executive 

director; Margaret, the house manager; and the women on the 

board. 

 

Sophia House is the first second-stage housing established in 

Saskatchewan.  For some women the level of violence escalates 

after separation; thus, second-stage housing is required to 

provide a secure environment for up to a year following the 

termination of a violent relationship. 

 

Sophia House was the dream of Sister Yvonne Toucanne, who 

actively worked, despite obstacles, to make her dream a reality.  

It is also an example of a solution developed at the community 

level.  The house came into existence because of the work of 

dedicated women who responded to a need that was identified 

by the task force on women's issues in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be able to present to Sophia House 

a grant of $23,000 to provide additional staffing for their 

expanded facility.  It is also in some small part the recognition 

of the work that the community has provided and the support 

that's so vital to the ongoing operation of this now expanded 

facility.  And example of that would be the seniors who at 

Cedar Manor got together and developed some fund-raisers to 

purchase a thousand dollars television and VCR (video cassette 

recorder) for the new suites.  The corporate sponsors have also 

provided furnishings, although four suites still need to be 

sponsored for furnishings. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gravelbourg Skating Carnival 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, the world's attention over the 

past week or two has been riveted on the World Figure Skating 

Championships in Japan.  But on Sunday, March 27, I spent the 

afternoon at the Gravelbourg hockey arena watching Icing the 

Year which is the Gravelbourg Figure Skating Club's annual 

wind-up carnival. 

 

If it may be said that the level of skills did not quite match 

those of Elvis Stojko and his friends in Japan, I can say that the 

level of enthusiasm was overwhelmingly greater. 

 

Were it not for the hard work and dedication of the club, their 

executive, the mothers, the coaches and assistants of 

Gravelbourg and Lafleche and Assiniboia and every other 

small town throughout 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

Saskatchewan, Canada, and indeed the world, events such as 

the Olympic games and the world championships in any sport 

you care to mention, just would not happen. 

 

It was particularly thrilling to me, whose children are all grown 

up and away, to see the babies that I have delivered zooming 

around the ice at breakneck speed.  And if perhaps little Erica 

Giesen, who was named in honour of my wife, fell flat on her 

face in the middle of a green tribute to St. Patrick's Day, she 

struggled happily to her feet and carried on in fine style.  

Perhaps in 10 years time she too will be a champion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, I humbly salute them all -- clubs, parents, and 

participants of all ages.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Accreditation of Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I would like the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, 

which is located in the constituency of Regina Victoria, in 

becoming the first post-secondary Indian institution to be 

accredited as a university by the Association of Universities 

and Colleges of Canada.  The association, which is made up of 

87 universities and colleges from across Canada, unanimously 

approved the college's membership during its national meeting 

this month. 

 

The college was granted provisional membership when it first 

applied in 1984.  In order to qualify for full membership, the 

college had to secure a long-term financial commitment from 

the federal government, and provide an academic freedom 

statement.  Since it was recognized as providing a high quality 

education, with appropriate library services, respect for 

academic freedom, and financial stability, the institution was 

accredited.  Full membership in the association will now 

qualify the college for more research grants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would once again like to congratulate the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College on receiving 

accreditation as a university.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

World's Largest Quilt 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in the 

town of Nipawin, the biggest cover-up story in the history of 

Saskatchewan is about to take place.  The annual Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association and the convention is being held in 

Nipawin in June and seniors' clubs from all over this province 

are gathering together and combining to make the biggest quilt 

in the world -- the biggest quilt in the world.  Each club in 

Saskatchewan is bringing a quilt to Nipawin, and many of them 

are already there.  There's over 200 of them now; they need 

about 40 more. 

They're going to sew them end to end and they'll have the 

biggest quilt in the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have seen some of the quilts that are there now and they're 

really beautiful and tremendous to see.  And when I looked at 

them and thought of the amount of work that it took, the 

number of hours of work, to make one of those, and then 

multiply it by 200 or more, maybe 300, it reminds me of what 

many hands can do when they cooperate.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon -- Best City on the Prairies 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The city that 10 of 

us have the privilege to represent -- including you, sir -- has 

received a special recognition from a national magazine.  This 

recognition should not pass without comment in this House.  

Based on a poll of its readers, Chatelaine has declared 

Saskatoon to be the best city on the prairies in which to live and 

it is ranked third overall in Canada.  I should add that out of 25 

cities covered, Regina fared quite well also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this were simply a popularity contest, I would 

not take the Assembly's time, but the criteria used, the opinions 

gathered, to take the measure of the cities are significant.  

According to Chatelaine's survey, what people want are, 

quote: safe streets, clean air, and jobs, as well as affordable 

housing, good schools and libraries, and some other amenities.  

Saskatoon has the lowest cost of living of the 25 cities, air 

quality second only to Thunder Bay, and impressive job-growth 

percentage, and as one correspondent said, a quality of life 

second to none.  It is the human touches that keep the city 

liveable, human touches like the development and preservation 

of the river bank by the Meewasin Valley Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and I know about the quality of life in our 

town.  It is good, though, to see some national recognition.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, yesterday you said that 

businesses and other associations who disagreed with your 

labour legislation were extremists.  Mr. Minister, our office has 

been literally flooded with faxes and letters from extremists 

who feel this legislation will devastate the business community 

and job creation in the province. 

 

One group of extremists includes the Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce who have identified 10 major flaws in your 

legislation.  Another group is the city of Regina, who told us, 

and quote: the amendments to section 72 is an unacceptable 

interference to the 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

collective bargaining process.  They also said that you gave 

them an assurance that this provision would not be in the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is clear that you did not consult to the extent 

that you should have and where you did meet with these 

groups, you misled them. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you keep the whole story from these 

employers that you met with?  What were you trying to hide? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have met with a fair number of 

employers over the last few days.  The same pattern appears; 

Liberals and Conservatives standing shoulder to shoulder to 

oppose this legislation and divide employers -- divide working 

people from their employers -- spread misinformation.  And to 

some extent I regret to say, there are still people who listen to 

what you have to say, although I think that number is declining. 

 

We have attempted to forge a cooperative relationship between 

management and labour to resolve some of the problems which 

we have.  I may say that after we have met with many of the 

groups, many of the groups agree that this can and should be 

done and that these problems should be resolved. 

 

So I wish you people luck in spreading misinformation, in 

dividing and setting people against people, but we are 

attempting to get them working together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now that the cat is 

out of the bag small-business people are simply appalled and 

they are speaking out -- something they were not allowed to do 

previously. 

 

One extremist small-business person faxed us today on behalf 

of the Saskatoon Station Place, as president of the Power 

Buying Group, an association of 40 restaurants in Saskatoon.  

This person said, and I quote: 

 

The changes you intend to make to the labour laws will 

destroy most small-business restaurants -- therefore less 

jobs -- higher unemployment -- more welfare. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is not these groups that are extremists.  They 

have a very keen understanding of business and labour 

relations.  You have repeatedly denied that your legislation will 

have a detrimental effect on job creation. 

 

In the face of the overwhelming firsthand evidence to the 

contrary, will you admit that your Bill will cause great 

unemployment for those who need the jobs most? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The legislation, Mr. Speaker, which 

is before the Assembly, is attempting a slightly different 

process.  Rather than have all of the rules set out in legislation, 

this legislation provides a framework within which these 

problems can be resolved by regulation. 

 

The danger in doing so is that you leave a blackboard for which 

knaves can write whatever they want on.  And members 

opposite are doing that.  You are writing their worst fears on 

this legislation. 

 

I'd suggest to members opposite, you're not doing the 

community of Saskatchewan any good with your 

fearmongering.  And in the long run you're not doing yourself 

any good politically, because in the end result we'll be judged 

by the quality of the product. 

 

And we believe that this particular legislation will be judged 

well, and it'll be judged well in the immediate future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it 

appears that you did not consult with Early's Farm and Garden 

Centre in Saskatoon.  These extremists told us: 

 

The proposed provisions will undoubtedly force our 

company to downsize its operation and eliminate four to 

five seasonal employment positions. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have said that there will be no job loss.  Your 

Premier stands in this House and says that he sticks up for the 

little guy.  Mr. Minister, what do you tell these four or five 

people, most likely summer students, when they can't find a job 

this summer.  Do you tell them, don't worry, your Premier 

sticks up for the little guy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I know, Mr. Speaker, there's nothing I 

can do to prevent the member from misrepresenting my 

comments where he believes he'll find a group of people who'll 

believe him.  I did not call them extremists.  I would be 

prepared to admit there are people concerned about this.  And a 

large part of that occurs because members opposite insist upon 

fearmongering. 

 

I'm quite sure, Mr. Speaker, when the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) brought in medicare that it was 

said by members opposite that it was terrible and going to 

destroy the province.  And I am quite sure that Liberals and 

PCs (Progressive Conservatives) did the same thing when we 

introduced . . . when the Blakeney government introduced 

things like occupational health and safety. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is one of those issues which is bringing 

forward to this province a significant reform of a difficult 

problem, that of part-time workers.  And 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

just as they now take credit for medicare, just as they now take 

credit for some of the things the Blakeney government had 

done, probably in a decade they'll be trying to take credit for 

this as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, here 

is what the Saskatchewan business coalition had to say about 

your consultation process: 

 

Despite an extensive ad campaign that says, "we're 

listening," the business employer community had no prior 

opportunity to review the detailed proposals contained in 

this legislation.  The mere act of meeting does not count as 

meaningful "consultation" if the Department does not 

reveal its detailed intentions and does not really hear our 

legitimate concerns. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that's your consultation process.  Now that 

they have been, for the most part, informed, business is saying 

thumbs down, way down, to you and your legislation.  Mr. 

Minister, will you assure this Assembly and all of those that 

will be looking for jobs this summer, that the changes you 

allude to in the media that will be occurring today or tomorrow, 

will be to pull this Bill until everyone has had an opportunity to 

review and analyse its devastating effects?  Will you do that, 

Mr. Minister, for the people of Saskatchewan today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can give the community of 

Saskatchewan categorical assurance that this legislation isn't 

going to cost any jobs this summer.  And I suggest that the 

members opposite would serve the province better if they did 

the same, instead of misrepresenting what we're attempting to 

do. 

 

What we are attempting to do is to get management and labour 

together to resolve a problem which everyone agrees upon.  

And most reasonable people agree it should be resolved. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Except the opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Except members opposite who for 

narrow, political reasons want to play politics, want to play 

politics with the lives of part-time workers.  Well I say to 

Liberals and Conservatives opposite, it is unfortunate you don't 

have some sense of responsibility to those part-time workers 

whose problems need to be resolved.  I really ask you to 

consider them, rather than your own narrow, political interests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour, the man that likes to divide workers 

from their pay cheques.  Mr. Minister, yesterday we heard you 

say that anyone who was not completely satisfied with your 

amendments 

to The Labour Standards Act is an extremist; and you said that, 

sir. 

 

I understand that yesterday you met with more of these 

extremist groups.  They were SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), and SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations).  They all 

met with us after they met with you, Mr. Minister. 

 

These groups are holding a news conference at this hour, Mr. 

Minister, to express their opposition to the labour standards 

amendments in their current form.  Do you intend to respond to 

these concerns, Mr. Minister, or are you simply going to ignore 

them and write them off as more of the so-called extremists that 

you see out there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, the 

extremists are those members opposite who for narrow political 

interests are fearmongering, and they clearly are.  We intend to 

work with the health industry and with municipal government 

and with their employees to resolve some problems which 

everyone agrees exist.  And when people become familiar with 

the process, they generally become fairly comfortable with it. 

 

I admit we are struggling with members opposite, who it seems 

are being wilfully obtuse, don't want to understand the process, 

and therefore oppose it blindly, as both Liberals and Tories did 

on first reading -- voted against it without ever having seen it.  

You're applying the same thoughtful process to these 

amendments as you are here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, yes, 

there is fear out there and it is in the hearts of the taxpayers that 

SUMA, SARM, and SAHO represent.  That's where the fear is, 

Mr. Minister -- in the hearts of those taxpayers. 

 

First and foremost, these organizations said to you yesterday 

that they had not been properly consulted.  In fact they had 

hardly been consulted at all on the changes that you propose, 

Mr. Minister.  The briefing they provided says with respect to 

the lack of consultation, and I'll quote to you: 

 

Our respective organizations take great exception to the 

manner in which the province reneged on its obligations to 

employer groups. 

 

That's a quote, sir. 

 

Mr. Minister, given the lack of public consultation, will you do 

what SUMA, SARM, and SAHO are requesting and delay 

passage of this Act until 1995 so that you will have adequate 

amount of time to properly consult with these and other 

employers in the province and respond to the concerns of the 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

taxpayers that these people represent?  Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's no question, Mr. Speaker, but 

that there are individuals -- 10 of whom . . . 13 of whom sit 

opposite actually -- who for narrow reasons, narrow personal 

reasons, want to spread fear. 

 

We say to members opposite that the process which we intend 

to set up, that of dealing with the detail of the legislation in 

regulation in a consultative process with management and 

labour, will work well. 

 

It worked well with occupational health and safety, 

notwithstanding the doomsday predictions by members 

opposite -- and members opposite who voted against the 

legislation, I want to add.  Liberals and Tories voted against the 

occupational health and safety regulations; the process worked 

well.  You will vote against this legislation and it'll work well.  

And I guess all I can say about the members opposite is, you 

never get tired of being wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, to say that SUMA and SARM 

and SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) are 

only a narrow, narrow segment of our population, is absolute 

blasphemy.  And you know it, sir.  They represent tens of 

thousands of people. 

 

Mr. Minister, these people have joined with private sector 

employers all over this province to say that your amendments 

will cost jobs.  They say, and I quote: 

 

The amendments make it extremely difficult, if not 

impossible, to attract new industries and employers to our 

province, especially when compared to the labour 

environment in neighbouring western provinces.  We are 

equally concerned that the expansion of existing industries 

will be thwarted, leading to fewer jobs and fewer workers. 

 

Mr. Minister, employer after employer, civic group after civic 

group, are saying that your changes will cost jobs.  Mr. 

Minister, when are you going to start listening to the people 

who create the jobs in this province; when are you going to 

stop driving jobs out of this province?  When will you do that, 

sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I recognize that it is the politics of the 

old-line parties, Liberals and Tories, to divide people.  That 

was what was done by Liberals with Bill 2, with Ross 

Thatcher.  It was brought into the legislature and rammed 

through the legislature.  That's what was done with Bill 104; 

there was no opportunity for consultation. 

 

This process has provided extensive consultation in advance 

and will provide an extensive consultation process afterwards.  

And you people might still be in 

office had you adopted a similar process, but you didn't.  You 

felt it good politics to divide one segment of this society 

against another.  Well that's not our approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, the amendments 

proposed to The Labour Standards Act will not only offer 

benefits to many non-unionized part-time workers, they will 

unilaterally change agreements that were achieved through the 

collective bargaining process. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are the estimated costs, and how have you 

gone about doing this, to government departments and those 

agencies funded by the provincial government who will be 

directly affected by the amendments to this particular 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If some of the members opposite 

want to break with the practice they've had to date, and stick 

around for estimates and for Committee of the Whole, you'll 

have lots of opportunity to ask these questions in Committee of 

the Whole.  I noted we have not received many of those 

questions to date from the members of the third party. 

 

I want to say to members of the third party, who sound so much 

like the official opposition -- the members of the third party are 

asking many of the same questions -- let me say that we did 

cost these in advance.  It was done by one of the province's 

more reputable chartered accountant firms.  I know you say you 

don't accept it.  May I say to you that I think the public are 

going to accept their version a lot sooner than they're going to 

accept your figures, given your success in office in budgeting, 

both provincially and federally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before I accept the next 

question, I would ask the member from Shaunavon to please 

not interrupt when the minister is answering his question.  I 

didn't see any interruption when his leader asked her question, 

or very little, and I expect him to give the same respect to other 

members. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Minister of Education.  Madam Minister, yesterday I met with 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, Madam 

Minister of Education.  Their members are very concerned 

about the effect that this will have on the cost of substitute 

teachers, caretakers and bus drivers.  These employees are 

governed by either collective agreements or by an order of the 

Minimum Wage Board.  In all cases, the Act could seriously 

alter those arrangements. 

 

Madam Minister, has the Department of Education assessed the 

additional costs that this will create for school boards across the 

province, and can you tell us whether boards were advised to 

plan for these costs when they prepared their 1994 budgets? 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Not only have I met with the SSTA, 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and teachers, but 

so has the Minister of Education.  And some of those groups 

welcome these improvements.  They're not all blindly opposed 

to any assistance which might be given to their employees -- 

unlike members opposite.  In fact we have discussed this with 

those groups.  I think there is a general agreement, that with 

respect to their institutions, these costs are manageable. 

 

Now it is true, again, the legislation provides a framework 

within which we draft regulations and the details in the 

regulations.  If the regulations were drafted as you people 

drafted your laws, that is without any consultation and you ram 

it down their throat, there could be some problems. 

 

That's not the way we've approached this Bill.  That's not the 

way we've approached government in general. And I think 

most of the people we've met with agree that the process which 

we described will work reasonably well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the 

Minister of Health.  Representatives of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations met with me yesterday to 

express their dismay with your government.  And it will be 

months before the district health board executives can assess 

the financial impact of the proposed changes to labour 

standards. 

 

In view of the tremendous upheaval they are experiencing at 

the local level, it is completely unreasonable to expect local 

health boards to review, to cost, and to analyse the impact of 

the amendments to labour standards overnight. 

 

Madam Minister, will you defend the concerns of health boards 

and ask the Minister of Labour to stop this Bill at first reading 

to allow the people a few months to analyse, and to do analysis 

and input, before introducing it again in the next session.  Will 

you commit to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It does seem, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

the case of the same old chicken, one foot up and one foot 

down.  We now apparently have the Liberal foot in the air 

asking if we will indeed consult with the health industry.  And 

we have, and we will continue to do so. And that is the process 

which we've outlined -- a process by which the Act makes 

provision for regulations drawn up in a consultative process. 

 

This government is not proceeding, as the former PC 

administration here did, which is confrontation.  And we're not 

proceeding as the Trudeau Liberals did when they were in 

Ottawa, which is confrontation -- or Thatcher.  We are 

consulting with people, we are working with people, and we 

are building a consensus to solve these problems.  Unlike 

members opposite who for the narrowest of political, personal 

reasons, want to get people fighting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Municipal Government.  Madam Minister, 

the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, as well as SARM, 

SUMA and SAHO, have all expressed grave concerns about 

how the amendments to labour standards, particularly to section 

72, will affect their ability to meet their budgets. 

 

According to a letter from the city of Regina, and I quote: 

 

It is our concern and expectation that the new Act, if 

passed, will create a damaging effect upon both labour 

relations climate of the city of Regina and the specific 

provisions which the city of Regina will be obliged to 

negotiate out of their existing collective agreements. 

 

I ask you, Madam Minister, on behalf of SUMA, on behalf of 

SARM and SAHO and SSTA and the thousands of jobs that 

they finance, will you commit to pressure your Minister of 

Labour to stop this Bill?  Will you comply with the request of 

SUMA, SARM, and SAHO, that section 72 amendment does 

not proceed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what the 

Liberals and Tories opposite are paying the people who write 

those questions, and I assume it's the same person.  I'm not sure 

what they're paying them, but I hope its not much because I 

think they could come up with at least two different questions 

in a single question period.  You've all been asking the same 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say with respect to this as I said with respect to 

the others, we don't behave as the Thatcher Liberals did, as the 

Trudeau Liberals did, as the Devine . . . as the former 

administration did.  Mr. Speaker, we have set up a consultative 

process.  We consulted beforehand; we'll do so afterwards.  

And we will be more than willing to be judged on the final 

product.  We will not have to be judged on your fearmongering 

that you people attempt to spread. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Liquor Franchises 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, I say to you if there are similarities between the 

Conservatives and the Liberals it's because we're on the public 

agenda and you're the odd man out.  That's what the problem is, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to address my . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I see that disturbed them, Mr. Speaker. But I 

would ask this question, originally, if the minister of Gaming 

and Liquor was here, but in his absence . . . 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows full well 

that that comment is out of order.  And if he wishes to continue 

I'll recognize him, but I wish he'd ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I will direct this question to the member of 

Gaming and Liquor and I would expect that he will answer the 

question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, Connie and Bill Buckton have leased the Elbow 

hotel for three years to help support their farm operation.  They 

were recently informed that there is a good chance that the 

liquor franchise will be moved from their hotel to the local 

store.  The Bucktons say that if they would have known that the 

Liquor Commission was going to make this move, they would 

not have signed the lease.  They wouldn't have leased it, Mr. 

Minister, because over 50 per cent of the income comes 

directly from that franchise. 

 

Connie told us that if that franchise is lost, the hotel is going to 

have to close.  Is it true that your government is removing 

liquor franchises from hotels in rural Saskatchewan to the local 

stores?  Is that now your policy, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on that very detailed 

question, which might be answered in estimates, I'll take notice 

and get back to the member. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  That was 

a policy question; it was not a detailed question.  A policy 

question of what is your policy. 

 

Connie Buckton and her husband were told by a representative 

of the Liquor Commission that there's a new concept being 

promoted by Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Commission.  

It's called the open shopping concept.  The representative told 

the Bucktons that because liquor consumption is down by 9 per 

cent in Saskatchewan, that the government is going to try to 

increase the consumption of liquor so that it would be available 

in liquor stores, local stores, and so on, for more revenue.  Is 

this true, Mr. Minister?  Are you actively promoting liquor 

consumption . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order. I'm certain 

that most members cannot hear the question that is being asked.  

Would the member please put his question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Is it true, Mr. Minister, that your government 

is promoting liquor consumption because people are not 

drinking as much as they used to, in order to add money to your 

coffers?  Is that your new policy, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, if it weren't so sad and 

pathetic, it would be laughable, but that is the party that opened 

up liquor advertising in this province 10 years ago that we 

fought against.  Do you 

remember the days when you sat over here on the treasury 

benches and we argued against liquor advertising?  Now you're 

pretending, in a sanctimonious way, that somehow you're 

opposed to it. 

 

I think we should all be happy that liquor consumption is down, 

which all of us are, and I don't know what you're upset about 

here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, a few weeks ago, the minister of 

gambling and booze said that the people of Saskatchewan were 

not betting enough.  They were not wagering enough and he 

was going to promote that.  And I asked him at that time, does 

that mean that you're now going to be promoting liquor in the 

future?  It's ironic, Mr. Minister, that in the year of the family, 

your government is hanging its financial hat on gambling and 

booze in order to generate revenues for your government. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, what's next?  Putting VLTs (video 

lottery terminal) in the elementary schools so children can blow 

their milk money on it?  I'm serious about that, because where 

will this end, Mr. Minister?  Or are you going to take your 

friend Mr. McKeown's advice and legalize prostitution?  

What's next, Mr. Minister?  Where will it stop? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, one thing I will 

guarantee the member opposite, that the now instant Liberal, 

Mr. Ted Yarnton, who was up in the galleries recently as the 

new Liberal team, who was the individual who hauled the 

liquor, the booze, to the ministers' offices under your 

administration is not going to be getting a job with this 

government to continue that kind of action with liquor 

distribution in this building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before we call the next order, I 

really do not want to single out certain individuals during 

question period, and I would ask all members, before I think I 

have to start singling certain people out, that constant 

interruption, of constant conversations that are going on 

between certain members when others are asking questions, are 

simply unacceptable. 

 

I don't think we need to point any fingers at any particular 

member.  Order.  I'm simply asking members to please 

cooperate in question period so they don't have to be singled 

out in the future. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Prince Edward's Visit to Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

I'm pleased to announce to the House today that His Royal 

Highness, the Prince Edward, will visit Saskatchewan on 

August 14 and 15 of this year.  The prince has accepted an 

invitation from four organizations co-sponsoring the visit: the 

Globe Theatre of Regina, the Duke of Edinburgh Awards 

young Canadian's challenge, the training academy of the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

While Prince Edward's itinerary has not been finalized, he has 

already agreed to several engagements.  The prince will attend 

a gala performance at the Globe Theatre.  He is a patron of the 

Globe Theatre; the only organization in Canada to which he has 

granted such royal patronage.  This is a distinct honour to the 

cultural community of our province and is a reflection of the 

professional excellence achieved by the Globe. 

 

Prince Edward will present gold Duke of Edinburgh's Awards 

to young people who have completed a demanding program of 

achievement over a number of years.  The Duke of Edinburgh's 

Award is an international organization which promotes 

physical and intellectual development in youth. 

 

The prince will also visit the RCMP Training Academy, one of 

the best-known police academies in the world.  And the 

government will arrange some events in the Regina area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize the original nature of this 

royal visit.  It is to be a working visit, not an official one.  This 

means that the program can be more informal and that the royal 

visitor can undertake fund-raising events for the worthy causes 

like the Duke of Edinburgh's Award. 

 

The government's role is to coordinate the visit and provide the 

expertise of the protocol office as well as arranging some 

events.  We are pleased to assist such fine organizations as the 

Globe Theatre, the Duke of Edinburgh's Award, and the RCMP 

Academy in this way. 

 

I might add, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has been in the 

forefront of developing the policy and educational dimensions 

of royal visits.  This has been the case for successive 

governments over the past 15 years.  The visits by members of 

the royal family contribute a great deal to our identity as a 

community and to our Canadian heritage as a parliamentary 

democracy and constitutional monarchy.  It is our hope that the 

formula of the working visit may facilitate future visits of 

members of the royal family to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of the Assembly will 

extend a warm welcome to the youngest son of our Queen 

when he visits our province in August. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Child and 

Family Services Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Saskatchewan has endorsed, as you know, the United Nations 

declaration making 1994 the International Year of the Family.  

The theme of this year is, family -- resources and 

responsibilities in a changing world. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is very significant in this 

particular year.  Over the past several years, the world has 

changed at an astonishing rate.  Technology has and will 

continue to revolutionize the way we live, work and play in the 

'90s and beyond.  Families are not immune to that pressure to 

change.  Nevertheless, despite intense outside pressure, the 

family as an institution in our society, Mr. Speaker, has 

survived. 

 

While the family constellation has undergone significant 

change and today takes many forms, the evidence continues to 

confirm that regardless of its structure, a strong, healthy and 

loving family is still the most desirable environment in which 

to raise a child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has made the well-being of 

Saskatchewan children, youth, and families a priority.  Last 

June we released the paper, Children First: An Invitation to 

Work Together -- Creating Saskatchewan's Action Plan for 

Children.  Dozens of community groups and individuals 

responded with observations, suggestions, and proposals as to 

how we might help to ensure the safety, security, and healthy 

development of our children and youth.  Over 40 follow-up 

consultations took place with various groups as we explored 

proposals in more detail. 

 

One of the points most often emphasized, Mr. Speaker, was 

that children need strong, secure families.  A family provides 

the base from which a child ventures forth to explore the world.  

A family provides the base to which the child turns for love, 

acceptance, guidance, and support.  A family provides the child 

with a sense of permanence and belonging. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe, all members of this legislature 

believe, every child has the right to grow up in a secure and 

nurturing environment of a lifetime family that will provide 

relationships that will last well into adulthood. 

 

Some children also, who are permanent wards of the Minister 

of Social Services, find it difficult to experience any lasting 

feeling of security and familiarity in their lives.  If these 

children are to enjoy the long-term benefits of belonging to a 

family, we must establish the means to connect them to a 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

reliable, long-term family environment.  My department has 

undertaken an initiative to provide this sense of permanency for 

about 400 children who are currently in the care of the Minister 

of Social Services, and for many children who are at risk of 

being permanently committed in the future. 

 

The family connections program is designed to link permanent 

wards with a secure, lifetime family by returning the child to 

their family or community of origin, or providing the child with 

a secure and a long-term placement with a family the child may 

have already come to accept as his or her own.  Because many 

of these children are of first nations or Metis ancestry, Mr. 

Speaker, my officials are working very closely with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Metis Society 

of Saskatchewan, and many government departments to ensure 

this necessary planning takes place. 

 

We believe if a child is to enjoy a sense of belonging that 

comes with being an integral part of a family, the responsibility 

for decisions and choices regarding all aspects of the child's 

daily life must rest within the context of that family group.  In 

order for the child and the family to achieve that sense of 

security and permanence, the care-giver must have the freedom 

to exercise all rights and obligations of a parent with respect to 

the child.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, one group of amendments in 

the Bill before the House authorizes the transfer of 

guardianship or custody of children permanently in the care of 

the minister. 

 

The intent of these amendments, Mr. Speaker, is to permit the 

Minister of Social Services to enter into an agreement with 

another person, such as an extended family member.  The 

purpose of the agreement is to transfer legal guardianship of a 

child permanently committed to the minister from the minister 

to the care-giver wishing to assume long-term responsibility for 

the child. 

 

The amendments allow for the care-giver to assume legal 

guardianship of the child while preserving the birth parent's 

role as a key individual in the child's life, and allowing the birth 

parent a say in determining the child's future. 

 

In order to safeguard the rights of a child's birth parent, the 

minister is required to make all reasonable efforts to locate and 

take into account the wishes of the child's birth parent prior to 

entering into such an agreement. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, in every case where the child is a 

status Indian, the minister must notify and take into account the 

wishes of the child's band before concluding such an 

agreement. 

 

The effect of these amendments it to provide the authority to 

terminate a child's status as a permanent ward of the minister 

and grant guardianship of the child and the rights and 

responsibilities of a parent to the care-giver.  The only 

exception is the guardian's right to place the child for adoption. 

This right will remain with the parent. 

These amendments are particularly important for Indian 

families who do not wish to proceed with legal adoption of a 

child but who choose to care for and raise the child.  While 

acknowledging every child's right to a family, the overall 

interests and well-being of each child remain paramount. 

 

It is vitally important to the child's development and happiness 

that the substitute family have the ability to appropriately and 

adequately meet the child's developmental, physical, emotional, 

and intellectual needs. 

 

Therefore the amendments require any person wishing to 

assume guardianship of a child permanently committed to the 

minister to participate in a home study similar to that required 

for adoption.  Only homes approved through this process will 

be considered and only if the transfer is deemed by the minister 

to be in the best interests of the child. 

 

My staff are sometimes faced with a situation wherein an 

extended family member or other interested person wishes to 

make a child who is a permanent ward as part of their family, 

but is unable to assume financial responsibility due in some 

cases to the special needs of the child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe no child should be denied the security 

of a family for monetary reasons alone.  Therefore, while the 

minister's legal rights and responsibilities to a child for whom 

guardianship or custody has been transferred to a third party are 

terminated, this Bill will permit the minister to provide 

financial support to a child where such assistance is required to 

maintain the child in the guardian's home or to meet the child's 

special needs. 

 

These amendments, Mr. Speaker, reflect the new, positive and 

progressive way of thinking and policy development which we 

will continue to pursue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is firmly committed to assisting 

and supporting first nations people as they assume increased 

control over the development and delivery of programs and 

services for first nations children and their families.  As you are 

aware, over the past few months we have signed agreements 

with Touchwood, Battlefords and Meadow Lake's First 

Nations, and now with the La Ronge Band, Mr. Speaker, for 

development of agencies to deliver services to Indian children 

and families on reserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most emotionally moving . . . the most 

emotionally moving experiences in my six months' tenure as 

minister has been giving the first nations people -- a long 

overdue move -- but full authority and the devolution of 

opportunity to manage their own child and family services.  

This is long overdue and we're managing this with due 

dispatch.  And these have been very moving experiences and 

one in which we've had a high degree of cooperation and 

consultation and sensitivity by all parties involved. 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

We are currently involved in discussions with several other 

bands and tribal councils for the formation of similar 

agreements.  In support of this commitment, Mr. Speaker, 

another group of amendments to the current legislation will 

increase the autonomy and authority of Indian child and family 

service agencies. 

 

Several amendments give the agencies the authority to enter 

into agreements with youth requiring care and supervision, 

appoint mediators to assist in child protection matters, and 

assume responsibility for costs of assessment of children and 

families requested by the court. 

 

Other amendments ensure agencies are bound by the same rules 

of confidentiality which bind employees of the department and 

are given the same protection from liability given to the 

employees of the department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of these amendments have been developed 

as a direct result of ongoing consultations with the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, bands, and tribal councils.  

The amendment which allows the court to take the 

recommendations of a child, band, or agency into account 

where a permanent committal or long-term care order is being 

requested, is just one example. 

 

At the request of first nations, we have included amendments to 

ensure the relevant agency or the child's band receives 60 days 

notice of any application for a permanent or long-term care 

order, and to grant party status to a band or agency appearing in 

court in respect of a hearing related to such an order. 

 

(1430) 

 

In addition, amendments will enable agencies to exercise 

greater authority over their operations.  For example, agencies 

may designate their own officials or officers and directors 

under the Act, without the need for formal endorsement of their 

appointments by the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Amendments will, as well, provide for greater flexibility in the 

future development of Indian child welfare agencies as 

self-government discussions progress. 

 

With respect to the commitment made by the federal 

government to provide funding to Indian child and family 

services agencies, Mr. Speaker, we respect this commitment.  

In recognition of that commitment, amendments contained in 

the Bill before the House ensure the Minister of Social Services 

in Saskatchewan will assume responsibility for expenses 

related to residential care of children for whom agencies are 

providing service only where there's been formal agreement to 

do so. 

 

The final group of amendments, Mr. Speaker, are primarily of a 

technical nature.  They relate to extending supervision orders 

rather than requiring my department to apply for a new order, 

and impose a 

total maximum period of 18 months for any supervision order.  

Also included is an amendment designed to increase the 

flexibility of the court in cases where orders for substitutional 

service are required. 

 

As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, this government has made the 

well-being of Saskatchewan children and youth a priority.  For 

children who have been permanently committed or 

permanently removed from their birth parents, we believe the 

secure and caring environment which is the right of every child 

may often be found within the child's extended family or 

community. 

 

We further believe that in order to provide children with the 

greatest opportunity to grow up with confidence and a sense of 

pride in who they are, it is imperative they learn about and 

experience the values and traditions which are part of their 

heritage.  We believe such learning and experience can most 

effectively take place in an environment which is sensitive to 

their cultural and spiritual needs.  This is particularly important, 

Mr. Speaker, for our first nations and Metis children. 

 

Saskatchewan's action plan for children and my department's 

family connections programs are major initiatives undertaken 

by this government to enhance the well-being of 

Saskatchewan's children and youth.  Under the umbrella of 

these larger initiatives, numerous preventive family support, 

parent education, and preschool programs and pilot projects 

have been developed and implemented by government 

departments across the piece, Mr. Speaker, and in consultation 

and partnership with our communities. 

 

As we continue to work in partnership with schools, churches, 

aboriginal organizations and various community groups and 

individuals, many more will be planned and undertaken.  The 

proclamation of 1994 as the International Year of the Family 

serves to focus the world's attention on the importance of 

families. 

 

The amendments I have outlined today will strengthen our 

ability to provide more Saskatchewan children with the 

opportunity to grow up within the secure and loving 

environment of a family they can now call their own.  We 

believe this is a birthright of every Saskatchewan child, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would like at this time to express my thanks to the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the many bands and tribal 

councils and the Saskatchewan Metis society who have 

provided input, as well as to staff of our department, the 

Department of Justice, and the other departments of 

government, for the assistance and support that they have 

provided in the development of this legislation.  Their 

cooperative spirit and dedication to Saskatchewan children and 

families is greatly appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are complex matters, but they are great 

challenges and opportunities.  By working together, these 

challenges are being met, Mr. Speaker, 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

in a spirit of mutual respect, sensitivity, and creative thinking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Child and Family Services Act.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Minister, children and families are the most important asset 

that we have in Saskatchewan.  Families are the basis on which 

our society is founded and the basis by which we support this 

society.  Therefore anything which is done which enhances 

both children and families, we are prepared to support. 

 

But that's not to say that we don't have questions when it comes 

to dealing with any piece of legislation.  There are always 

questions as how the legislation is going to affect families and 

children, and how it's going to be implemented. 

 

When you come to the question of our first nations -- the 

natives and their families -- I think it's very important that the 

children be raised within their heritage, if at all possible.  It 

allows them to have a knowledge of where they are coming 

from and where they're going to.  And that's important for all 

families without regard to their ethnic background.  It's 

important for them to understand their heritages. 

 

When you talk about guardianship, I think we have to ask some 

questions in that area to get a clearer definition as to what is 

exactly meant in this piece of legislation and how that kind of 

guardianship will work.  Because it sounds to me like it's 

almost parenting but not quite.  So we need some explanations; 

we'll need some explanations on exactly what that means. 

 

We also have to question, Mr. Minister, on what supervisory 

role your department will play with this new piece of 

legislation.  How will your department interact with bands and 

the tribal councils?  And how will this piece of legislation 

interact with the children under the control of your department, 

under your control, Mr. Minister? 

 

It's very important that children be given a permanent and 

secure home base -- one that is loving and caring.  And when 

you mentioned home schooling, Mr. Minister, I kind of had to 

stop and think a little bit, that perhaps it might be worthwhile 

that we had the same sort of thing for all couples before they 

decided to become parents.  And then some of the problems 

that we face with children in our society might be alleviated.  

Just a thought.  I know that there would be a considerable 

amount of unrest if it was implemented, but nevertheless it may 

have some value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we do have questions that we need to 

review with this legislation, we need to talk to the various 

parties who are interested in this, I would move that we adjourn 

debate now. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Traffic Safety 

 Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988/Une Loi modifiant 

 la Loi de 1988 sur le Tribunal de la scurit routire 

de la Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Traffic Safety Court of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1994.  This amendment will 

repeal the appeal provision in this legislation, so that the 

general appeal procedures for provincial offences will apply to 

traffic offences heard in the traffic safety courts. 

 

The present appeal section provides that when a matter is 

appealed from a traffic justice, the appeal is by a retrial before a 

Provincial Court judge.  There is a further and final appeal to 

the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

There are a number of problems with this section.  The first 

problem is that a retrial, as a standard appeal provision, has 

been found by the Supreme Court of Canada to be 

unconstitutional.  It has been so found because of the 

possibility of the Crown bringing new evidence at the second 

trial that wasn't brought forward at the original trial. 

 

The second problem is that the levels of court appealed to are 

different, if the traffic offence is not heard in a traffic safety 

court.  Traffic safety courts exist only in Saskatoon and Regina 

at the present time.  If the same provincial traffic offence is 

originally heard elsewhere in the province, apart from Regina 

or Saskatoon, the appeal is to the Court of Queen's Bench, with 

the final appeal to the Court of Appeal. 

 

The difference in appeal procedures and levels is confusing to 

persons convicted as well as to lawyers and to judges.  It is also 

unfair, as only Regina and Saskatoon residents are barred from 

going to the Court of Appeal on traffic offences. 

 

The removal of the appeal provision will solve the 

constitutional problem and result in a uniform appeal procedure 

for traffic offences everywhere in the province.  This 

amendment responds to complaints over the years from 

lawyers, from defendants, from persons charged, and from 

judges who find the present lack of uniformity in appeal 

procedures to be confusing and unfair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

it's interesting that the previous Act was unconstitutional.  It 

seems that the constitutional questions are becoming more and 

more prevalent in our society today, and partially because of 

the way legislation is being brought forward. 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, this deals with legal and constitutional 

questions, we need more time to 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

evaluate what this piece of legislation will do.  We need time to 

be able to consult with those people who are experts in it, 

which I am not. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 1994.  The Summary Offences Procedure 

Act, 1990, sets out the procedure for issuing and serving tickets 

for provincial and municipal offences.  It establishes the 

options available to the person served with the ticket to respond 

to the ticket.  It also deals with the processing of tickets through 

the court system and the enforcement of fines. 

 

The first problem that this Act addresses is the situation where 

a person is arrested and taken to the police station because he 

or she has failed to appear in court on the required day with 

respect to a provincial offence.  If a justice of the peace is not 

able to come to the police station to release the person, the 

person may have to spend a night in jail. 

 

This Bill will allow the police officer in charge, in these 

circumstances, to authorize the interim release of a person who 

has been arrested on a warrant to appear in court.  There are 

similar provisions in the Criminal Code and the uniform 

provincial offences Act to deal with the situation I've described.  

These have served as the model for this amendment. 

 

Another amendment will repeal the municipal by-law appeal 

procedure.  This procedure creates different appeal procedures 

for by-law offences in Regina and Saskatoon than are in place 

for municipal by-law offences elsewhere in the province.  In 

Regina and Saskatoon, if a municipal by-law matter is heard by 

a justice of the peace, the appeal is to a Provincial Court judge.  

A further and final appeal can be taken to the Court of Queen's 

Bench.  Outside of Regina and Saskatoon, Provincial Court 

judges hear by-law offences.  An appeal can be taken to the 

Court of Queen's Bench with a further and final appeal to the 

Court of Appeal. 

 

Existing appeal provisions in this Act and The Traffic Safety 

Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988, prevent residents of 

Saskatoon and Regina from going to the Court of Appeal on 

most provincial and municipal offences.  Yet if a trial for the 

same offence is heard elsewhere in the province, it can 

ultimately be determined by the Court of Appeal.  There is no 

good reason for this distinction and it does not seem fair.  By 

removing the municipal by-law appeal provisions, the same 

appeal procedures will be applicable in all parts of the 

province. 

 

Two other minor clarification amendments are being 

made with respect to the issue and service of municipal by-law 

tickets.  These are purely housekeeping in nature.  The changes 

made in this legislation provide for increased uniformity and 

fairness in the administration of provincial offences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

again we're dealing with a situation here of legal technicalities 

and potentially even constitutional issues since the last traffic 

Act dealt with constitutional issues. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, that we need more time 

to investigate this and to find out what the ramifications of 

these amendments to the legislation are.  Therefore I would 

move that we adjourn debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 30 -- An Act 

respecting Victims of Domestic Violence be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to be 

able to rise today and make some remarks regarding Bill 30, 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. 

 

You know, domestic violence is not a new problem, but this 

Act certainly does present us with a novel solution for this 

age-old problem.  Domestic violence has existed down through 

the ages across all economic classes and throughout all 

religious belief systems. 

 

I want to give members an example of how domestic violence 

has become so commonplace that it has entered our lexicon 

without us even thinking of it.  And I refer to the common 

statement that we say, oh well, it's just a rule of thumb.  How 

many of us actually stop and consider what is meant or what is 

the origin of that phrase, rule of thumb? 

 

In fact, it's a phrase that dates back from about the 15th or 16th 

century and it comes from an English law at that time that 

forbade a man from beating his wife with any stick thicker than 

his thumb.  There we see, at that time, socially sanctioned 

violence. 

 

In these modern days the tacit social endorsement of violence 

as a behavioural control mechanism is more subtle, but it is still 

there.  It ranges all the way from thought control techniques, 

like accusing somebody of being oh so politically correct if 

they disagree with 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

your world view, to increasing images of child sexuality being 

used to sell goods and services, to ridicule when people talk 

about domestic violence statistics. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, some people genuinely cannot believe 

that one in five reported assaults in Saskatchewan are spousal 

assaults; that two-thirds of female murder victims are killed by 

family members or by close friends; or that up to 80 per cent of 

children of abused women actually saw the horror of their 

mother being beaten. 

 

Still though, some people, many people, can believe these 

statistics, but they want to convince themselves and others that 

the statistics simply are not so.  It's a sort of a whistling in the 

dark theory of social development.  The theory that says, if I 

don't acknowledge a problem, it doesn't exist.  If it doesn't 

exist, I don't have to do anything about it.  If I don't have to do 

anything about it, I can ignore the pain and the screams I hear 

coming from my neighbours. This is, sadly, the logical 

extension of a hedonistic, individualistic society turned inwards 

upon itself. 

 

Luckily here in Saskatchewan we are starting to recognize that 

this simply is not the socially useful or smart way to deal with 

domestic violence.  Sometimes living in a small place with a 

close-knit population is a great advantage.  All across this 

province, all across the political spectrum, people are coming to 

endorse the concept of zero tolerance for domestic violence. 

 

Right now I would like to commend the member from Morse, 

who when speaking to the second reading of this Bill, told this 

House about the violence that he and his wife had had to deal 

with when they were helping a neighbour woman who was in 

jeopardy.  I thought that what he and his wife did was very 

courageous; I thought he was very courageous in telling this 

House about it; and I am very pleased that he, like others, is 

standing up and starting to break the silence of the tyranny of 

domestic violence. 

 

Previously people were often reluctant to interfere in a marital 

or family relationship.  I think that came from the whole notion 

that a man's home is his castle.  But you know, it is to be hoped 

that the notion of the divine right of husbands, just like the 

divine right of kings, can now be challenged successfully.  The 

rule of thumb is almost over. And why?  Because as a society 

we are recognizing that the castle walls are no longer merely a 

private domain. 

 

We know that what happens in the privacy of a home spills out 

and affects the public domain as well.  We know that private 

privileges are limited by public responsibilities.  We simply 

cannot ignore the harm inflicted by one family member on 

another.  This is no longer, if it ever was, merely a private 

problem. 

 

In past decades, as women started talking about their abuse, the 

attitude was often, ah, she must have been asking for it; or, a 

few little slaps are a part of marriage; or, everything would be 

fine if only she'd stop provoking him.  All that these attitudes 

and sayings did 

was to enhance the feelings of shame, isolation, and 

helplessness that the victims of violence already felt.  They 

already blamed themselves.  Their families already blamed 

them. 

 

Little wonder then that most victims stay in a violent situation 

until there have been 30 or 35 separate incidents of violent 

assaults. 

 

What exactly are we talking about when we talk about 

domestic violence?  I'd like to refer to my experience as a 

psychologist, because in my time, working as a clinical 

psychologist, I had a lot of contact with victims -- people, 

mostly women, but some men, who had been physically, 

emotionally, or sexually abused by the people they loved. 

 

One example that I would like to share with the House today is 

a women named Elaine, a very beautiful women.  She married 

the local handsome high school hero.  They had two children.  

And each night she would wait in terror for him to come home 

and start punching her. And she felt she had no option but to 

take it because her mother had disapproved of her marriage, 

and because her father, from the time she was eight or nine, 

until she eloped with the high school hero, her father used to 

come into her bedroom regularly. 

 

She finally left her husband, with her two boys.  She started 

therapy. But one day she came to see me and she had a 

blackened eye.  That blackened eye did not come from her 

ex-husband.  Her oldest son, now a university student, had 

broken up with his girlfriend and he came home and he took 

out his frustration on his mother. 

 

Another example, Judy, married to a very successful, 

prominent Saskatoon businessman.  The picture of success -- 

great home, great clothes, great lines to cover up her abuse.  

Dave would come at night, having worked 10- and 15-hour 

days. He'd be exhausted and he'd start picking at little flaws in 

her housekeeping skills.  He'd be irritated that she didn't have 

his favourite drink ready and waiting for him.  He'd be angry 

that she was still folding laundry instead of comforting him 

about all his hard work. 

 

And then she became pregnant.  But what should have been a 

joyous time turned into a time of terror for her.  Dave started 

out by pinching, always where her sleeves would cover the 

bruises.  Then, as her baby grew, his violence grew until one 

day he pushed her down and kicked her in the stomach.  His 

selective violence -- the bracelet and necklace pattern of 

punching where it didn't show -- wasn't enough for him when 

he was faced with the responsibility of a baby on the way.  

Judy's tale is all too common.  Unfortunately, far too many 

pregnant women see an escalation of violence during their 

pregnancy. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there is a saying that sums up the 

abusive power in these situations that we all must take note of.  

The saying is: once a man has used his fist he doesn't have to 

hit again; all he has to do is make a fist.  Just imagine the terror 

of always waiting for that 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

fist.  Imagine living out the terror of the ongoing cycle of 

violence. For there is a pattern, a cycle, a circle that spirals in 

on itself. 

 

A circle of violence starts with the tension build-up -- the little 

things that let the victim know she's not pleasing her partner.  

The intimidation, the threats, and then comes the violence -- 

physical violence like choking, kicking, or slapping; emotional 

violence like humiliation; sexual violence like forced sex or 

coercive ugly acts that degrade and shame. 

 

And the circle of violence is closed then with the honeymoon 

phase.  After the violence comes the honeymoon phase, where 

the perpetrator apologizes, maybe even weeps, certainly sobers 

up, and definitely promises that it will never, ever happen 

again.  So she believes him, gives him another chance.  And the 

dance, the circle of violence, starts all over again.  

 

So that's the circle of violence, Mr. Speaker -- tension, 

violence, honeymoon hearts and flowers and promises -- that 

victims have to deal with over and over again. 

 

I want to repeat, between 30 and 35 incidents of violence 

happen in the home before it's even reported.  That's a shocking 

statistic.  Just as shocking as is the statistic about the frequency 

of battering.  Depending on the source that you read, the 

experts will say that it is either one in ten or one in eight 

women who are the victims of domestic violence. 

 

Now it is important at this point, Mr. Speaker, since I have 

been talking primarily about women as victims, to 

acknowledge that not all batterers are men. Some, very few, but 

some batterers are women -- women in lesbian relationships, 

women abusing their ageing parents, women beating on their 

kids; even, in a curiously twisted and agonizing pattern for the 

victim, women beating up on men.  Yes, there are some women 

who are violent.  Our sex does not provide us with some sort of 

a magic hormonal inoculation against the violent messages all 

around us in this society. 

 

But luckily, there are very few women who are violent, few 

enough that the odd reported incident still causes shock and 

consternation.  Our senses haven't yet, thankfully, been dulled 

to the notion of female violence, like we have ignored male 

violence. 

 

Yes, the incidence of women perpetrating violence on 

powerless victims is much less frequent than it is for men, but 

it is still unacceptable.  Our goal today has to be zero tolerance 

for all violence -- zero tolerance for violence, no matter who 

commits the violence. 

 

I would like to point out that this Act, Bill 30, gives remedy for 

any victim, regardless of sex or age or status.  This Act is not 

aimed at men.  The Act is aimed at violators.  The Act deals 

with domestic violence, however perpetrated, by whomever. 

 

Sadly, though, we know from the evidence, that a majority of 

violent offenders are indeed men.  What a 

terrible burden this must be for men, knowing that your 

brothers are all too frequently violent, knowing that your 

brothers have bought into the twisted notion that thumping is a 

substitute for thinking, that fists are stronger than feelings. 

 

Now just who is your average batterer, Mr. Speaker?  What is 

his profile?  What would he look like on the street?  Well to tell 

you the truth, he wouldn't look any different than the men here 

in this Chamber, for a batterer is not a brutish, depraved lout, 

frothing at the mouth and just yearning to whip his woman.  In 

fact, the average batterer is quite terrifying just because he is so 

average.  He could be any one of us -- any one.  As was pointed 

out originally in the Badgley report way back in the early '80s, 

any man could be a batterer. 

 

Violence occurs across all socio-economic lines.  Violence 

affects all income groups, all employment classes; violence, 

potentially, affects all of us.  Sadly, one in four girls will be 

raped; over 30 per cent of girls will be sexually assaulted 

before they're 18; and worst of all, over 70 per cent of assaults 

are within the family -- within the family, the home, the one 

place where people should have a 100 per cent, ironclad 

guarantee of safety -- within the home, the one place a victim 

should never have to leave. 

 

It is very hard, looking at the statistics on domestic violence, to 

ignore one inevitable conclusion.  For far too many women and 

their children, the home is one of the most violent places they 

will ever experience.  We should change the old saying. It's not, 

home is where the hearth is. For far too many people, home is 

where the harm is. 

 

(1500) 

 

Abusive behaviour in the home is a serious social problem; it is 

not a private matter.  Family violence, which is physical, 

psychological, or sexual maltreatment, abuse or neglect by a 

relative or care-giver, is a violation of trust and it is an abuse of 

power in a relationship where people should have the right, the 

right to absolute safety. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have introduced this Act, The Victims 

of Domestic Violence Act, to work towards establishing the 

home as a place of safety.  To give victims some assurance that 

they will not be doubly victimized in violence -- first to have to 

endure the pain and terror and then to have to leave their own 

home in order to seek out safety.  This Act turns around the 

whole notion of responsibility and ownership of the problem of 

violence. 

 

You know, there's an endless litany of commissions, reports, 

and initiatives that have attempted to deal with violence in the 

home.  There are so many studies that if I brought them in here 

and stacked them up on my desk they would be as tall as a 

young child, as tall as a little kid watching his mother being 

beaten. 

 

I want to just refer to a few of the studies in the past decade.  In 

1981, the Committee on Sexual Offences 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

Against Children and Youth, the Badgley report; 1983, the 

Fraser Committee on Pornography and Prostitution; 1986, a 

five-year child sexual abuse initiative funding over 300 projects 

to raise public awareness and to train front line workers; 1988, 

at the federal level, Bill C-15, amendments to the Criminal 

Code and the Canada Evidence Act to facilitate the testimony 

of child witnesses.  Again in 1988, a family violence initiative 

by the federal government.  In 1991, a new family violence 

initiative; and in 1992, most cynical of all, the program called 

brighter futures. 

 

This program was announced to promote the health and 

well-being of children, and to build on the goodwill generated 

by Canada's profile at the United Nations during the Year of 

the Child.  Well brighter futures, that program was announced 

just scant months before the federal government announced 

that it was shelving the whole notion of a universal child care 

program.  The bulb on the brighter futures got considerably 

dimmer that day. 

 

Nevertheless all these initiatives, these commissions, these 

studies, were attempts to deal with the problem of domestic 

violence.  As such they should be applauded.  They were all 

good band-aid solutions -- they kissed the problem but they 

didn't make it go away.  Because no matter what, it was still the 

victim who was punished; the victim who had her life torn 

upside down; the victim who was forced into a twisted game of 

double jeopardy.  She was first assaulted and then further 

abused by having to leave her own home. 

 

It is time now to turn our understanding and concern about 

domestic violence upside down.  We endorse zero tolerance of 

violence in the home.  A home should be a safe place.  Home 

can become a safe place.  It is time now for the offender to 

leave the victim.  And why do I say that?  Well for some very 

compelling and practical reasons, practical reasons for women, 

for children, and for men.  This Act provides positive 

advantages, positive solutions to violence for all three. 

 

First, the most obvious group affected are the direct victims of 

domestic violence.  Most often, as I've said, that's women. And 

so that's who I'll direct my remarks about. 

 

What advantage does this Act provide for women victims?  If 

women are forced to flee a violent situation, often leaving at 

night with only a few possessions in a garbage bag, they may 

be condemning themselves and their children to a lifetime of 

poverty.  Don't forget, in this province 41 per cent of the social 

assistance case-load is single parent women and kids.  A high 

number of them, I would suggest, have left violent situations. 

 

Right now at least one woman in six lives below the poverty 

line.  Some women victims face major problems -- major 

problems -- in trying to find alternate housing and employment.  

Just thinking about the logistics of looking for a new home 

when 

you've got a black eye or a broken arm, should give you a fairly 

clear picture of why it's better, more appropriate, that the 

perpetrator leaves, not the victim. 

 

This is particularly so for rural women.  There are very few 

shelter spaces available for rural woman, even less than there 

are for urban women.  So this Act is particularly important for 

rural women. 

 

Another group of victims at great jeopardy is immigrant 

women.  They are in many cases already doubly disadvantaged.  

First, they have poor or no English language skills, and they are 

trying to learn English in a system that doesn't provide ESL 

(English as a second language) training for someone only 

working in the home. 

 

Secondly, because they're new to the country, they may lack 

knowledge about the systems available in Canada -- the 

practical things of figuring out how to find a place to rent, how 

to pay for it. 

 

Third, one other factor for immigrant women is the fear of 

deportation.  They may have been threatened that they will be 

deported if they dare leave their home.  So to ask immigrant 

women to leave their own fragile, new, strange, and unfamiliar 

home, is an even greater trauma than it might be for others. 

 

Now what about the men?  In this instance I'm talking about 

men as violators, as perpetrators.  Why would it be an 

advantage in terms of dealing effectively with domestic 

violence to have the perpetrator leave instead of the victim?  

Well there are three very practical reasons. 

 

First, he would be the only one who would have to find 

alternate shelter.  And it's much easier to find a home for one 

person rather than a parent to find a home for herself and any 

number of children. 

 

Secondly, generally the perpetrator is the person with power, 

not only the power of the fist, but pocketbook power.  So he 

likely has better access to financial support.  He's less likely to 

sink into poverty and it will be easier for him to find alternate 

accommodation. 

 

And third -- and most important from my point of view as a 

psychologist interested in motivating behavioural change -- if 

the perpetrator has to leave, this will lead on his part to a 

quicker realization of just who owns the problem and who is 

responsible to change.  This Act will create pressure on men to 

recognize their problem and to do something about it. 

 

Domestic violence unfortunately is one of the few crimes 

where the villain gets to punish the victim doubly -- first with 

direct violence and then by forcing the victim out and still 

remaining king of the castle.  This attitude must stop.  Only 

when perpetrators, primarily men, lose the luxury of denying 

the responsibility for their action, only when they experience 

some discomfort by having to leave the home, only then will 

there be real and meaningful pressure on them to change their 

unacceptable 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

behaviour.  Only then will we be able to move in a practical 

way towards zero tolerance of violence in this society. 

 

And we must do that, Mr. Speaker, because of the third group 

of people affected by domestic violence -- the children.  These 

are the people who in many ways are most traumatized by 

violence in the home.  This Act, Bill 30, this initiative, will 

provide a buffer and will protect the child.  Why should the 

innocent children have to go and live in poverty, be uprooted 

from their school and their friends, lose their sense of stability 

and security, all because their mother is running away from 

terror? 

 

The most important and often least-acknowledged victims of 

domestic violence are the children.  Children grow up 

tremendously confused about intimate relationships when they 

grow up in violent homes.  Guilt, fear, anxiety, intimidation -- 

these become all too common emotions for them.  If the victim 

and her children leave, their living arrangements are disrupted; 

there is more stress and strain on the family; they have to find a 

new school, new friends; they often have to deal with poverty. 

 

Seventy per cent of children, Mr. Speaker, living in single 

parent homes headed by women, live in poverty.  Violence has 

a great impact on children: low self-esteem, insecurity, low 

self-confidence.  Children do not feel safe in their own homes 

when they live in violent homes.  They may feel guilt for their 

mother's pain; they may feel responsible for their father's anger.  

These children may not develop social competence.  They 

become socially isolated.  They have poor relationships with 

their peers because they have a great sense of shame and a 

great need to hide the secrets, the ugly secrets, of the violence 

in the home. 

 

Sadly, many of these children may externalize their feelings.  

They may become delinquent and aggressive, mimicking the 

belittling behaviours that they see in the home.  Severe 

psychological and emotional distress may lead to them running 

away, may lead to suicide attempts, abuse of drugs, or alcohol. 

 

A child needs to feel loved by the people who matter in his or 

her life -- loved, not intimidated.  There are long-term 

consequences to domestic violence.  These children may 

develop inappropriate attitudes towards violence.  They may 

learn at a gut level that violence is an acceptable way for men 

to relate to women and to resolve conflicts.  Boys learn 

violence and the girl children see few options as they grow up. 

 

Finally, in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly address two 

issues that have been raised in opposition to this Bill.  The first 

issue, the legal technicalities and niceties of the Bill.  Certain 

people in the legal community are saying the Bill is flawed.  

All the fine arguments that they have been raising, I have to tell 

you have already been considered by the drafters of the Bill.  I 

won't repeat their arguments here -- that is up to the Minister of 

Justice to do  

_- except to say that the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was 

never, ever 

drafted to provide liberty for violence within the home.  And 

that issue, as well as questions about infringing on areas 

traditionally dealt with by Queen's Bench justices, etc., can and 

will be dealt with satisfactorily as the Bill comes to life. 

 

Personally I hate to see lawyers arguing this out in courts 

instead of dealing with the more substantive issue of preventing 

and stopping violence in society.  But I am satisfied that the 

Act will withstand the threatened legal challenges and will lead 

the way to a revolutionary and long-overdue attitudinal change 

in dealing with violence. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there has been some criticism of this 

Act by people who work in the shelter movement.  Now I have 

a great deal of sympathy with their position that existing 

resources for battered women's shelters are inadequate.  But I 

do reject the notion that the only response to domestic violence 

is to have a monolithic, unidimensional approach; that is, 

creating shelter situations for victims of domestic violence. 

 

We have been grappling with the problem of domestic violence 

throughout the centuries.  In this century we have made some 

considerable progress with the creation of safe shelters.  But the 

problem is not always a simple and straightforward one.  No 

one solution can fit all situations. 

 

As Tolstoi said in his novel, Anna Karenina: "Happy families 

are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way." 

 

Some victims will want and will need to seek shelters; some 

victims will want and will need to remain in their own homes.  

This Act provides victims with choice.  This Act is novel, 

revolutionary, and bold. 

 

I call on all people who care about stopping domestic violence 

to support its passage.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased 

today to speak in second reading of The Act respecting 

Domestic Violence. 

 

I want to commend the government for its efforts to address the 

serious and desperate situations faced by so many people, 

women and children in particular, in our society, who are 

victims of domestic violence.  And those of us who have been 

very blessed with a secure and safe home environment 

probably can't even imagine the horror that is experienced by 

those who are subjected to violence, particularly at the hands of 

someone they know and they love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to put into law those things which so 

many of us assume to be the responsibility of the individual.  

Respect for the safety and security of another person should go 

without saying.  But it has become painfully obvious that there 

are an alarming 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

number of individuals in our society who are unable to cope 

with that responsibility, due to a combination of emotional and 

psychological problems which result in their thinking that 

violence is an appropriate behaviour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of what laws we enact, we must never 

forget that we are treating only the symptoms of violence and 

not the causes, and I urge all members in the Assembly to keep 

that realization in the forefront. 

 

Today, however, we are talking about an enormously important 

step towards protecting the rights of victims.  And this Bill will 

allow for a change in the approach used by law enforcement 

personnel when called to a scene of domestic violence.  With 

this proposed Act it will now be possible, with minimal delay, 

to issue an order which removes the aggressor from the 

situation, thus offering temporary relief from the violence being 

perpetrated against the victims. 

 

And the problem -- and I think it is one that we must be 

prepared to live with until further progress can be made -- the 

problem is that the removing of the aggressor will not 

guarantee the safety of the victims beyond the moment of 

removal.  And there are many with whom I have communicated 

on this issue who caution that the ultimate safety of women and 

children in particular, the typical victims of domestic violence, 

can only be assured when they have more of a secure 

environment, when they have the potential to be able to leave 

the situation and, if necessary, travel to safe harbours such as 

transition houses and interval homes for a period of time. 

 

Last year, as most people would know in this House by now, 

there was an estimated 20,000 Saskatchewan women abused by 

their husbands or male partners.  But there are less than 250 

bed spaces for women and children who are fleeing abusive 

relationships.  I believe that it is critical for our government to 

continue to recognize its obligation to adequately fund the 

agencies which provide those safe havens, because this 

legislation does not provide a substitute, by any stretch of the 

imagination, for safe houses for victims of abuse. 

 

When the police are called to a scene of domestic violence, 

they now have the power to remove the aggressor and order 

that individual to stay away from the victim's home.  But they 

are limited, by sheer budget constraints and availability of 

police officers, in their power to monitor the situation and to 

ensure that the aggressor stays away. 

 

Therefore I cannot stress enough the need to maintain and in 

fact expand our efforts to provide shelter for women and 

children who simply do not feel safe, in spite of the provisions 

that will be placed before them with this Act. 

 

I want to speak for a moment about another aspect of the issue 

of domestic violence which is of particular concern to me, Mr. 

Speaker.  In my work as a psychologist I dealt with many farm 

wives and 

children for whom physical violence is all too much of a 

reality.  And I realize that it is the intention of this particular 

Bill to empower the law enforcement agencies to act with some 

immediacy to defuse the violence and return some measure of 

safety and security to the home. 

 

What I think is particularly difficult, in fact I know is extremely 

difficult for farm women, is to see their spouse removed not 

only from their home but from their place of business, and this 

is the location in which they, as a family, earn their entire 

family income. 

 

There's a great deal of pressure and stress among rural families 

that has been produced by a tremendous amount of uncertainty 

and fragility of the farm economy over the past decade and a 

half.  And many of the families who are experiencing problems 

with violent behaviour and physical abuse within these family 

units, have been put in that situation as result of circumstances 

with which some of these people have simply been unable to 

cope.  And I would ask the government to be very cognizant of 

the interconnectedness of its policies in agriculture, in farm 

debt, in gaming, and in setting all of the regulations which it 

imposes on people from the government level. 

 

Now as I said earlier, the level of physical abuse and family 

violence all over Saskatchewan is very much a symptom of 

what families are experiencing.  Much of it can be directly 

associated with feelings of great desperation, often the result of 

financial circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in trying to propose solutions to problems, we 

must be certain that we do not treat only the symptoms, but that 

we get right to the heart of what is causing the problem and put 

forward a concerted effort to solve these problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that overall this is a very positive step 

toward providing some immediate relief to victims of domestic 

violence which is far, far, long overdue.  It is one of those 

initiatives that cost us little as a government, but which means 

so much to people who have felt abandoned and unprotected. 

 

So I do hope that this is an Act which will be the beginning of a 

commitment to address the core of the problem of physical 

violence and domestic abuse in our society, and I am pleased to 

pledge the full support of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party and 

the members of our caucus to this significant legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know with her 

kind words speaking to Bill 30 that then the Liberal caucus will 

be glad to support the budget that is going to be before us, 

because it does speak to 9.3 per cent increase in social 

programs that will begin to address some of the concerns she 

has.  It identifies about $750,000 worth of 

community-supported projects, such as the one I spoke to 

earlier on Sophia 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

House; that to address some of the concerns that she's raising; 

and that before us we have in discussion the $4.5 million that's 

been identified in the child action plan that begins to address 

the preventative measures. 

 

So I look forward to seeing the Liberals on their feet in support 

of that, unlike the provinces in the Maritimes where the 

Liberals are seeing a decrease in their budgeting and their 

monetary commitment to the programs that she mentions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I stand in support of Bill 30, and as I know many 

women in Saskatchewan that have grown up in this province -- 

not only in this province but Canada -- know that we're not 

alone in either knowing of, being a victim of, or witnessing the 

violence against women and children that occurs in our homes, 

in our neighbourhoods, or our communities.  And statistics tell 

us why.  The minister's outlined the statistics earlier but I think 

they need to be restated so that they become a part of our 

thinking and our understanding of the magnitude of the 

problem we face. 

 

Over one-half of all adult women in Canada have experienced 

violence since the age of 16.  Over one-half of all adult women, 

at least 5 million adult women, have experienced violence.  

One in ten, and some would say one in eight, have been 

assaulted within the last year.  That's more than 1 million 

women in Canada who've been assaulted in the past year.  One 

in four women have experienced violence in a marital 

relationship.  More than one in ten women have reported 

violence in their current marital relationships and have at some 

point felt in their life that they were in danger or in fear of 

losing their lives; one in ten.  Almost one-half of all women 

have experienced violence by men they know: their boyfriends, 

spouses, friends, and family.  And almost 40 per cent of women 

in violent marriages reported that their children witnessed the 

violence against them -- their children witnessed the violence. 

 

In beginning to address this issue and the task force in women's 

issues, the first thing that I was made painfully aware of, that 

those statistics don't report what's really happening out there, 

they report the tip of the iceberg.  Because many statistics that 

are gathered don't break out the incidence of violence in family 

situations, or domestic situations, from those situations that 

occur in a bar fight, or people assaulting each other in some 

form in the community. 

 

So they don't really have a good handle on it other than the 

reported statistics.  And those reportings say that at least 30 

incidences will occur before women will come forward just to 

report something happening.  And that's before they're even 

going to brave trying to leave their home to escape the violence 

that is occurring. 

 

So with those statistics, and it's hard to internalize them, we all 

know that the Bill does not address all of the concerns of 

everyone.  It does begin to go a long way to talk about some of 

the psychology that was inherent in the old patriarchial 

structures that 

schooled our men to believe that being big and brave and 

strong was so important.  It would be a sign of weakness to 

allow your women or children to confront you, speak out or 

back to you, or to challenge your decision making on how the 

household operated or the income was being spent. 

 

To assert authority by violence then was necessary and was 

tolerated.  Today we must school everyone that zero tolerance 

to violence is the only acceptable tolerance level. 

 

When we as an individual or collectively as a society hear the 

cries for help, we cringe and we feel inadequate, sometimes too 

inadequate to respond.  Some of us are aware of the helping 

agencies, such as transition houses, Sophia House I mentioned 

earlier as second-stage housing, the crisis agencies, family 

services, and so on, and will try to assist in this situation by 

directing people to these assisting agencies.  Or we may 

recognize that violence is a crime and we call the authorities 

and ask for the abuser to pay for the crime. 

 

This many times still falls short of protecting the women and 

children, as we know that the numbers of people who now lose 

their lives at the hands of their partners, the men that they 

know, is also still among us and in some cases, growing. 

 

We still don't have all the answers to that.  We don't have all 

the solutions, but the Act before us must be supported if for no 

other reason than the power it contains to, in the first instance, 

make an emergency intervention order. 

 

This government . . . and we all recognize that the need for 

support is at the moment of crisis.  That's the need when there's 

support for intervention.  And the Bill provides for this, where 

the woman has the ability then to ask for an immediate order 

from the justice of the peace, and that will require the abuser to 

leave the home. 

 

This Bill assists communities and individuals in responding to 

either their notion or their idea, something that is happening in 

their neighbourhood or the home next door or in their own 

families; that they now have an instrument through section 11 

of this Bill to have the authorities ask the justice of the peace to 

issue the power in an order to have an actual entry into a place 

where someone believes that someone may be the subject of 

abuse. 

 

This is particularly so for those who would have difficulty in 

asking for help.  Those people who may be dependent seniors; 

they may be people with either physical disabilities or mentally 

challenged individuals. 

 

The importance of this Act is very basic.  It does a number of 

things just by its being.  The first one is that is removes the 

batterer from the home, and it says to someone who's battering, 

you've done something wrong; this is not acceptable. 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

And in many cases that might just be enough to have that 

individual seek help to break that cycle of violence and to 

become someone who understands why he's responding in a 

violent situation or in a violent way.  And it may be a he or she.  

It could lead to someone changes their attitudes toward the 

confrontation that exists in all of our lives. 

 

The second thing it does is for the victims, to reassure them that 

they didn't do anything wrong, that they're indeed the victims.  

And they're not going to also be bashed because they may have 

. . . in their minds, they have a guilt to carry that they've being 

doing something wrong. 

 

And it tells those children in those homes that this behaviour is 

not acceptable, they can stay in a safe and caring environment, 

and that they are going to also learn that they can handle their 

problems in a peaceful and non-confrontational manner.  And 

that in some way this will then begin to address the perpetration 

of the violence and the circle of violence that exists in the next 

generation. 

 

(1530) 

 

The other thing it does, and I mentioned earlier, is it assists 

caring family members, caring members of our 

neighbourhoods, to be able to intervene and to feel that they 

have some power in addressing and saying to other people that 

zero tolerance is the tolerance that they have in the issue of 

violence in their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill touches the very basis of the measure of 

our society.  It is one that touches my heart and soul.  I look 

forward to all members of all parties rising in this Assembly to 

support Bill 30.  From there, then not stopping, but moving it 

from being a piece of paper in hand that's been given our 

support, but to an instrument of justice and safety.  It will offer 

a safe place for victims while we all move to a world where we 

know that no violence is tolerated. 

 

I rise in support of Bill 30 and encourage all my colleagues and 

the members of all parties to include their support behind this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

speak today on Bill 30.  Mr. Speaker, the intent of Bill 30, An 

Act respecting Victims of Domestic Violence, is to provide a 

much needed alternative to victims of family violence to 

remain in their family home rather than being forced to flee in 

fear with a few belongings. 

 

For 25 years I have worked with many, many children, and 

their mothers, who have been victims and witnesses to 

violence.  I have spent many hours working to help children 

learn less violent ways of expressing their frustration, their 

fears, and anger, after their young lives have been disrupted 

first by violence and then by the loss of familiar surroundings. 

I believe this legislation will make it possible to lessen the 

trauma for young children, to help break the perpetuation of 

violence from generation to generation.  However, as the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone has said, Bill 30 is only one 

step in solving the dilemma of family violence.  There is a 

necessary, further step our society needs to take beyond this 

new, positive attempt to deal more justly with the vexing 

problem of family violence. 

 

Bill 30 is a response to acute emergencies.  It will need to be 

tested to assess the effectiveness in lessening the trauma of 

victims.  There is more needed to ensure protection of victims 

and an end to the cycle of violence.  We as a society need to 

not only stop the perpetrators, but also to deal with their 

continued need to act violently.  We especially need to help the 

children who witness their acts of violence. 

 

I know the roots of violence are in childhood experience.  With 

the many children I've worked with, I found that the one goal 

of childhood is to learn how to progressively learn more 

appropriate means to express anger and violent feelings.  

Children learn these skills from their parents, from their play, 

but especially through role models.  I endorse the intent of this 

legislation.  It is an important step and I wish to express my 

support for Bill 30. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I found it 

a pleasure to be able to rise and speak, as well, to Bill No. 30.  

As a number of my colleagues have indicated, and certainly 

members on this side of the House and government members as 

well have -- pretty well everyone to a T, I think has indicated 

our support for the Bill before this Assembly.  Our opposition 

fully supports the intent of this Bill, and we commend the 

government for bringing the issue to the forefront of debate in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for too long women have been the subject of 

abusive situations in the home at the hands of their partner, and 

action is certainly needed.  I think, Mr. Speaker, violent crimes 

of all kinds in any matter must be addressed with all of the 

weight of the law and justice that society allows. 

 

As I listened to the minister the other day, I was appalled at 

some of the statistics the minister was raising.  During his 

second reading speech, the minister revealed some very 

startling statistics and some of those have been brought to the 

forefront again. 

 

Those statistics include over one-half of all adult women in 

Canada have experienced violence since the age of 16.  Over 

one-half of all adult women, at least 5 million adult women, 

have experienced violence.  One in ten women have been 

assaulted within the last year.  One in four women have 

experienced violence in a marital relationship.  And more than 

one in ten women who reported violence in their current 

marital relationship have at some point felt their life was in 

danger. 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure how many people happened to 

witness the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 

documentary -- I believe it was a week ago Thursday or it will 

be a week ago tomorrow night.  They were talking about drugs 

and the drug scene in Vancouver and the prostitution that has 

hit the streets.  And as I was watching that scene . . . they 

basically related it to the story of two individuals -- one was 33, 

I believe, and one was 37.  As I watched that program I was 

appalled at what I saw, to think that there are people in our 

society living in such circumstances. 

 

Now that may not directly relate to women that are facing 

violence in the home, but it certainly brought to the forefront 

something that an individual growing up in rural Saskatchewan, 

many of us do not see or do not even anticipate takes place out 

there. 

 

And I listened to the member from Saskatoon relating the fact 

of what we may perceive as being individuals who would 

assault another person.  It's unfortunate to think that men, 

married men or men in relationships, would think that the 

partner that they happen to be dwelling with is a person that 

they can vent their frustrations on.  Almost one-half of all 

women have experienced violence by men they know, be it a 

boyfriend, be it a spouse, friend, or a family member.  And 

we've all been reminded of that through the media and through 

circumstances that we've seen over the past little while. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, it's something that is 

certainly on the increase and it's appropriate that we at least 

have a piece of legislation brought forward.  But I think the 

intent is there to bring some help, to bring some assistance, and 

to indeed punish the violator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost 40 per cent of women in violent marriages 

reported that their children witnessed the violence against them. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, these statistics offered by the Minister of 

Justice certainly are, to say the least, shocking.  And I 

remember it wasn't . . . I'm not sure if it was a year, year and a 

half ago, a situation in the city where a man's life was abruptly 

ended by the police force who were called to a domestic 

situation.  And I'm certain that the officers at the time were in a 

very difficult situation. Something that most officers that I've 

talked to, when they talk about going to a crime scene, the one 

crime scene that they fear and dread the most is being called 

into a home where there may be evidence of domestic violence. 

 

The reason they fear that, Mr. Speaker, is because the 

perpetrator of the act is maybe violent and ready to just lash out 

at anyone who would step into the home.  But as well, as soon 

as the officers would try to help the victim, sometimes the 

victim tries to protect the spouse who's perpetrating the act. 

 

And I think it comes back to some of the comments made by 

the member from Saskatoon, where people do not want to 

really believe that the violence being 

performed against them was intentional.  And I think in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker, that is quite possibly true. 

 

If these are the numbers of adult women suffering at the hands 

of violent men, imagine the number of children suffering from 

abuse as well.  Imagine the thoughts going through a child's 

mind when they happen to see a mother being abused by a 

father, both individuals whom they love dearly, and they're 

trying to determine what is really happening here.  Don't these 

two people love themselves?  Isn't there love there?  What is 

happening to my parents? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's certainly been brought up.  It's not just a 

matter of women, it's not just a matter of wives, it's not just a 

matter of the abuse of children, but as well we've been 

reminded of the fact that seniors as well have faced the 

problems of abusive situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the abuse is not happening directly to us or our 

families, we do not see it.  One thing we have known, and one 

thing I have found out in my short term as an MLA (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly), when you talk about violence, 

domestic violence is something that is always hidden.  It's 

hidden away deep in the home.  No one wants to talk about it.  

No one really wants to admit that that circumstance or situation 

is something that they are facing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, home is a place where we are supposed to feel 

secure, where you are supposed to feel the most secure.  And I 

don't believe society can continue to stand idly by allowing 

women, children, and senior citizens to be brutalized by 

members of their family or extended family.  That is why I 

must stand here and commend the minister and the government 

for introducing the legislation, and I believe they deserve credit 

for moving in this direction. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, while I am in favour of the legislation, I 

am not sure that it will help victims of violence as much as we 

all hope.  I, along with many others, anxiously wait for this Bill 

to pass.  We desperately hope, many people across this 

province desperately hope it will help.  But in some cases I'm 

not exactly convinced that it will. 

 

And there's no doubt other provinces across this country are 

looking to this province regarding the legislation. And I think 

many other jurisdictions, if at the end of the day this legislation 

after being passed shows that it has a lot of benefits and has 

support, other provinces will probably move in the same 

direction. 

 

But I think what the Bill does, at the very least, that the 

additional awareness and attention stimulated by this Bill will 

help in the fight against violence.  And, Mr. Speaker, if even 

one family is assisted, it will be a significant help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allowing the police access to homes where a 

violent situation is reported is positive.  It is my understanding 

that currently they can't enter the premises without a warrant.  

And can you imagine a 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

police officer trying to get a warrant at 3 o'clock in the 

morning, especially if there isn't a judge residing in the 

community? 

 

What this piece of legislation does is allows the police, gives 

them the access to a home where violence is suspected.  And as 

I mentioned previously, I'm not opposed to the legislation, but I 

do have questions that I will be dealing with in committee. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, I'm wondering what will happen in 

situations where the spouse is being expelled, or the spouse 

being expelled from the home is a farmer.  What will happen in 

that situation?  And one might ask, well what do you mean by 

that, Mr. Speaker?  And what I'm suggesting is the fact that a 

farmer is an individual who has to come back to that 

workplace.  There are chores to be done. 

 

And certainly it's an area that we're going to have to in our 

deliberations with the minister, we're going to have to explore 

ways and means. Because I believe as a person is allowed back 

to the . . . even close to the premises, it certainly invites the 

abusive situation to become more aggravated. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the victim must be protected, but how 

do you deal with families who live in the same location as their 

place of business?  I imagine this will impact a number of small 

businesses as well.  And we're all aware of small businesses 

across this province where parents or where families live, 

reside right in the business that they are running.  Mr. Speaker, 

these are cases that need consideration. 

 

(1545) 

 

Another question that has been raised is, if an order is issued by 

a justice of the peace, is the Department of Justice at risk of 

being sued by the expelled individual?  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, as we get into that debate we will be . . . the debate 

with the minister in Committee of the Whole, those are some of 

the questions we will raise, and we've raised them already. 

 

And I want to also acknowledge . . . and I thank the minister for 

throwing out some of the concerns that he has, and as well 

trying to alleviate some of the concerns we may have, even 

through question period.  But those are legitimate questions 

that we must explore before we allow the Bill to proceed 

through committee and indeed to receive Royal Assent. 

 

As well I have some questions on the concerns raised by the 

University of Saskatchewan law professor, Doug Schmeiser.  

He feels the legislation has huge flaws and could violate 

several areas of Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this Bill addresses violent crimes, we must 

wonder if the government opposite has considered if it goes 

beyond what society allows.  Certainly the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms under section 11(d) guarantees that there is a 

presumption of innocence before guilt.  That is the fundamental 

premise on which our legal system and our society stands. 

 

As well, some have argued that there may be problems 

associated with section 15, which states that: 

 

Every individual is equal before and under the law and has 

the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the 

law without discrimination . . . based on (among other 

things) sex . . . 

 

My concern, and I believe they have already been echoed by 

some constitutional experts, is that this Bill may not survive a 

challenge based on these premisses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has said that they have 

numerous legal opinions that say that the de-insuring of 

abortion procedures would violate the federal Health Act, and 

have therefore refused to act on this issue. 

 

Therefore I would hope that the government has garnered a 

legal opinion that says that this Bill does not violate the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms.  We will be asking for opinions in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, because it would be a shame for the 

government to raise the hopes of victims of violent crime, only 

to have this Bill revoked because they may not have done their 

homework. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Justice continues to 

maintain that this Bill is constitutional and will not infringe on 

anyone's rights.  I surely hope that this is the case. But as I've 

indicated, we will continue to ask questions to confirm that the 

minister has followed through and received all the legal advice 

that he can muster to guarantee that the Bill doesn't go part way 

and then stop there.  Mr. Speaker, I truly hope that this Bill is 

successful in keeping families together in their own home. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the most important things we must 

remember when we're dealing with victims of violence is not 

just the matter of the victim, but we also must look at the 

perpetrator.  Mr. Speaker, I think in the long run . . . or, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we want to address the concerns and the 

problems faced by the victim. But if we are going to prevent 

violent crime, it's also important that we look at ways and 

means of dealing with the perpetrator of violent crime so that 

they recognize their responsibility to society, and they realize 

that the rights of every individual in our society is to live freely, 

to live in an open and loving environment. 

 

And we must all respect it.  Whether we're a man, whether 

we're a woman, whether we're a person of another race, Mr. 

Speaker, these are all rights that we must adhere to and respect. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do look forward to raising questions in 

committee.  And I therefore at this time will suggest that we 

move the Bill into committee. 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 46 -- An Act to 

amend The Provincial Court Act and to enact certain other 

provisions be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this Bill, we believe, goes against everything that a 

good government should be trying to do in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that's to promote the laws and to lead by 

example with the laws of the province and the laws of the land, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And unfortunately this government seems to feel that whenever 

there is something that is of political necessity to them, that 

they are perfectly willing to do whatever they need to in order 

to meet that need of political necessity, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

Justice minister believes . . . I think, Mr. Minister, that he's, 

generally speaking, an honourable man.  And to bring forward 

this kind of legislation, to bring forward this kind of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, calls into question that very honour that the 

people of Saskatchewan believe that a Justice minister should 

have in order to hold that office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is of great concern, when the highest official in 

the province of Saskatchewan, the highest man associated with 

the Justice department in this province decides for whatever 

reasons -- for whatever reasons -- that the political necessity 

overrides law and good government, and law and justice, and 

law and order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we in the opposition believe that the issue is that the Justice 

minister has broken the law, broken the law of the land, and 

now he feels somehow or another justified in it because it is of 

political necessity and somehow it's politically palatable 

enough for the people of Saskatchewan to buy into that 

argument. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the people of Saskatchewan 

are buying into it as much as they would like to believe, even 

though they did their little political polling and all of that sort 

of stuff, Mr. Speaker.  I think that the results are beginning to 

come back and beginning to come back in sharp contrast to 

what the government believed at an earlier date.  That just 

because we're talking about the increases, it's all right to talk 

about cancelling the laws, changing the laws, doing whatever is 

necessary to make it acceptable to the people out there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that this has developed into a pattern of 

operandi, Mr. Speaker, where the people of Saskatchewan now 

believe that this government seems to feel that whenever it's 

necessary they will 

break a law to justify their actions.  We saw that happening 

with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) debate, Mr. 

Speaker.  We saw that happening with civil servants' contracts, 

Mr. Speaker.  We saw that happening with the Co-op upgrader, 

and now we see it with the judges' salaries. 

 

And I think if I was someone out there in Saskatchewan today 

that was dealing with this government, if you were a business 

person or you were someone that had some kind of contract 

with this government, if you were working for this government, 

or if you were in some way associated with this government 

and thought you had some kind of legally binding contract with 

this government, I would think that this kind of legislation 

should cause you pause to rethink that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you had a collective agreement with this government, if you 

were a member of the civil service with this government, at 

some point when they decide and their political polling shows 

them that people are willing to roll back wage increases for 

civil servants, for example, would this government go ahead 

and do it?  Well the way they've operated up till this point 

would lead one to believe that that might be what they would 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you were a nurse in the province of Saskatchewan and you 

were coming up for contract negotiations, I would be 

concerned if I were them, Mr. Speaker.  If you were a doctor in 

this province, or if you were a teacher in this province and were 

coming up to negotiations of contract, what stops a government 

from necessitating another law-breaking incident, Mr. Speaker?  

What stops them from deciding that maybe teachers now can 

be the next victim of this government? 

 

If the people of Saskatchewan . . . or they think, in their way of 

looking at things they believe that the people of Saskatchewan 

might buy into the argument of a roll-back for teachers' 

salaries, this government might go ahead with it.  That's the 

same criteria that they've applied to judges, farmers, civil 

servant contracts.  Mr. Speaker, it's that same kind of rationale 

that they used to change the upgrader deal, against a great deal 

of opposition of the day and at that time, Mr. Speaker, and yet 

the government proceeded.  Yet they went ahead and decided 

for whatever . . . and used whatever means possible. 

 

And the absolute shocking thing about this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that they've done it with seemingly no conscience 

whatsoever.  The minister comes in and he just announces that 

the Bill is going to be done and then rationalizes it by saying 

that it's an increase that's unacceptable to the public.  Doesn't 

matter anything at all that's the only justification for it.  It's an 

increase; it's unacceptable to the public, so therefore we break 

the laws of the land. 

 

And it's breaking not only the laws of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but it's breaking the very law that 

they brought in themselves.  And, Mr. Speaker, they brought 

that law in last May, and the 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

Justice minister at that time used a number of quotes from the 

Supreme Court to justify the reasons for doing it at that time, 

saying that there needed to be some sort of independence from 

the judiciary and the executive branch of government. 

 

And at that time I don't think there was a great deal of 

argument about that, Mr. Speaker.  The opposition believed 

that that was the case, that there needed to be some kind of 

independence in there.  But we also at that time, Mr. Speaker, 

set out a couple of warnings to the Minister of Justice. 

 

We suggested to the Minister of Justice at that time that you 

better reconsider making it binding -- the agreement, Mr. 

Speaker -- because you might find out that the agreement at the 

end of the day isn't something that you can live with. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also suggested at that time that 

maybe people closely -- too closely, I would suggest -- 

associated with the judiciary, that is lawyers who often are in 

the same firms as these judges or have been in the past, who go 

before them on a daily basis, who somehow maybe are a little 

bit impartial to the views . . . or to the concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan, maybe are a little too impartial in this . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Partial. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Maybe too partial in this judgement, Mr. Speaker, 

that maybe they shouldn't be the ones that make up the entire 

commission, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's a little bit like, it's a little bit like you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

supposing you were the owner of a store and you're an 

employer and you decided that in order to be the fairest you can 

possibly be with the wages of your employees, that you decide 

to set a commission out or allow someone outside of the 

process to decide on their salaries.  So you ask a former 

employee to deal with them.  Well now that former employee is 

thinking to themselves, well maybe it would be in my best 

interests if I give my boss a pretty good raise here in order to 

keep him happy with me. 

 

And I think that same kind of argument can be made of the 

lawyers that are on that commission, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe they 

felt that because I go before -- as a lawyer -- before these 

judges on occasion, maybe I should give these judges a pretty 

good raise in order to, well we'll say, gain some kind of favour 

with the judges or gave them the feeling of comfort for myself 

going before them, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why at that time 

we argued that appointing only lawyers to this commission is 

something that they should reconsider.  But oh no, the Justice 

minister and the Premier of this province decided that they 

were all-knowing and pressed ahead with this and appointed 

three people to the commission.  And they were going to set the 

trend for all of Canada. 

 

That's what they were going to do, Mr. Speaker.  The hotshot 

lawyer from Riversdale wanted to be the first in Canada to set 

the judiciary apart from the executive 

branch of government and hold it up as an example to all 

Canada and say here, we were the ones that did this; we were 

the first.  That's something that the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) takes great pride in, in promoting themselves as the great 

leaders in the field of justice in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so they set this commission up against some of the 

concerns that we had and against some of the judgements that 

other people had suggested, Mr. Speaker.  And they went ahead 

with it, proceeded, thought to themselves, we've done 

wonderful work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the people of 

Saskatchewan and indeed the people of Canada will sit up and 

take notice at our wonderful work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And lo and behold, our fears were realized, Mr. Speaker.  Our 

fears were realized that the commission came forward with 

recommendations that the government now appears unwilling 

to live with. 

 

And so it's a fix of your own making, I say to the government 

and to the Justice minister.  You made the mistakes, Mr. 

Minister, and unfortunately you're not prepared to live with 

your mistakes.  You're prepared to break the law instead. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I think that's absolutely reprehensible that the Justice 

minister of this province is willing to break a law, particularly 

his own law that was brought in as early as last May, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has tried from time to time to 

justify this by suggesting it's too hefty of an increase, and the 

opposition agrees.  It's an increase that is unwarranted, that the 

people of Saskatchewan can't live with. 

 

But yet there's a higher principle that has to be adhered to, we 

believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that's to uphold the laws of 

this country and this province.  And if the Minister of Justice 

had've looked at some of the concerns we had last May, I don't 

think he would find himself in the mess he finds himself today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess in conclusion, I would say that the 

Minister of Justice took an oath, took a solemn oath before the 

people of Saskatchewan to uphold the laws of Saskatchewan; 

and he has broken that law, Mr. Speaker, and he has broken his 

oath.  And I believe that the Leader of the Opposition, in 

calling for his resignation, was doing exactly the right thing.  I 

don't think the resignation should have even needed to be called 

for, Mr. Speaker.  I think the Minister of Justice should have 

tendered that resignation because of the mess that he's brought 

before the people of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, our government made a tough decision last week.  

The decision was whether we 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

accept the recommendation of an independent commission that 

would have given the Saskatchewan Provincial Court judges a 

24 per cent pay hike, or a decision to reject that 

recommendation and change the legislation.  We decided that 

the increase was not fair to Saskatchewan people and to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers.  And the law we passed had to be 

rescinded. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all Saskatchewan people have had to 

make sacrifices in order to weather the economic storm that we 

have had to endure and to restore some financial stability to our 

province.  To exempt this one group of people would have been 

unjust and unfair.  To me it is a matter of justice.  On one hand 

we have the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the 

Third Party talking about legalities and undermining the judges.  

The truth is, it is a question of whether an increase of 24 per 

cent to the judges is fair and just, or it isn't fair and just. 

 

I say I am elected as a legislator and a lawmaker.  If a law is 

unjust for a majority of people it must be changed.  Our laws 

are made by men and women elected to do so.  They can be 

changed by men and women if they are perceived to be unfair 

or unjust.  Mr. Speaker, this seems to be practical to me and I 

think it seems to be practical to the people that I represent. 

 

Where does exactly the Leader of the Opposition stand on this 

issue?  Would he have voted for the 24 per cent increase?  

When he was a member of the government he rejected an offer 

of a 15 per cent increase to judges, as did the hon. member 

from Moosomin.  Are they telling me that they now accept a 24 

per cent increase when they rejected a 15 per cent increase?  Is 

the Leader of the Third Party telling me she accepts a 24 per 

cent increase for the judges but no increased benefits for 

women working part-time under The Labour Standards Act?  A 

24 per cent increase for judges but no benefits for part-time 

women under The Labour Standards Act? 

 

Exactly where do the opposition and the third party stand?  We 

have been clear and consistent since taking office.  We were 

left with a financial mess.  We have tried to manage that crisis 

and treat people fairly.  We have laid out our debt reduction 

plan for all to see and the Minister of Finance is meeting these 

targets.  We are restoring fiscal integrity so all of society can 

share in the good things of life.  This is a dream I have: justice 

for all Saskatchewan people, not select groups; opportunities 

for our children, our grandchildren, to grow up in a society 

where cooperation, compassion, and caring are our values -- 

not privilege, divisiveness, and harshness. 

 

I will be supporting this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

first of all congratulate the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster on just an excellent speech, and I thought 

it outlined very well the issues that are before us. 

I want to start off by saying that it's been somewhat puzzling to 

me why it would be that the Progressive Conservative caucus 

would stand up and take the position which they know is not 

only politically indefensible, but one which is morally 

indefensible, and quite frankly legally indefensible.  And I've 

been racking my brains to try to figure it as why is it that 

they're up there defending, day after day, judges.  What 

possible reason could they want to have to be out front on this 

issue, saying that we've got to stand up and defend judges? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may be unkind, but perhaps they're looking 

down the road a little ways, to some upcoming events that may 

transpire in this province and that's why we find them taking 

this position.  That is indefensible legally, morally -- 

indefensible legally, morally, and politically.  It may be, as the 

member from Saskatoon says, a conflict of interest.  Now that 

may or may not be so.  That may try to put the members of the 

Progressive Conservative caucus in a bad light; however, Mr. 

Speaker, the more one gets curiouser and curiouser the longer 

that this debate goes on. 

 

Let's deal with the fundamental, underlying issue which the 

member from Kindersley has raised; the member from 

Moosomin have raised in this debate.  And that is that 

somehow the Minister of Justice has broken the law and that by 

recommending to this Assembly that we repeal the Act which 

set up the commission, abrogate that commission's report and 

come up with a sensible response to judges' remuneration. 

 

The underlying principle, the underlying principle which these 

members seem to take in this position in this debate is that it's 

okay to support bad laws; that laws which have been passed by 

this Assembly, no matter the quality of that law -- whether it's 

good or it's bad -- it's, one must come to its support, regardless 

of the content of the law. 

 

Now that's, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, on the face of it, 

patently ridiculous.  A bad law is a bad law.  And we as elected 

representatives of this Assembly are charged with the 

obligation to change laws which do not fit society's version of 

what constitutes justice.  Because bad laws, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, inevitably lead to injustice. 

 

And what we've seen in the case of the judges and the 

commission's recommendation for a 24 per cent increase in the 

justice's salary, is unjust in terms of society's needs, wishes, 

aspirations, at this point in time.  Laws are not immutable 

objects hanging in the firmament, immune to the vagaries of 

time and circumstance.  Laws are fashioned to deal with the 

questions of what is just and what is not just at any particular 

time in the development of a society's history. 

 

We've seen that in many instances.  The debate, for example, 

around capital punishment.  Now obviously capital punishment 

and the repeal of capital 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

punishment couldn't have been made retroactively.  But we 

know of three instances in Canada's history when that in fact is 

regrettable because mistakes were made in the application of 

that law.  That law was a bad law; that law was repealed. 

 

I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that any member of this Assembly is 

trying to suggest that this Assembly does not have the authority 

to alter, amend, or abrogate bad laws.  But when you listen 

closely to what members of the Progressive Conservative 

caucus are saying, that seems to be precisely the underlying 

philosophical standpoint upon which they are making their 

argument -- that somehow a law which is not just cannot be 

touched. 

 

Well as the Minister of Justice has said, this Assembly made a 

mistake in passing the law, and I don't think that there is any 

doubt in anybody's mind about that.  I would ask the member 

from Arm River whether his constituents think that this 

Assembly didn't make a mistake in passing a law which 

resulted in judges getting a 24 per cent increase in their 

salaries. 

 

And I can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that in the coffee shops 

in the constituency of Arm River, that you will be hard-pressed 

to find anybody -- gas jockey, lawyer, farmer, teacher, 

housewife, househusband -- anyone who thinks that a 24 per 

cent increase for judges is a just application of the law. 

 

I can tell you that from my own experience in the constituency 

of Regina Rosemont that there has not been one single 

telephone call, not one single letter, not one single approach to 

me personally saying: gee, Bob, you did the wrong thing; you 

should have given the judges their 24 per cent increase.  Not 

one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the residents, the good folks, of 

Regina Rosemont are not bashful about contacting my office 

when it comes to issues of political and social importance in 

this province.  But I can tell you this, that no one . . . and I 

would, with the exception perhaps of a few lawyers and maybe 

some judges themselves, although I don't say that the judges 

would actually personally go and try to intervene in terms of 

contacting an individual member -- I must be clear about that -- 

I want to say clearly that I defy any member of this Assembly 

to stand up and talk about the overwhelming mass sentiment of 

people in their constituencies who think that the application of 

the law that we passed was a just application of the law.  I defy 

any member of this Assembly to stand up and repeat that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not understand -- and perhaps it's because I'm 

not a lawyer -- but I don't understand why it would be that 

Liberals and Conservatives would try to justify an action by a 

government, if we were to have gone ahead and passed the 24 

per cent, how they would have tried to justify the granting of 

the 24 per cent salary increase to judges. 

 

Let's put the shoe on the other foot, Mr. Speaker.  Let's say that 

this Assembly, in its wisdom, had gone ahead 

and passed the commission's recommendation for the 24 per 

cent salary increase.  Mr. Speaker, you can bet your bottom 

dollar, you can bet your bottom dollar that the members of the 

Liberal Party and the members of the Conservative Party sitting 

in this Assembly, would have been up bleating like sheep, like 

wounded ducks, like any other kind of fauna that we can find in 

this province, outraged -- outraged that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member does himself no credit 

by some of the adjectives that he uses, and I urge him to use 

some restraint in his language in referring to other members of 

the House. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I was 

grasping for an appropriate . . . grasping for an appropriate 

adjective and I appreciate your ruling.  Mr. Speaker . . . No I 

won't say that; I'll be besmirching the reputation of sheeps and 

ducks.  That would not be a . . . 

 

(1615) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member does himself no credit 

by carrying on this discourse, and I urge him to return to his 

remarks and to stick to the matter at hand and to do so now. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'll get out 

of the barnyard and back to the issue at hand.  The issue at hand 

is very simply this, very simply this.  For whatever partisan -- 

and I must say twisted partisan -- partisan reasons that the 

members of the Conservatives and Liberal caucuses are taking 

this position, is absolutely baffling.  Absolutely baffling to the 

people of this province. 

 

The people of this province are wise enough to realize that it's 

not very often that a government will stand up and say we 

made a mistake.  I mean between 1982 and 1991, and the 

dozens and dozens and dozens of mistakes made by the 

members of the Progressive Conservative Party we have yet to 

hear one, not one repentant voice.  Right?  We have not heard 

during their reign of error one voice saying, gee we made a 

mistake, we should have changed our ways.  Mr. Speaker, not 

one. 

 

Unlike the former administration this government says we 

made a mistake -- we collectively.  Because what's interesting 

is that the members of the Conservative and Liberal parties 

voted for that legislation.  Despite what they say now, they 

voted for that legislation, went past, went through the House, 

right?  We as the government saying we made an error. They're 

still the same kind of bull-headed, blockheaded refusal to stand 

up and say, we made a mistake. 

 

The members of the Conservative caucus will not admit that 

they've made a mistake. They haven't changed their spots.  And 

what's interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the members of the 

Liberal caucus seem to have caught that same kind of measly 

disease -- they're not changing their spots either. 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

We made a mistake; we say it forthrightly. We're not afraid to 

say that, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why I support the actions of 

the government and the Minister of Justice in doing what we've 

done, and which is to limit judges' salaries to a reasonable, 

reasonable amount. 

 

And I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker. Some people in my 

constituency have phoned me and said, why are you even 

giving them two and a half per cent when they make $90,000 a 

year.  Well that can be debated, Mr. Speaker.  Suffice it to say 

that two and a half per cent is much closer to reality than to 

whatever position the members of the Conservative and the 

Liberal parties are taking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to 

address a few words to this subject because I think it is a matter 

that most people in Saskatchewan have some fairly fixed views 

on.  I would suggest, given the phone calls and letters that I 

have been receiving on this matter, that their fixed views are 

that the judges did not need or deserve a 24 per cent salary 

increase. 

 

However some people are also concerned about what they see 

as a process of a government short-circuiting the laws that it 

itself creates.  So I think it is important in my role as a 

representative for the people of Saskatoon Wildwood that I 

stand today and address a few words on this matter. 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, following on the words of the 

member for Regina Rosemont, I do want to emphasize that our 

government is adopting and putting into practice and 

behaviour, word and deed, a new kind of politics, and that is we 

are trying to get away from the old, what I would call the 

macho style of politics which is, full steam ahead, damn the 

torpedoes, and don't worry about what's going on on any side. 

 

Instead we are saying that when we make a mistake, we feel 

comfortable enough, we feel firm enough in our basic 

principles, in our desire for social justice in this province, that 

we will stand up and admit that we've made a mistake.  I like to 

think that perhaps that might come a little bit from the 

influence that some of the women members in our party and in 

the legislature are having because feminists for years have been 

saying that we want to have a different approach to politics.  

And we don't want it to be so rigid and doctrinaire. And 

certainly our government, I believe, is being very forthright and 

very strong by standing up and saying that it has made a 

mistake; it created a commission whose report went badly off 

the rails. 

 

But even more importantly, we are willing to learn from that 

mistake.  When we create commissions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

is important that we not only create commissions that can be 

independent, but commissions that are accountable.  And 

clearly in this whole process, as we look back and review what 

went wrong, we have to take a look at whether or not that 

commission in its creation actually received sufficient 

guidance for it to actually bring in an accountable report. 

 

I went back to the original report, December 13, 1993, the 

report of the Provincial Court Commission written by Mr. 

Irwin, and also signed by Ms. Rothery and Mr. Allbright.  And 

I found it interesting looking at it and checking out some of the 

comments in it.  I think that the commission did try to bring in 

a reasonable recommendation, but I think that they had so 

many different competing philosophies and demands placed 

upon them that they ultimately, to my way of thinking, simply 

plucked out of the air an award.  And it does not bear any 

relationship to what I would have expected, given the preamble 

in the commission's report.  For instance, Mr. Speaker, they 

say, and I quote here: 

 

The Commission believes it is important to consider the 

provincial economic environment. 

 

They go on to say: 

 

. . . the employer's ability to pay must also be considered . 

. . (the) real "employers" are the people of this province. 

 

Reading that, one would not have expected a 24 per cent 

arbitration award.  I go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They say: 

 

The Commission sees its responsibility to the residents of 

our province and not to the government who appointed it.  

The economic condition of our Province and its people 

must be a factor in our recommendations on judicial 

compensation. 

 

All of these fine phrases, and they still brought in a 24 per cent 

salary raise for judges who were already earning $90,000.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, most ironic of all, the commission says: 

 

Local conditions, the ability to attract suitable candidates, 

and the ability of resident taxpayers to pay must all be 

considered. 

 

So reading that, one would assume that there would be a 

reasonable standard applied to the recommendation that they 

brought in. 

 

And I have some fair degree of sympathy for the commission 

members, because of course they had to make a decision as to 

what kind of a standard they would apply in terms of 

recommending a salary increase for the judges.  Should they 

apply a federal standard? 

 

We have in this province 44 judges who are appointed federally 

-- some 35 Queen's Bench judges, eight on the Court of 

Appeal, and then a Chief Justice -- 44 federally appointed 

judges who receive compensation that is equivalent to what all 

the judges federally across Canada receive, that is in excess of 

$150,000 a year. 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

On the other hand, we have 44 Provincial Court judges -- it is 

somewhat ironic that the numbers happen to be the same -- 44 

at 150,000 and 44 at 90,000.  Those poor 44 at 90,000, 

receiving only $90,000, felt that they should have the right to 

more compensation. 

 

So of course the commission could have decided to bring in a 

recommendation to bring them right up to the level of federally 

appointed judges.  They could have applied a federal standard.  

They could have applied a regional standard or a 

made-in-Saskatchewan standard. 

 

As I look at it and as I read the commission report, I would 

have expected it would have been a made-in-Saskatchewan 

standard.  Given that, I would have assumed that what they 

would have done would be to refer to what lawyers, who after 

all are the feeder stock for judges, were making. 

 

So you would expect that they would look at the salaries for 

lawyers and then say, well we've got to take into account the 

working conditions and so forth, and take into account the 

prestige of the position of judge, as well as the onerousness of 

their working conditions, and bring in a recommendation that 

was appropriate there. 

 

Well I go and I look at what kinds of salaries lawyers make in 

this province, if they're going to apply a local standard.  Now it 

is a fallacy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that lawyers make a great 

deal of money.  Certainly they are middle income earners in 

this province, but they are not the fat cats that a lot of people 

who like to do lawyer bashing would have them be. 

 

I think I'm getting interrupted in my thought process by a 

lawyer here.  I will try to get back on track here.  I want to 

address the issue of just exactly how much do lawyers make, if 

the commission is going to use a local standard as they seem to 

have been saying they would, when making recommendations 

for appropriate compensation for Provincial Court judges. 

 

Well in fact, according to data reported to Statistics Canada, in 

1990 the average income of lawyers was $61,573.  Now when 

you look at that, that may sound like an incredible amount of 

money; certainly it is to somebody who's earning minimum 

wage.  But there's all sorts of factors that go into that.  There 

are salaried lawyers; there are salaried unionized lawyers; there 

are non-salaried, self-employed lawyers. 

 

There are differences between the earnings of men and women 

as lawyers too.  In 1990 there were 1,330 lawyers who reported 

their income to Statistics Canada.  As I said, the average salary 

for those lawyers was $61,000-plus.  For the men it was 

$69,366, whereas for the women lawyers it was $39,434.  An 

issue, I would hope, that the legal profession would consider at 

some point is that whole question of salary differential within 

the legal profession.  As a feminist, I'm often aghast at the fact 

that women only make 71 

cents on the dollar compared to what men make. But I'm sorry 

women lawyers have got an even larger wage gap that they 

have to close. 

 

So having looked at that, one would say if the commission is 

going to make its award based on a local standard and based on 

comparables within the profession, then they obviously are 

going to take a look at what is involved in the job of being a 

judge.  Because the concept of being a judge has changed. 

 

It used to be that in exchange for the prestige, the honour, and 

the security, the judges got certain other things in exchange.  

Right now judges in our provinces receive a group life 

insurance.  They get holiday pay.  This is all in addition to their 

$90,000 a year salary.  They have a defined benefit pension 

plan -- not a money-purchase plan, a defined benefit pension 

plan.  They get an allowance of $1,250 a year for miscellaneous 

expenses.  They have six weeks vacation.  And while 

technically they are to work five days a week, in fact one day a 

week is set aside for judgement writing.  So they have a fairly 

reasonable bit of working conditions. 

 

And I would suggest that all the benefits that I have listed there 

now . . . And the other thing that I didn't mention is that unlike 

lawyers who are self-employed, they don't have any capital 

investment.  They don't have to maintain an office because the 

office is provided for them.  They don't have to buy computers 

or pay secretarial staff or whatever.  So they have fairly 

reasonable working conditions, I would suggest.  All of these 

benefits likely add up to about an additional 20 per cent more. 

 

(1630) 

 

So I'm very hard-pressed to say that at 90,000 plus the 20 per 

cent perks and benefits, that they really are hard-pressed and 

one of the socially hard-done-by, poverty-ridden groups in 

society. 

 

Still and all, I could understand that the commission would 

want to bring in a recommendation that would bear some 

relationship to local employment conditions, local economic 

conditions, and local conditions vis-a-vis other people in their 

profession. 

 

Well they haven't done that.  I mean, if you take a look at the 

local economic conditions in this province, we are struggling 

trying to maintain the province's credit rating.  We are 

struggling trying to deal with a deficit that is obscene so that 

we can finally start to turn our attention to a debt that is even 

more obscene.  And judges already are at the top 7 per cent of 

income earners in the legal profession in this province. 

 

So as I look at it, it seems to me the commission did not apply a 

federal standard, because they didn't recommend that they get 

the 150,000-plus the 44 federally appointed judges get.  They 

didn't apply a local standard. 

 

It seems to me what they did was they applied a "pluck it out of 

the air" standard and said, well gee, sounds 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

good to me -- 20 per cent for April '93 and then 2 per cent the 

year after and 2 per cent the year after that.  This is totally 

absurd and it is unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We recognized that when we got the recommendation from the 

commission and we struggled -- days and days.  Indeed we 

struggled long past the time when we were to have adopted that 

recommendation, as members opposite know, because we were 

very concerned about the charges of well, this government is 

breaking its own rules; this is wrong; this is a terrible 

government.  We did not want to have those kinds of cheap 

political shots aimed at us because we are, quite frankly, trying 

to govern with the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan 

at heart. 

 

But I have to say that at the end of the day we finally decided 

that, by analogy to arbitration, what we had to do was 

recognize that we had a commission that had gone badly off the 

rails.  The commission went off the rails in terms of its 

recommendations. 

 

And so what we're doing with this legislation, Bill 46, is 

essentially the same thing that employers, and indeed 

sometimes unions often do when they are the subject of an 

off-the-rails, ridiculous arbitration award; they appeal it. 

 

Now for employers and for unions, they have the ability to go 

to court to try to get the thing reversed.  The problem that we 

have is we're dealing with judges' salary.  We would be going 

to court and asking judges to once again review their own 

salary.  It's absurd.  So we finally decided that the court of 

appeal for us is the legislature.  This is the court.  We are in it.  

We are doing the same thing that any employer or any union 

would do when they have an off-the-rails arbitration award.  

We are appealing it. 

 

But rather than having it fester along in the court system and 

affect the administration of justice, we are substituting the 

judgement of the legislature in this arbitration appeal process.  

This is not breaking our word or not breaking law, Mr. 

Speaker.  This is seeking remedy from an illogical settlement. 

 

Before I finish off, Mr. Speaker, I do want to point out that this 

is not unique.  There have been other awards where 

governments of the day have felt that they were either out of 

line or the people who were subject to the awards did not agree 

with them. 

 

And I want to refer very quickly to the 1988 Medical 

Compensation Review Committee.  That was . . . the Medical 

Compensation Review Committee was set up by the 

government of the day in 1988, to review compensation 

packages for physicians.  When they brought in their 

recommendations, the Saskatchewan Medical Association 

appealed it, and the recommendation was quashed in provincial 

court.  The government of the day then appealed it successfully 

to the Court of Appeal. 

 

Finally, as has been pointed out by other speakers, the 

members of the parties opposite are not entirely clean on all of 

this.  They might want to talk a lot about the independence of 

the judiciary and so forth, but we must never forget that it was 

the Mulroney Tories who, just a few years ago, actually froze 

federal court judges' salaries until 1996. 

 

So clearly the time has come.  This society recognizes that 

there is a certain amount of common sense that has to be 

applied to salaries for people who are working in jobs such as 

judges. 

 

Clearly society is saying -- our telephone calls that we're 

receiving in all the constituencies in this province -- our 

telephone calls say that society recognizes that the judges are 

adequately compensated and it is time now for them to get on 

with doing the job that they are adequately being paid to do.  

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- There's several speakers have spoken on this 

particular Bill and I do not want to address again the issues 

which have been addressed very well this afternoon. 

 

But I do want to speak very briefly just to one concept and that 

is to the concept of the independence of the judiciary.  Because 

during the course of this debate there have been some 

allegations that by the government doing what it is supposed to 

do -- that is evaluate laws -- evaluate laws to see if they're good 

or bad, and then changing the law if it's judged that they are 

bad, is somehow . . . in doing this would be undermining the 

ability of the judiciary or somehow is interfering with its 

autonomy. 

 

And I've been trying to grapple with this, Mr. Speaker, and this 

argument, and to address it and see just where this argument 

came from or whether it holds water or not.  And I thought to 

myself, Mr. Speaker, consider what would happen in the case 

of other professionals -- let's say doctors.  If the government 

rules on an issue that affects doctors -- say medicare, imposing 

a medicare scheme -- does that interfere with the doctors' right 

to doctor, or did it?  And history has proven, even though the 

doctors clamoured, and in the 1962 debates which were very, 

very aggressive, to say the least, found that the doctoring if 

anything, in Saskatchewan, had improved.  There was 

absolutely no effect on their ability to doctor. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, of a situation where there have been 

occasions in this country, or on the continent at least, where the 

government has interfered with salary bargaining, or imposed 

salary bargaining on professors of universities or on teachers, 

and has that interfered with their academic . . . or their right of 

academic freedom.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, never has it 

interfered with their academic freedom.  All it has done is set 

the salary. 

 

So for anybody to say, Mr. Speaker, that somehow this law 

undermines the independence of the judiciary, would be to 

impugn or to assume that somehow the 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

judges will stop acting professionally.  And I say they won't; 

the judges will continue to act as professionally as they have in 

the past, as the public expects them to. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that our job as legislators here is to look 

at the law, see if the law is a good law or a bad law.  If we 

judge it as a bad law, it is our job to change it no matter who it 

is that it affects.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will be speaking 

against this Bill of course, Mr. Speaker, as I think the members 

will all realize when I'm through my remarks that I'm definitely 

against the Bill. 

 

I have a few remarks that I'm just going to read out.  Then 

we're going to make a few comments from the remarks of my 

coffee rows, that you can come with me, the member from 

Rosetown, and we'll just take a tour.  We'll be inviting him, Mr. 

Speaker, to come out on the weekend and we'll just tour Arm 

River and we'll talk to the coffee rows, and he'll find out and 

get a little lesson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Dale Eisler asked in his editorial, March 19: 

who's next?  Now that's just what all people listening in this 

room and all the television listeners right now, just think about 

this, who is next?  And people are saying out there right now, 

the majority -- and I agree with the members opposite -- who 

cares if the judges don't get a raise?  That's what a lot of the 

people are saying.  They make a lot of money and these are 

tough times. 

 

I heard the hot line this morning, Mr. Speaker, and it was about 

five to one coming in in favour of what the government's doing 

but didn't like how they were doing it.  They were just thinking 

about the 24 per cent raise, Mr. Speaker, but it didn't make it 

right how they done it. 

 

Because it came in very clearly on the hot lines this morning:  I 

agree that the judges shouldn't get 24 per cent interest, they 

said, but why didn't the government think of this before they 

brought this Bill in?  That was the clear message.  Why didn't 

they use their head?  Why weren't they thinking a year ago?  

But no, sir, they weren't. 

 

People are asking why we're getting worked up about this.  And 

I say we should get worked up about it because the pattern of 

government behaviour exemplifies this.  It began with the 

government unilaterally vetoing all previous contracts with 

civil servants through The Crown Employment Contracts Act.  

There, as here, they could count on public apathy about their 

behaviour. 

 

Then they cancelled the contracts with farmers by unilaterally 

changing the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program.  I'm going to cover quite a bit about that, Mr. 

Speaker, because as every member knows, I like to talk about 

GRIP every time I get my chance. 

And naturally when you get a Bill like this brought into this 

legislature, what the Minister of Justice has put upon the people 

of Saskatchewan, it's going to remind everybody how serious 

that changing of the GRIP contract was in 1992.  Then they 

turned on Federated Co-op Ltd. by refusing to live up to the 

terms of the agreement the province had with the NewGrade 

heavy oil upgrader. 

 

Now I would say, Mr. Speaker, that that caused quite an uproar 

in the province of Saskatchewan because they changed 

contracts.  Now I don't know how anybody can possibly say 

that that's the right and proper thing for a government to do, to 

up and change a contract. 

 

Time and again, Mr. Speaker, the government has shown that it 

regards the law and its responsibilities as a mere nuisance.  

What they want is the only thing that concerns them in dealing 

with the institutions of a civil society. 

 

Now they have taken the ultimate step of defying their own 

law.  No one is arguing that the government did not have the 

prerogative to deal with the judges' salary issue in any way they 

saw fit.  They can do that.  We know that, Mr. Speaker.  They 

can do what they want.  They've proved that to the people in 

Saskatchewan -- do it, they can do. 

 

But from our experience with this issue, we tried to tell them 

that binding arbitration was not the way to go.  We tried to tell 

them when they put the Bill through in the first place.  But as 

usual they didn't listen.  They held firm in their belief that no 

one, but no one but an NDP cabinet minister, knows anything 

about anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's their trouble.  They should have thought this 

out very, very carefully when they put this Bill through in the 

first place, to give this commission the mandate that they did.  

Why didn't they think it out? 

 

Well events have shown just how wrong that theory is.  They 

made a mistake in our system of democracy.  Governments 

must live with their mistakes.  And I will say that the Minister 

of Justice has stood up and said, we have made a mistake.  He 

said it to the media, he has said it in this legislature -- they have 

made a mistake.  And I'll give credit that he's admitted they 

made a mistake.  But it's how they're saying it.  They're just 

saying, we made a mistake, and sloughing it off that it's a 

nothing thing to make a mistake around here. 

 

When I make a mistake in my life, I've got to abide by the 

consequences.  And all my life experience, when I make a 

mistake on the farm, if I don't do things right, I suffer the 

consequences.  And the government should have realized that. 

 

And when they give this commission this mandate, they 

thought that maybe they would come up with a 5 to 10 per cent 

increase.  I'm sure that's what they were 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

thinking.  They could have went 5 and 5, the commission, and 

nobody would have thought anything more of it.  But when 

they come into a 24, a 20 -- I guess it was 20 per cent, two and 

two -- that was just more than they can stand. 

 

(1645) 

 

And I understand that.  I can see why they've done it, but 

there's no justification for changing the law.  There's no 

justification.  I can see the bind they were in, but boy, if I was 

on that side of the House, in government, which we will be 

again, I would rather suffer the consequences than break an 

agreement.  Breaking an agreement is bad enough between 

friends, neighbours and what not, but when the government 

breaks an agreement, it's serious.  It'll have its consequences, 

my friend.  Breaking agreements will never be forgotten. 

 

Rather than admitting a mistake and accept the judgement of 

the public that would come with it, they have borrowed a page 

out of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four.  Big Brother has 

decided that the independent commission never existed.  Hence 

they don't feel any embarrassment.  No responsibility.  Anyone 

who dares say otherwise is guilty of a thought crime and will 

be sentenced to listen.  Big Brother pretends that he's Tommy 

Douglas. 

 

That is why we as ordinary citizens should care about the 

judges' dispute and other such actions by the government.  This 

kind of arbitrary and self-indulgent behaviour by a government 

is tyranny, Mr. Speaker, and is serious.  If the media, the 

opposition, and the public let it slip by uncontested, then there 

is no board, no regulation, no institution of government that 

will not fall prey to the petty whims of the cabinet members. 

 

Again, no one is arguing that the action of the government in 

the judges' dispute does not have the support of the majority of 

the people in Saskatchewan; however, a democracy is judged 

not only by how it represents the majority, but also on how it 

defends a minority, especially an unpopular minority. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, it's just as important to stand up for a large 

group, the large group in Saskatchewan, as you would a 

minority.  It's just as important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You see they didn't care about the farmers in the GRIP program 

because they were in the minority.  They knew that the 

majority of the people in Saskatchewan would say, oh well, 

farmers doing all right; let's worry about myself.  They knew 

that.  That's why they done it. 

 

But they're getting braver and braver.  You see it's just like a 

person that commits a sin -- once he does it once, it's pretty 

hard on him, but the second time, not so bad, and then it gets to 

so it don't bother him any more.  And this government, once 

they've done this . . . 

 

They started out in 1991 breaking their own contracts 

and it didn't seem to bother them a lot.  I can see they really 

worried about breaking that GRIP contract.  It was bothering 

them because letters and phone calls came from all over 

Saskatchewan.  Then they broke another contract.  And I see it 

didn't seem to bother them so much.  And then they break 

another contract, and then another one.  It don't bother them at 

all now. 

 

And you watch, Mr. Speaker, over the next few years, to have 

this balanced budget as they promised before they go to the 

polls, the only way they're going to do it is -- which I'm going 

to touch on here -- who're they going to be touching to balance 

the budget?  They'll be breaking contracts like the people in 

this province of Saskatchewan have ever seen or ever witnessed 

in their life. 

 

Yesterday was civil servants' day; today, it's the judges.  But 

watch out.  And I say to Barb Byers, watch out, because 

tomorrow it will be you.  You'll be hitting her tomorrow. When 

the government ignores the law, no one is safe.  And the 

member from Rosemont should know that. 

 

The member from Rosemont thinks he's very . . . he talks very 

proud, he stands up here, and he knows, he feels, he's in a safe 

seat.  The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd was speaking here a 

while ago, how everybody in her riding said everything was 

just hunky-dory, they all agree with her. 

 

This is the way I predict it -- when I predict anything about 

politics, I'm not too far wrong -- and I predict that the member 

from Rosemont will probably hang in there.  He's fairly safe in 

the remarks he said, because he got a pretty safe riding around 

him, a labour riding. 

 

But the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, I wouldn't want that 

Hansard to get back out to that riding, because I'm sure they're 

saying in her riding exactly what they're saying in mine -- the 

judges don't need 24 per cent interest, but I don't like the 

method and how they done it. 

 

Now that's what you better worry about, the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloyd.  Go home this weekend.  I challenge her to go to 

any coffee row -- as I challenge the member from Rosemont to 

come out to Arm River, and we'll go to the coffee row of your 

choice -- and if you can get anyone to agree with you, you've 

got my word, I will stand up in this House and say I made a 

mistake, I can't read my people.  But you'll find out that I am 

right. 

 

So we'll meet after this session tonight, Mr. Speaker, I'll meet 

with the member of Rosemont and we'll pick out our hour, our 

time, and when we're going to meet, and go through my riding, 

and to prove to him what people are really saying.  It's not the 

judges they're thinking about, it's the method of what you're 

doing, because this has reminded every farmer in 

Saskatchewan, including the farmers from Cut Knife-Lloyd, 

and Arm River . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Rosemont. 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1994 

Mr. Muirhead: -- There's a few farmers in Rosemont that 

probably aren't too happy with you breaking contracts either. 

 

Let's just, Mr. Speaker, just touch on a few of the people here -- 

before 5 I probably won't be able to get through them all -- that 

they're really going to be touching here.  I would not feel safe if 

I was working for the Crop Insurance right now, for Crop 

Insurance as a civil servant, because just with a snap of the 

finger every agent and adjuster could be gone.  Just like that. 

 

Because don't you remember, Mr. Speaker, we must remember 

about the contracts they broke when they formed the 

government in 1991.  They came in here and they said, we've 

got to get rid of all those bin police, because we are not going 

to be out there harassing farmers, but boy they broke that 

contract in a hurry.  But now what's happened, they've got more 

adjusters, and more bin police than ever before, and there's 

more farmers that have been charged, and more farmers have 

gone to jail.  I just had one in my riding went to jail.  He was 

framed by that Crop Insurance, the bin police, and I'll be 

bringing that to this legislature in the estimates of the 

Department of Justice, and we're going to be talking about it 

very freely in this House and how he was treated. 

 

Well let's talk about contracts.  If I was an agent out there and I 

was an adjuster, I'd wonder what's going to happen next.  

Because they know we don't need bin police, they've already 

said that, so that means their jobs are in jeopardy.  Could be 

gone. 

 

Now we talk about something that's really important here, what 

really worries me, if you want to know what you hear out in the 

Craik, and Davidson, Kenaston schools, is that teachers are 

worried about their own contracts.  They're saying the 

population is going down in rural Saskatchewan, the farmers 

aren't surviving, the towns are getting smaller.  They're either 

leaving the province or moving into the cities and they're 

having a job . . . quite a thing for a school teacher to hold onto 

his job not because of their qualifications -- because of not 

enough students. 

 

And so to save money . . . and they've onloaded so bad, 

breaking contracts to the municipalities and to the Department 

of Education, has broke their contracts with the school units 

that they're passing this expense back onto the municipalities 

on taxes.  And they can't stand it. 

 

So what they're doing is talking about maybe we're going to 

have to cut back on keeping our schools up.  And so what's 

going to happen?  What I'm afraid of is more contracts are 

going to get broken, Mr. Speaker.  They're going to be cutting 

down on their grants to keeping our schools in place, and the 

cost-sharing grant is now in place for education in our province 

of Saskatchewan.  These contracts can be broken at any time. 

 

Now if you want to talk about . . . I know what you're going to 

hear in Davidson, to the member from Rosemont; you're going 

to hear this if you happen to 

get a hold of a teacher in that coffee row talk:  well, they're 

going to say, Mr. Member, well how safe is my contract?  How 

safe is my contract as a teacher?  Am I going to just lose that 

job? 

 

The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood says . . . he 

gripped his fist.  I don't know what he was meaning there but 

he must figure they're safe. But boy if I lived in rural 

Saskatchewan, like the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, I don't think I'd go home this weekend.  

Because this is . . . I don't think it's safe.  It's not safe . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I wouldn't want to be a 

government member, I wouldn't want to be a government 

member under the Progressive Conservatives and then have 

done something like you people and go home on the weekend. 

 

I'll tell you that I would be staying in here for sure.  I'd stay in 

Regina on the weekend because, Mr. Speaker, I can say in the 

16 years I've been an MLA we figured out, my wife and I -- 

we've had five weekends that we've stayed in Regina.  I love to 

go home to my riding.  I like to talk to my people; I like to get 

their feeling, and I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I have 14 people 

that's on my executive that I make a phone call to and they 

phone four more, and we have covered every town in our 

riding.  Every poll is covered, and in 24 hours to 48 hours, I can 

tell you what the coffee row in Arm River is saying. 

 

And that's how I've listened to those people and that's why I've 

been returned to this legislature for 16 years, because I listen to 

people.  But I could not go home ever and hold my face up and 

say to the people, we have broken a contract, whether it was 

something they didn't care about or not.  I mean, about the 

judges and the 24 per cent, that wouldn't bother them.  What's 

bothering them is you can break contracts. 

 

I'd like some government member that's going to be speaking, 

follow me, whenever they speak again on this, somebody get 

up and say, how many contracts has any government in Canada 

ever broken?  Just see how many other provinces have done the 

same thing as this. 

 

We heard the member from . . . I believe it was from Saskatoon 

-- she was speaking a little while ago -- from Saskatoon 

Wildwood, and she said Mulroney broke a contract by freezing 

the salaries on court judges.  Well what a statement to say.  

What a statement to say.  Just freezing the wages, just freezing 

the wages is not breaking a contract that changed their salaries.  

Come on now, get serious.  That was an awful statement for her 

to say, that Mulroney broke a contract.  He didn't break a 

contract. 

 

We as MLAs have froze our salaries for years here.  We MLAs 

have done the honourable thing.  We've all . . . and I agree with 

the members over there -- they've done it; and the members 

here, we did it when we were in government -- we froze our 

own salaries.  But you don't freeze the salaries, you don't worry 

about the contracts.  But breaking contracts -- they break the 

contracts of their own Executive Council and their own 

individual workers and EAs (executive assistants) 



March 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

and their own departments -- they break the contracts but they 

don't go down, they go up.  They raise the contracts up. 

 

So I don't know how you people can be too proud.  I just can't 

believe it.  And if we want to . . . I want to touch on one more 

as quickly as I can, is the hospital contracts.  If you think for 

one minute, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite think for one 

minute that the people in Davidson and Craik and the 

community in Imperial and Outlook who have hospitals in 

danger -- and we're not talking about all Saskatchewan, but 

that's the four in my riding -- if you think breaking contracts to 

close hospitals . . . and we in the town of Craik are sitting there 

with an eight-bed, acute-care hospital, and the beds are sitting 

empty.  But thank goodness the hospital's still open because we 

have 12 bed for level 4 care. 

 

And that's breaking a contract.  That hospital was built, it was 

opened under the Minister of Health under the NDP 

government; it was opened under them.  And they come out 

and say, what a wonderful facility.  And no more than got back 

to Regina, we're going to close it down.  Never heard of such a 

thing of breaking contracts in my life, breaking contracts.  The 

people from the Craik and Aylesbury and Chamberlain 

community in my riding, they raised $875,000 cash; we have 

no debt; we own that hospital.  And what did this government 

do in this last few weeks?  Come in and took their title away.  

Took the title away and says, we now own this hospital.  It 

went to the board; we've lost it. 

 

And then they try to get their hands . . . when the mayor was 

away, they sent in some people to break another contract, to get 

their hands on some of the cash that was sitting in the hospital 

fund, but thank goodness there was some people got that 

stopped or they would have walked away with another contract 

broken.  But they're taking some of it, don't worry; the title's 

gone, some of the money's gone, but we've had to fight to hold 

onto the contract of some of the funds that were left in the 

Craik bank account, the Craik community hospital bank 

account, that was put there by individuals.  Thank goodness 

that is staying there momentarily while we're fighting this out. 

 

Now the member from . . . the Associate Minister of Health 

said, it's all fixed.  Well I'll tell you, things aren't fixed as good 

as he thinks it is because he's breaking contract, he breaks his 

word.  I came to him and had a contract with him, Mr. Speaker, 

a contract with him about not moving four of my patients out of 

the Davidson Hospital to another town and he stopped it right 

there, and I appreciated that.  But I no sooner got out of the 

country and was away to the United States, and whoop, one 

was gone 127 miles away.  He broke his word just the second 

that I was gone. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, 

this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


