




















































Hansard: May 13, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2287 

 May 13, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the city of Saskatoon humbly praying that your 

Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister of 

Health to examine the proposal to close emergency and 

cardiac care at City Hospital. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly a special 

friend who's seated behind the rail on the government side, 

Merv Johnson, who was the MP (Member for Parliament) for 

Kindersley from 1953 to 1958, is joining us here today.  Merv 

of course in addition to being the MP for Kindersley during that 

period of time was also the agent general for Saskatchewan and 

was appointed to that position in 1977. 

 

He as well acted as president of the CCF-NDP (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) for a 

number of years and many, many other capacities here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like all members to welcome Merv here today.  Merv 

and his wife Elaine now are retired, living in Victoria, British 

Columbia, and I'm sure all members will want to welcome him 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure today to introduce to you in the west gallery 23 

students and their teachers, Allan Hoblick, Gloria Danku; 

chaperons, Brenda Gorniak, Betty Poley, and the bus driver, 

Milton Turnquist.  They're from Prairie River School, Mr. 

Speaker, which is a beautiful community in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan, primarily an agricultural community, but also 

some logging.  And it's a great deal of pleasure that I will have 

to meet with these students and talk about the Legislative 

Assembly later this morning. 

 

So I would like all members to join with me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Legislative Assembly 

today, some 48 grades 7 to 9 students from the Frontier School.  

And with these 

students we have Murray Legge, Mike Puszkar, Jane and 

Hector Cherpin, Diane Thoring, Roy Ham, Cindy Puszkar, 

Norm Baker, and Barb Keith.  And later today we'll have 

photos and some discussion about the operations and workings 

of government.  And I wish all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too am privileged 

today to be able to introduce to you some students from the St. 

George School in Wilkie, and through you to the rest of the 

members assembled.  Mr. Speaker, the students are from grade 

7; there's 24.  They're accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Bev 

Barth, and they have five adults chaperoning them.  We will be 

meeting them, Mr. Speaker, after question period. 

 

And as the member from Kindersley mentioned yesterday, we 

don't get a lot of visitors, so we really appreciate being able to 

recognize the visitors when they come.  And he had a group 

yesterday; I have a group today.  So we're really pleased, from 

the west side of the province, to be able to do this. 

 

We'll be having a bit of a question period, I think, after photos 

and some refreshments. 

 

And I would ask all the members to help me welcome these 

folks from the west side of the province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to very 

quickly join with the member from Shaunavon in welcoming 

the students from the Frontier area.  Not very often that we get 

students in from the south-west, but more particularly now that 

our boundaries have changed and in consideration of the fact 

that the Maple Creek constituency that I now represent will in 

the future extend down to Frontier, I sort of will take the 

opportunity to adopt these kids right away and say hello to 

them. 

 

I met some of them earlier today over at the Imperial 400 -- 

really early.  And I now have a little bit of a suspicion of why I 

didn't sleep so well last night for awhile.  Anyway thanks a lot 

for coming, guys, and glad to see you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

my daughter, Heidi, in your gallery, who does not have school 

at Indian Head today and has decided to come up here and pick 

up some pointers on how children should behave in classes. 

 

And I ask members to join me in welcoming her today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

with great pleasure that I introduce to you and through you to 

the members of the Legislative Assembly 27 students from 

Carrot River High School in Carrot River.  They're on a tour of 

the legislature today.  They're in the Speaker's gallery, Mr. 

Speaker.  And we'll be meeting with them for pictures after 

question period and a meeting. 

 

I would ask all members here to help me welcome them today 

to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a privilege for 

me to welcome to the Assembly here today, and through you 

and to the members of the Assembly I want to welcome 

individuals who'll be new constituents of mine in the very near 

future. They're Mr. and Mrs. Hector and Jane Cherpin from 

Frontier and we met them this morning at breakfast and it's not 

very often we get to welcome them. 

 

They'll probably be going to school in Waldeck, which I want 

to tell the kids that they're going to a very good school -- my 

kids went there as well.  So on behalf of myself, I want to ask 

the Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Day of Families 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to today make a brief statement in support of the 

International Day of Families.  Mr. Speaker, this interests me, I 

suppose, as much as anyone.  I came from a large family and I 

understand the strength that there is in families. 

 

I also believe that we need to strengthen the family structure in 

today's world and I applaud the minister.  I don't always agree 

with him, but I agree with you this time, sir, that the 

International Day of Families is a worthwhile cause.  I think I'd 

like to suggest that all of us recognize this for what it is -- a 

major step forward in going back, I believe, to the fundamental 

beliefs we used to have in families. 

 

I'll tell you from my experience it's a wonderful thing, to be 

able to pick up the phone and phone your families in cases of 

trouble and they're there.  It's a reassuring feeling, and I'm sure 

that all of us who have brothers and sisters and so on will agree 

with that. 

 

So again, Mr. Minister, I agree with what you are doing here 

with recognizing the International Year of the Family and I 

certainly will be supporting any move that you make in that 

direction. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

International Day of the Family 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to the comments from 

the member from Wilkie, I would announce that Sunday, May 

15 has been proclaimed by the United Nations as the 

International Day of the Family as part of the International 

Year of the Family. 

 

The United Nations has proclaimed that from this year on 

families will receive worldwide recognition on this special day.  

This is the first time in history that a single, specific day has 

been set aside where people throughout the world can celebrate 

the importance of families. 

 

Saskatchewan is supporting International Year of the Family 

through its initiatives for children, youth, and families under 

Saskatchewan's action plan for children.  Over $4.4 million will 

be provided under the action plan through '94 and '95.  

Activities and programs initiated during the year will extend 

beyond 1994 and lead to continued support for strong and 

healthy families.  An information kit about the International 

Year of the Family has been distributed to the public through 

the Women's Secretariat. 

 

Family celebrations organized by various community groups 

will be held in Saskatchewan throughout the year for this first 

International Day of Families on Sunday. The Interagency 

Family Life Education Committee is hosting a family fun day 

at Wascana Park in Regina to provide families an opportunity 

to celebrate, and we hope that families in many communities 

throughout the province will be able to participate in 

celebrations on this newly declared International Day of the 

Family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Big River Trade Show 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I am pleased 

to inform the Assembly about a very exciting trade show and 

truck roadeo taking place in Big River this weekend, May 15.  

Big River and District Chamber of Commerce is sponsoring the 

show.  The purpose of the show is to allow the local business 

community the opportunity to increase their visibility in the 

community.  Last year businesses involved did an outstanding 

job of presenting their products. 

 

Included in the trade show will be some other fun events.  A 

giant pancake breakfast will kick off the day followed by a 

logging competition.  However without a doubt, the most 

exciting and anticipated event this weekend will once again be 

the truck roadeo.  This is an extremely popular event for the 

public as well as the drivers.  The inexperienced though need 

not apply, for last year Les Bueckert from Big River won the 

competition, then went on to win in the district championships, 

and the provincial title.  And he went with the team from the 

province of Saskatchewan to the nationals in Winnipeg where 

he was one of the five to place first in the competitions there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all visitors and those who wish to 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

come to Big River this weekend to go, and to enjoy the trade 

show, logging competition, and the truck roadeo. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Study of Aboriginal Education in Greenland 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Today I 

would like to inform the Assembly of some interesting news 

which relates to my constituency.  Shirley Cardinal, a 

24-year-old student studying education at Waterhen Lake is 

travelling to Greenland this August to study their aboriginal 

education system. 

 

Sixteen students from the University of Saskatchewan's Indian 

teacher education program will spend two weeks in Greenland 

to see how Greenland's aboriginal people, the Kalaallit, run 

their own education system. 

 

The tour will begin in the town of Nuuk, Greenland's capital, at 

a teachers' training school.  They will look at some of the 

schools in the area and then head 200 kilometres north to 

Maniitsoq.  Here they will witness and join in the culture of the 

Kalaallit.  The education of Greenland's aboriginals has a 

similar history to that of Canada.  The students from 

Saskatchewan are trying to find out what is and what is not 

working well and then hopefully incorporate the positive 

aspects of their system to their own here in Canada.  They have 

already tasted seal, a traditional food of Greenland's Kalaallit 

people, and have been learning about their language, a dialect 

of that spoken by the the Canadian Inuit. 

 

In 1979, Greenland's aboriginal people attained 

self-government from Denmark.  Since that time their 

education system has been stressing indigenous culture and 

language. This trip comes in response to several similar visits 

to Saskatchewan by students from Greenland in the last few 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of myself and our government, we wish 

Shirley Cardinal and the rest of the students travelling to 

Greenland the best of luck and success on their fascinating 

adventure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sudden Passing of John Smith 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I 

rise to acknowledge, with sorrow, the sudden death yesterday 

of John Smith, Leader of the Labour Party in Britain.  Mr. 

Smith, who was 55 years old, died of a heart attack.  He was 

one of the few current Labour members of parliament to have 

served in cabinet, having been the trade secretary in the 

government of James Callaghan.  Before becoming leader in 

1992, he'd been Labour's Finance critic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure two months ago this week to sit 

in the House of Commons and watch Mr. Smith question, 

during Prime Minister's question period, and the response from 

the Prime Minister, 

John Major, at the time showed a great deal of respect for the 

way he handled his questions. 

 

And Mr. Major said yesterday through The Globe and Mail, 

and I quote: 

 

 I think of him as an opponent, not as an enemy, and when I 

remember him I shall do so with respect and affection. 

 

And that's a great compliment, coming from the Prime 

Minister; and as I said, as you could see the question period 

going on, the great respect with which all members treated Mr. 

Smith. 

 

Former prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, also talked of his 

courage, his humour, and his fundamental decency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge his passing, send 

great messages to his family that we're all thinking of them, and 

for a person who was thought to be the next prime minister of 

Britain, a great loss to the whole world. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Raise the Flag Day 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would to announce to the Assembly today that tomorrow, May 

14, is officially Raise the Flag Day in Canada.  This is a 

coast-to-coast celebration which all Canadians can join together 

to celebrate our country. 

 

This is the third Raise the Flag Day and the second one in 

which the Kinsmen  and Kinettes will be leading the 

celebrations.  This special day was created by the mayors and 

reeves of Canada three years ago.  It was decided last year for 

the Kin family to join, who were running an event very similar, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will all benefit from this event as we celebrate the one 

thing that unites all Canadians. It is anticipated that the 1994 

Raise the Flag Day will be bigger and better than in previous 

years.  Festivities are not limited to just raising the flag, but 

they have a poster contest, essay contest, and picnics. 

 

Raise the Flag Day was created in an effort to strengthen our 

country.  This is a day when all Canadians can focus not on the 

negative, but on the positive aspects of our land.  And we can 

rejoice in the freedoms, the rights, and the privileges we all 

enjoy as being a Canadian. 

 

I encourage everyone to be part of the day that we'll be 

celebrating tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, 

yesterday the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce took the 

unprecedented step of calling on your government to fire the 

Minister of Labour.  Now this resolution received unanimous 

support from chamber members. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, the people who create the jobs in this 

province are saying that the minister has so poisoned the 

atmosphere for job creation in this province that the only 

solution is for you to remove him from his post.  Mr. Deputy 

Premier, will you act on the chamber's resolution?  Will you 

fire the Minister of Labour and replace him with someone who 

will get the work done? 

 

As an act of good faith to re-establish some room for 

compromise, Mr. Deputy Premier, will you remove him from 

his job today and get busy with the business of creating jobs in 

this province instead of destroying them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What I said yesterday to the media 

when they asked me about this, is that such requests are 

frequently made without any real expectation that the 

resignation will actually be offered.  It is more often a kind of a 

personal attack.  What I said yesterday to the media was that I 

believe the public are better served if the discussion remains a 

clash of ideas and doesn't degenerate into a series of personal 

attacks. 

 

Let me say as well that we have striven to produce a 

middle-of-the-road package which will enjoy a degree of 

consensus.  I guess the events of yesterday prove that it is a 

challenging task. 

 

I will also make the prediction here as I've made it before, and 

that is that in future sessions, they won't be occupied with this.  

When this legislation is actually up and running, that fact -- 

when they see it in operation -- will allay their worst fears. 

 

I'm not in any sense being critical of them.  We tend to fear that 

which we don't totally understand.  There's no way they can 

totally understand it until it's actually operating.  But there's no 

way that we can understand it until it's actually up and 

operating.  I think once it's up and operating, I truly believe that 

the operation of this legislation will allay their worst fears. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Minister, 

seeing as how you're going to be your own cheer-leader and try 

and start your own fan club here this morning, I'll have to say 

that that is a stirring defence of your position as minister.  But 

it just doesn't wash with the people because it isn't what the 

facts are based on.  And so I'm going to ignore you because this 

problem goes deeper into the needs of the government to make 

some changes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, I address you once more.  I only wish, Mr. 

Deputy Premier, that you and your 

government would put as much effort into protecting the jobs 

of the thousands of Saskatchewan residents whose jobs are 

going to be lost on account of your government legislation, the 

labour legislation.  I only wish that you would spend as much 

time defending the 82,000 people who are on welfare, who are 

not going to be able to find jobs on account of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, your government and this minister in 

particular are driving thousands of jobs out of this province.  

And what is the reason?  For what reason?  To try and promote 

harmony between business and labour?  Not likely. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, when the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce is unanimously calling for the minister's 

resignation, I don't think he's doing too great of a job of 

promoting harmony.  Mr. Deputy Premier, now do you see how 

badly you are poisoning the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  The member has to put his question.  All right? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  What more, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, is it going to take for you to realize that this legislation 

must be pulled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I had 

an opportunity yesterday to spend about seven hours in Prince 

Albert with the chamber of commerce attending a question and 

answer session, giving an address, and working with the 

chamber; and attended the president's banquet and reception 

last night.  And I have to say to the members opposite that there 

is in fact a good deal of goodwill between the working group in 

the government of Saskatchewan and the chamber of 

commerce. 

 

I want to say as well that the optimism that is building in this 

province is based on some very, very solid foundations built in 

the Partnership for Renewal, which business was involved in 

designing, along with labour and the cooperatives. 

 

I understand what the members are trying to do here, 

understand that they are playing their politics the way they did 

for nine years in government -- that is, put a wedge between 

working people and business people in order to try to elevate 

their position politically.  I guess I don't blame them; but it's a 

sad commentary on the situation of the Conservative Party 

when that is the only possible way they see to revive their 

political fortunes in the province. 

 

I would say, if you have positive suggestions that would help 

us work our way through -- amendments, for example, to the 

Bill -- let's get on with it.  We've been debating the Bill on first 

clause day after day.  If you've got positive alternatives to the 

Bill, let's get on to committee stage, let's get some amendments 

in here that are positive in nature, and see whether or not we 

can get consensus. 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the Minister of 

Economic Development, seeing as how the Premier's people 

won't talk to us today.  You gentlemen sat there and laughed as 

we started our questions today.  Your minister, do you realize, 

laughed at the chamber of commerce yesterday.  That's what he 

did.  You all laugh at the people who bring their problems to 

the Assembly and to this government. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have called the business community ruthless 

and greedy; you laugh at their legitimate concerns.  You have 

16,000 jobs lost since you took power as government, you've 

got 82,000 people on welfare, and the chamber says your 

minister has an ideological bias against the free and democratic 

enterprise system on which our current and future well-being is 

based. 

 

What you are doing, sir, Mr. Minister of Economic 

Development, is driving a wedge between the people who work 

in this province and their pay cheques.  That's the only wedge 

that's being driven.  And I ask you simply right now, will you 

go to the Premier and ask him to replace this minister as an act 

of good faith, fire him, and tell him to laugh no more.  Will you 

do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With respect to the member's 

comments that we called the business people ruthless, what I 

said in the interview was something that had been repeated to 

me at virtually every chamber of commerce meeting, and I met 

with quite a few of them.  At virtually every one of those 

chamber of commerce meetings people would say, the 

problem, Mr. Minister, isn't it, that there is a very small 

minority of our industry which are not following the rules; why 

don't you enforce the rules on them and leave us alone?  That 

was said at virtually every chamber of commerce meeting, and 

I agree with that. 

 

And in the interview which I did with The Financial Post, that 

comment was made, that the vast majority of business people 

treat their employees very generously and the problem is a very 

small minority of people. 

 

I say to members opposite: it isn't us that is sowing discord and 

attempting to divide worker from management; that's you 

people.  If you want any advice, it is: it didn't work in 

government; it isn't going to work any better in opposition.  

Like the proverbial elephant, you seem to learn nothing and 

forget nothing.  It's not a recipe for success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

arrogance of the Minister of Labour in this House today is just 

absolutely unbelievable, given what is happening around him in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

My question is to the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, 

yesterday the chamber of commerce, probably the most 

moderate of all business groups in the province of 

Saskatchewan, asked for the Minister of Labour's resignation.  

Today in an open letter delivered to the Premier, the Minister 

of Finance, and the Minister of Economic Development, we see 

that their concerns about economic activity and job creation by 

your government are an abject failure. 

 

And I would quote to you from the letter released this morning, 

Mr. Deputy Premier.  It says this: 

 

 There are . . . 12,000 fewer people working in 

Saskatchewan's labour force than 1991.  Net out migration to 

other provinces and countries has exceeded 24,000 people in 

the last three years . . . many of them were young people 

looking for work elsewhere. 

 

 In the year to date, Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces 

in all of Canada where business bankruptcies are still going 

up . . .  

 

My question to you, Mr. Deputy Premier: why on earth would 

you bring in this kind of legislation at this time?  Surely you 

can see that you're pouring gasoline on the fire, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, by doing so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

be more than pleased to respond to the member from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  There was absolutely no interruption 

when the Deputy Premier asked his question, and I ask the 

member from Maple Creek not to interrupt when the minister is 

trying to answer.  Order, order.  Order from the member from 

Maple Creek . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don't need that 

advice either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now that 

you have got the attention of the members opposite, I'll be 

pleased to respond to the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

And I want to say this: that I couldn't think of anybody more 

appropriate to talk about net out-migration than members of the 

former government, during whose term there was a record level 

of net out-migration of people that this province of 

Saskatchewan has seen, at least in my lifetime.  And that's 

getting to be quite a considerable number of years. 

 

So I think for the member from Thunder Creek to stand up and 

talk about net out-migration when in fact the population of 

Saskatchewan has now stabilized speaks a great deal to the 

sincerity within which those questions which we are being 

asked here today are being raised. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that on the question of The Trade 

Union Act and the labour standards legislation, there has been 

an unprecedented amount of consultation with all of the people 

who are going to be impacted.  And that consultation was led 

by the 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Minister of Labour of Saskatchewan who, unfortunately, some 

people have decided to personally attack, which I think does 

not lend much to the argument.  But I think that's a tribute to 

the Minister of Labour and I think it's a tribute to the Minister 

of Economic Development and it's a tribute to this government 

on how it conducts itself in bringing forward important 

legislation. 

 

All of the people have been consulted more extensively than 

ever before on this kind of legislation.  That is the process of 

this government.  That kind of process is going to continue. 

 

And I repeat something that's been said earlier: if members 

opposite have anything constructive to say other than the kind 

of things that they're saying here today, let's get on with this 

Bill so that they can raise them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Deputy Premier, the letter released this 

morning, an urgent, open letter to your government, doesn't say 

that.  It doesn't say that at all. 

 

I'm going to quote to you again: 

 

 Faced with these tough economic conditions, we are very 

concerned about the added uncertainty and uncompetitive 

climate that may be created by the Government's new labour 

laws.  We fear that your new legislation . . . (would) further 

weaken our economic recovery and result in more 

out-migration and loss of jobs. 

 

End of quote, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

 

You're not part of the solution -- you're part of the problem, sir.  

That is obvious to everyone in the whole world, at least in this 

province, except you -- you go merrily along. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, in your budget address and the throne 

speech you placed an emphasis on economic development and 

job creation.  Why would you allow the Minister of Labour to 

bring in legislation at this time that goes totally counter to the 

stated objectives of your government in both your throne 

speech and your budget speech to the people of this province 

this spring?  Why would you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me once again be 

very clear to the member opposite.  The legislation that is 

before the House today has got nothing to do with whether 

economic development will be more or less in this province. 

 

The legislation that is before the House today, Mr. Speaker, is 

legislation that is providing a balanced approach to 

labour-management relations and providing protection for 

workers who are otherwise unprotected, and I can tell you very 

clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, for that we do not apologize as a government. 

 

Now the members opposite may want to attack working people 

and they may want to suggest that somehow the economic 

development investment climate in Saskatchewan will be 

dampened by this.  I categorically refuse to accept that 

suggestion and allegations of the members opposite. 

 

In the last two years there has been more involvement by the 

business and investment community in developing government 

policy than there ever was in the 1980s when members 

opposite were sitting on this side of the bench.  The only people 

they spoke to were the carpet-baggers, the people who came 

with briefcases from outside of this province, saying will you 

please put money into it, like the Guy Montpetit's -- that was 

their economic development strategy. 

 

And that's why today, Mr. Speaker, we are faced with a $16 

billion debt to which, never in those years did people -- like 

some of the people who are complaining today -- ever object to 

the strategy that the members opposite employed, which was a 

deficit strategy, year after year after year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this 

legislation is going to kill jobs.  It's going to reduce investment 

and it's going to force people out of this province.  And you 

don't have to take my word for it, Mr. Minister. The entire 

business community of this province is telling you that this 

morning. 

 

And your feigned concern for workers is an embarrassment, 

Mr. Deputy Premier.  You're the people that are separating 

workers from their jobs -- just ask my folks in Moose Jaw who 

work at the Woolco store.  Just ask them about their pay 

cheques, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

 

Now you should be looking after the average worker in this 

province and his pay cheque, not your union leader friends who 

are worried about their pay cheques, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

 

I'll quote from the letter again this morning to you, Mr. Deputy 

Premier.  This is the entire business community saying: 

 

 We fear that these new laws will handicap (the) public sector 

managers from pursuing future wage restraints and/or other 

labour contract concessions in order to avoid higher taxes and 

utility rates on all taxpayers in (the province of) 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They're saying to you this morning, Mr. Deputy Premier, the 

entire public sector is being put under pressure by your 

legislation.  If you are such a promoter of deficit reduction, 

why are you transferring this kind of power to union leaders?  

Because it flies in the face of your other policies that you stated 

yourself this spring.  Why are you doing 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, once again I think the 

member opposite speaks in the way that I think does him no 

credit because everything he says is of no relevancy to the 

legislation that's being proposed here. 

 

If there are some positive, concrete suggestions that the 

member from Thunder Creek and the member from 

Souris-Cannington and others might have, then I simply ask 

them: why not get on with the legislation in committee so that 

they can bring their suggestions forward, rather than simply 

trying to make the political statement that they're trying to 

make here today? 

 

Not that I object to political statements, but I think the way that 

they're approaching this really questions whether they really 

mean what they say or whether they're just trying to make that 

political point.  If they have some constructive 

recommendations and suggestions to make, as the government 

has with some of the amendments that have been suggested and 

are being brought forward, then they should let this Bill 

proceed. 

 

Now I want to address the mention the member opposite makes 

about the letter which says that this will handicap public sector 

managers from pursuing future wages restraints.  We're not 

looking at wage restraints.  That's something that's subject to 

bargaining, as it always has been.  That never changes by this 

legislation. 

 

All this legislation does, Mr. Speaker, is provide a fair and 

balanced approach to those kinds of legitimate democratic 

processes which have worked very effectively in the past and 

will work just as effectively, in fact more effectively, in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that 

answer just tells me how out of touch with the world that 

you've become in the last few months.  You're out of ideas 

obviously because your minister went around the province for 

16 months, at least he claims, and he listened to all the ideas.  

Today you're bereft of any of them. 

 

The chamber has called upon you to fire that minister for being 

incompetent.  You laugh.  And now you scoff at the authors of 

the letter.  Well let's just run through them, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, to make sure everybody in the province understands 

who we're talking about here. 

 

The letter is signed, sir, by the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business, Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices 

Association, the Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association, 

the North Saskatoon Business Association, Saskatoon Chamber 

of Commerce, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 

Saskatchewan Construction Association, Saskatchewan Home 

Builders' Association, 

Saskatchewan Restaurant and Foodservices Association, and 

the Association of Concerned Taxpayers of Saskatoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Premier, you've been around the province a 

while, you tell me who's missing -- you tell me who's missing.  

The entire business community is upset with you and your 

Minister of Labour. And you and your Premier can go out and 

try and cut all the side deals you want with a few big business 

people in this province, to try and get somebody to prostitute 

themselves so you can get this legislation through. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Minister, it isn't going to work.  

Would you respond to the people that signed this letter today 

and tell them that you're going to pull this legislation before it 

goes any further? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think the latter words of the 

member opposite, Mr. Speaker, say a great deal.  And I want to 

make it very clear that I stand here and I do not associate 

myself with his comments that people in the business 

community are prostituting themselves in this process. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that may be . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Apologize for that.  That, Mr. Speaker, may be 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Apologize for character, 

apologize for it.  That may be shading what is parliamentary 

acceptable, Mr. Speaker, but I can say to the member from 

Thunder Creek and the members of the official opposition that 

in the public mind . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If members continue, question period 

will be over soon.  The Deputy Premier . . . Order.  His 

colleague has to give him the opportunity to answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Although I am tempted, Mr. 

Speaker, so it's clearly on the record, I will not repeat what I 

have just said.  I think the way the member has addressed this 

speaks for itself.  I want to say that we don't associate ourselves 

with that kind of view of concerns that people have. 

 

We appreciate as a government legitimate concerns that 

anybody has in our society -- whether it's working people or 

whether it's the business community -- and we have shown that 

we appreciate legitimate concerns by recognizing many of 

them and have brought forward recommendations to this 

legislation. 

 

And we will continue to listen to legitimate concerns, Mr. 

Speaker, as soon as the members opposite get off the delaying 

tactics and begin dealing with the legislation so that they can 

tell us what their positive alternatives are; and then we'll get on 

with the business of this province, which is what the people of 

Saskatchewan expects us to do as legislators. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Crown Lease Rates 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

today is for the Minister of Agriculture.  When your 

government was drafting its so-called vision for agriculture, it 

commissioned a study that identified obstacles to this vision.  

One of the obstacles identified was regressive economics.  It 

indicated that provincial economic strategies have retarded 

growth in the farming sector, as evidenced in a drop in net farm 

incomes, and has Saskatchewan leading the country in farm 

bankruptcies, Mr. Minister. 

 

Would you agree, Mr. Minister, that the Saskatchewan farming 

sector still has many obstacles to overcome? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the 

member opposite, I thank him for that question.  Certainly 

agriculture has many obstacles to overcome in this province.  

It's been like that since day one. 

 

Our government has made a lot of progress in that regard.  We 

have an ag equity fund, Mr. Speaker, that was announced in 

this year's budget -- $20 million to help farmers diversify. 

 

We have over 45 per cent of the arable land in the country of 

Canada; we have 3 per cent of the population.  We certainly do 

what we can. 

 

There is a federal responsibility here, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member opposite does not seem to understand.  They continue 

to do things like cut the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation 

Act) subsidy by 5 per cent in the federal budget, which affects 

our farmers in Saskatchewan by millions of dollars.  I wish 

they would join with us in trying to improve the agricultural 

community across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, many 

Saskatchewan farm families rely on leasing Crown land to 

make their farming operations viable.  Without this Crown 

land, many farmers would have to declare bankruptcy.  A 

farmer from Shaunavon just received a letter, signed by your 

department, that says his rent for the grazing land he's leasing 

from you is going up by more than 13 per cent, and his leased 

cultivated land is going up by 10 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you confirm that Crown lease rates are 

going up right across Saskatchewan, and tell us why?  Mr. 

Minister, you agree there are obstacles; now tell us why you are 

one of the obstacles. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the 

member opposite, I'm sure he's quite aware that leased land in 

the province of Saskatchewan is based on a formula, depending 

on the product - the price of livestock, for an example, and the 

price of grain, for an example.  As those prices increase, lease 

rates increase accordingly.  If in fact prices decrease or fall, 

lease rates fall, so it's a system that works well in the 

agricultural community.  And it proves I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that if indeed lease fees are going up, is that farm 

income also looks better. 

 

The farmers in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, and indeed 

across the province are a lot more optimistic this year.  They 

certainly would appreciate more federal aid, especially in the 

north-east where we had some snowfall and some damage to 

our crops.  But we will do the best we can as a provincial 

government and we would ask that the federal government and 

the federal Agriculture minister, Mr. Goodale, join with us to 

help the farm community in Saskatchewan and indeed across 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1045) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I don't think I have to warn the 

member from Shaunavon that kind of tolerance is simply not 

accepted. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well let's have some fairness. 

 

The Speaker: -- I will ask the member from Shaunavon to 

please withdraw that statement and apologize to this House.  I 

asked the member from Shaunavon to please apologize, 

withdraw that statement and apologize to this House. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I withdraw the statement, Mr. Speaker, of 

asking for fairness for the third party.  I apologize. 

 

The Speaker: -- I will warn the member once more to 

uncategorically withdraw that statement and apologize to the 

House. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I withdraw the statement and apologize, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Thank you.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray: -- With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 

colleagues.  Mr. Speaker, I'm delighted to introduce to you and 

through you to my colleagues in the legislature, a constituent of 

mine seated in the west gallery, Ruth King.  She is 

accompanied today by two friends visiting from Scotland.  

They are Anthony and Charlotte Blythe and they run a kennel 

in the Highlands of Scotland. 

 

I'm actually looking forward to meeting them to find out what 

sort of dogs they have, perhaps Scottish deer-hounds.  They've 

rented a camper and they are touring Canada.  And I would ask 

everyone here to join me in welcoming them to Regina.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Public Health 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time the minister to introduce 

the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I'd like 

to introduce the officials who are with me at this moment.  On 

my immediate right is Mr. Dan Perrins, the associate deputy, 

and on my left is Mr. Louis Corkery, the public health 

inspections program branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, and 

welcome to your officials this morning. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you would, prior to the passage of 

this piece of legislation, if you would care to give us a brief 

explanation as to the purpose of this Bill.  I know you've 

outlined it somewhat in second readings, but I just wondered if 

you had anything that you would like to add to your 

explanation at that time; and as well to, for the information of 

the general public, to bring them up to date on the content of 

this Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, the 

legislation allows us to become more effective with respect to 

preventing, investigating, and controlling non-communicable 

diseases and injuries.  It also has provisions in it requiring 

physicians to report information concerning injuries, deaths, 

birth defects, or other illnesses, for example.  And in this 

fashion we will be able to learn more, Mr. Speaker, about new 

diseases or those occurring in unexplainable ways, in the hope 

that we can identify diseases somewhat earlier -- diseases that 

cause such illnesses. 

 

The communicable diseases are also dealt with in the Act.  

Around the world more and more people are living with HIV 

(human immunodeficiency virus) or AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome), and we've been hearing about hepatitis 

C in the legislature and the press in the last few days.  This 

legislation protects the privacy of individuals with respect to 

HIV and AIDS, while at the same time strengthening our 

ability to limit the spread of the fatal disease. 

 

So the Bill is designed then, Mr. Chair, to protect the health of 

our communities by ensuring the people of Saskatchewan have 

better public health services with respect to illnesses, and have 

access to clean water and safe food and milk.  It continues our 

ability to control communicable disease and also allows 

communities to assess the risk of health hazards and take steps 

to prevent or remedy them. 

It's also, Mr. Speaker, ground-breaking in the sense that this 

legislation recognizes the importance of controlling 

non-communicable diseases as a top priority for a modern 

health system -- diseases such as cancer, heart disease, 

diabetes, cerebral vascular diseases.  These we know are killers 

today in society and, to a remarkable degree, are preventable.  

So we are learning to pay more attention to their treatment.  

And this Bill recognizes the need to pay more attention to those 

particular diseases. 

 

So generally then it is an update of The Public Health Act, 

bringing us more in line with what the general direction that we 

feel we should be moving, and it allows us also to make public 

health services very much a part of health reform. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister.  I 

wonder if you could tell us whom you've consulted with prior 

to the drafting of this piece of legislation and what the results 

of those consultations were. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the first consultation round 

we consulted with a very broad range of people.  For example 

the Acupuncture Foundation of Canada, Agriculture of Canada, 

AIDS Regina, AIDS Saskatoon, The Arthritis Society, 

Association of Professional Engineers of Saskatchewan, Bahia 

Faith, Canadian Cancer Society, Canadian College of Family 

Physicians, Canadian Institute of Public Health Inspectors.  

And I could send the list over to the member.  It goes on for 

three pages, three full pages. 

 

So I'll just . . . the college of dental surgeons, College of 

Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, community health 

administrators, Consumers' Association, Epilepsy Regina, 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Fort Qu'Appelle 

tribal council, Heart & Stroke Foundation, Meadow Lake 

Tribal Council, National Farmers Union, naturopaths' 

association, regional board chairpersons, the community 

clinics, many, many tribal councils, the dental therapists, 

Dietetic Association, fire commissioners, environment, 

hemophilia, herbalists, Lung Association. 

 

And I'm just picking them off the page as I notice them.  I'm 

certainly not reading out all of the names.  The Water 

Corporation, urban municipalities, Saskatchewan Restaurants, 

Registered Nurses', Public Health Association, and so on.  

What I will do is have a Xerox copy of this made and sent over 

to the member.  Those were our first round of consultations. 

 

The second round of consultations were with people who had 

raised some questions and we went back and talked to them 

further about it.  That was AIDS Regina, AIDS Saskatoon, all 

PSB program directors, community health and epidemiology, 

U of S (University of Saskatchewan), Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Legislative Review Committee 

of branch, medical services branch, medical health officers, 

Midwest Health Board, northern health services, occupational 

health and safety, P.A. (Prince Albert) Health Board, Provincial 

Lab, Regina Health Board, regional nursing 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

supervisors, SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission), Saskatchewan Education, Saskatchewan 

Environment, Saskatchewan Public Health Association, 

Saskatoon Health Board, senior deputy minister, senior public 

health officers, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), technical advisory committee, treatment 

services branch. 

 

So the consultations have been enormously extensive, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You certainly have 

. . . you and your department certainly have done your 

homework with respect to this piece of legislation, and I 

applaud your efforts for the extensive consultation that you 

have gone through and completed. 

 

You missed the second part of my question.  The past question 

was: what were the results of those consultations and did those 

groups have direct input into the legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have been advised by the department 

that the concerns have been resolved.  There is one concern that 

was raised by medical health officers inasmuch as they wanted 

that title in the legislation itself.  And we chose instead to refer 

to them as designated public health officers to give us a little 

more flexibility.  But the medical health officers will be the 

designated public health officers in virtually all of the cases.  

The regulations are going to be clarifying that a little further.  

That was one issue that was brought to our attention. 

 

Another concern was the cost of water and sewer in some of 

our northern communities and the legislation was changed in 

order to accommodate those concerns by requiring a very 

extensive consultation process with respect to that particular 

section before anything is done. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair.  Madam 

Minister, we just have a few questions here of a specific nature 

with respect to the Bill I wonder if we could deal with at this 

time. 

 

Could you please explain the criteria required for the position 

of public health officers presently and is there any change 

whatsoever after Bill 28 comes into effect? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- In the former legislation, the public 

health officers were the medical health officers.  And in effect 

they had to have knowledge of environmental health, and some 

communicable disease training, and knowledge of health 

hazard abatement. 

 

In the new legislation, the criteria required for the position of 

public health officer will not be changed -- there's no change in 

that regard -- except what we will do is allow a broader range 

of health professionals 

to participate as public health officers.  Not only will it be 

medical health officers, but it will be public health inspectors, 

public health nurses, and there might be some other professions 

that will be able to meet the criteria that has always been 

required of an individual to fill this position. 

 

The reason for doing that, of course, is one of the goals of 

health reform is to use health professionals more fully, to 

expand the role of nurses, for example, to have health 

professionals working in a more coordinated fashion.  

Therefore we think we can expand the sort of people who are 

considered to be designated public health officers, providing 

they meet the criteria that was set out -- which is knowledge of 

environmental health, communicable disease training, and 

knowledge of health hazard abatement. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Chairman, by leave I would like to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce some 

visitors that are in the Speaker's gallery.  First of all, I believe 

there are 12 Big River Pathfinders, ages 12 to 14, seated in the 

gallery.  They are here to tour the legislature and to observe 

what is taking place in the Assembly. And after I have 

introduced another group that is also in the Speaker's gallery, I 

would like the members to welcome them here to the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Jack Langford, the member for the 

constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River, I believe I have as 

well the opportunity to introduce 30 grade 12 students from the 

Shellbrook School who are here to tour the legislative buildings 

and observe the activities of the Assembly this morning.  Colin 

Neudorf is a teacher that is with them today. 

 

And with the Pathfinders we have Leah Scriven and Ms. Carla 

Blampin, who are with the Pathfinders as well.  And I'd like to 

ask the members to welcome them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 28 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, now I guess 

we have . . . it appears that . . . I understand the Health minister 

has to be away and I guess her partner actually is looking after 

the questions now, and I'm sure he can deal with them 

adequately. 

 

Regarding section 14 within the piece of legislation; when 

discussing water supplies and sewage disposal, I understand 

that the municipality is responsible for a supply of potable 

water, for the disposal of sewage. 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

 Are there any costs at all involved to municipalities through 

this Act for that provision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is, to the member 

opposite, Mr. Chairman, is that the regulations as they exist, 

already impact here and this is moving it into legislation.  The 

only area where there may be some rearrangement of costs is in 

northern Saskatchewan, where it hasn't applied up until now, 

but there will be consultation and negotiations that will go on 

before anything is done there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, section 

32 deals with communicable diseases.  And I'm sure that 

everyone agrees that government should do everything possible 

to control these diseases.  This section deals with teachers, 

doctors, etc., reporting such diseases and then compiling the 

information. 

 

Will this legislation help people like Vicki Lissel, whom I'm 

hoping your officials are familiar with the situation -- the 

woman who has contracted the hepatitis C through tainted 

blood.  Will the program be grandfathered for research, etc.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I would indicate to 

the member that this section 32 of The Public Health Act 

doesn't affect funding at all, but merely reporting.  And so this 

section in itself will have no effect one way or the other on the 

review and discussions that are going on on the case that you 

mentioned. 

 

What this does is merely set out the reporting mechanism as it 

would relate to the section. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Section 

35 states that: 

 

 A . . . public health officer who receives a list of contacts 

pursuant to section 34 shall promptly notify the persons 

named in that list that they have been exposed to . . . 

communicable disease(s) . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't this the situation with individuals who have 

contracted hepatitis C?  According to a recent article, there are 

an estimated 140,000 people -- I presume that is nationwide -- 

walking around with this disease.  Maybe that's even 

worldwide, for all I know -- and most which don't know it. 

 

What are you going to do to see that Saskatchewan people who 

have received transfusions, etc., who could have contracted the 

hepatitis C virus, are contacted and tested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- To the member, I want to say that in 

section 35 we're really not talking or relating to medical 

procedures -- as you indicate as one example, transfusions.  

The Public Health Act, as it's written, really deals with personal 

contact, one on one, as opposed to medical procedures, so it 

really wouldn't impact on medical procedures such as 

transfusions that might have caused problems for people. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I guess what we're asking in that situation, 

Mr. Minister, is . . . we're dealing with communicable diseases, 

and hepatitis C being one of those, we think it important that in 

light of the Vicki Lissel situation and other people like her that 

your department contact these people who have received 

transfusions and notify them of the difficulties that may be 

associated with it and provide some testing procedures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll take that under advisement.  As I 

mentioned, section 35 doesn't deal with it but your comments 

are well taken.  And I'll take that concern that you have back.  

And you may want to follow up on it on another day in a 

different forum.  But as it would relate to section 35, it doesn't 

have impact.  But I certainly understand the concern that you 

have and I'm sure it's reflected in many other people who have 

concerns about the potential of contracting some disease 

through a medical procedure.  But as it would relate to this Bill, 

it does not have impact. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, with 

respect to public health nurses, we've received a number of 

letters from public health nurses and they all are expressing 

concern over the recent reclassification of dental health 

educators, class no. 605210 to the positions of health educator 

2, class 108082. 

 

Mr. Minister, the job description for the health educator 2 states 

that the incumbent will possess a university degree or extensive 

experience in journalism, public relations, advertising, related 

fields of communication.  The incumbent will possess broad 

general knowledge of the problems related to diet, 

communicable disease control, immunization, cancer, 

tuberculosis, and sex education; that they will stimulate, 

coordinate, plan and organize all health education activities 

under the direction of the regional medical health officer; that 

they may supervise the work of the professional and clerical 

employees performing duties related to the public health 

education process. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is how the job description reads, yet the 

employees have been reclassified and I understand also 

received a $6,000 per year raise . . . possess training and 

education which focuses on a single, specific aspect of health 

education, dental health.  This is not what the job description 

states. 

 

Public health nurses are concerned that this could threaten the 

quality and standard of health education provided presently to 

the people of Saskatchewan.  They are concerned that this does 

not meet the stated qualification or possess the skills and basic 

knowledge to function as described in the job description of 

health educator 2. 

 

Further, Mr. Minister, public health nurses already possess this 

qualification; skills and ability outlined in the health educator 2 

job description.  They already provide health education on a 

broad range of topics including dental health to people of all 

ages in the 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

communities they serve.  Given these facts, why was it 

necessary, Mr. Minister, to create a health educator 2 position 

and who authorized the reclassification? 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate 

that the changes came as a result of a request for 

reclassification from the dental health hygienists who applied 

for reclassification.  The Public Service Commission saw this 

new established class of health education 2 position as being 

the way through this. 

 

And I think what has happened here is that in the 

reclassification, is I think you are indicating there was a salary 

increase that possibly bumped them slightly ahead of public 

health nurses.  There is discussions going on at the present time 

to make sure that that playing-field is not out of sync too much; 

and so without putting too fine a point on it, if there has been 

some unlevelling of the field here, negotiations are going on to 

hopefully bring a resolve to that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think you probably 

have answered my next question with respect to that but we'll 

deal with it anyway.  If the newly-created health educators 2 

are to be compensated at the level outlined in the current 

agreement, the range has been set at $2,915 to $3,583 per 

month.  Public health nurses have a Bachelor of Science in 

nursing and a much broader knowledge base than health 

educator 2, yet the current salary range, with a Bachelor of 

Science in nursing, is between $2,893 and $3,319.  And 

obviously there is some inequity in there and I guess you've 

recognized that.  Do you have anything further to add to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, I really can't add a lot to what 

I've said, except that we'll continue to review if there are 

discrepancies in that salary area.  But I think what it does point 

out is the need for a further review of the whole classification 

structure in that area as we move into the wellness model, 

where more preventative work is being done and the role of the 

nurse, and particularly the health nurse, takes on new meaning. 

 

So it's been recognized and I think solutions and options are 

being worked out. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, is it true that dental health 

educators do not possess a university degree, that their 

education was completed at a technical college? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding that the new 

specs -- for the member opposite -- that the new specifications 

that will be coming out will actually require an academic 

degree.  So you may have some who are already working in the 

system who don't have an academic degree, but that will 

change in the near future. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- According to the job description, it sounds as if 

the dental nurses will be teaching children in the province of 

Saskatchewan about sex education, cancer, etc.  No offence, 

Mr. Minister, but they are 

dental educators, not health educators.  Don't you think that 

perhaps something should be done about this type of situation?  

Or is it a done deal?  Or are you looking into this situation 

further, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I think the specs here have 

already been changed to limit the area of qualifications to the 

dental area.  And so I think your concerns are probably already 

taken care of. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We're hopeful that that 

is indeed the situation and I think that we'll be watching that to 

see that that is rectified. 

 

How many individuals were affected by this reclassification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The best information I have, to the 

member, is between 16 and 20.  I'll get you the exact number 

but something between 16 and 20.  And this is the best 

information we have at this time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Are these people all being transferred to the 

district health boards?  Will they be under the jurisdiction of 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, they will be part of the staff 

that will devolve to the health boards. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you tell me what the total increased cost to 

the taxpayer, by this reclassification, is for this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I don't think we have that detail here 

but I can make the commitment to get that for you within the 

next . . . let's say in the next week I'll send you a note that will 

give it to you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That concludes the 

questions I have on this piece of legislation at least for the time 

being. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

appreciate the opportunity today to speak on this Bill.  I can see 

some benefits in assembling this Bill but I can see that this Bill 

also raises some considerable concerns.  I intend to outline 

some of those concerns and then depose some relevant 

questions particular to the specifics of this Act. 

 

First I wish to say that there is considerable merit in having all 

public health matters brought together into a single Bill and I 

admire this.  It creates clarity and order in government 

regulation which is an important aim to be achieved.  Also the 

Act appears to streamline public health enforcement measures.  

In an age of considerable government regulation, it is wise to 

also make the enforcement of laws an orderly process. 

 

But this Bill has implications that go far beyond the mechanics 

of regulation and law making.  This Bill permits cabinet to 

delegate the responsibility to administer and enforce the Act, 

and to offer public health services through local authorities.  

This Bill is the part of government's process of implementing 

their wellness model of health care.  The Act makes 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

public health a community-based service, makes public health a 

local responsibility, and places the administration of public 

health at the local level.  Is this the right thing to do?  Is this 

being done right?  I hope our discussion today will enlighten 

these questions. 

 

Public health matters are often local matters.  The outbreak of a 

communicable disease, the protection of potable drinking 

water, or the control of tainted food are all primarily local 

matters deserving local attention to local interests.  But this is 

perhaps a simple view; there is more to managing public health 

than local attention to local interests. 

 

The move to transfer public health to the local level could be 

seen as a bold . . . bald attempt to offload provincial 

responsibility.  When the government enters into agreements 

with local authorities, the Act in clause 7 places the obligation 

on local authorities to administer and enforce provincial laws.  

Some could see this move as expedient, but just as easily this 

can be viewed as an effort on the part of the government to pass 

off its obligation to regulate matters in the public interest. 

 

Instead of the province doing a job of administration and 

enforcement to the standards it sets for itself in the public's 

interest, the move can just as easily be seen as a way to pass off 

that responsibility.  It makes the local agencies responsible to 

live up to the standards the government sets.  In effect this 

could be viewed as balkanization of the system.  By breaking 

up the administration of public health into small, near 

independent pieces, there's a potential risk of inconsistencies. 

 

The Act, nor the department which is responsible for the Act, 

creates no mechanisms for centralizing important functions.  

There is no assurance of common, shared quality control; and 

because there will be a multiplicity of agencies facing different 

circumstances in different places, there is a risk of extra effort 

to coordinate activities and a risk of inconsistent application of 

the law.  In fact clause no. 8 of the Act ensures that the minister 

may exercise any powers already conferred on the local 

authority.  The clause anticipates and permits the duplication of 

efforts. 

 

Well presumably the government's intent is to protect the 

public interest. It is doing so by incurring additional and 

perhaps unnecessary cost.  While there appears to be some 

appeal to passing public health to local control, there also 

appears to be some hidden dangers. 

 

Mr. Minister, regarding clause 4.  Please describe the nature of 

the contracts to be undertaken between local authorities and the 

government.  In particular what would be the nature of the 

agreements with Indian bands?  Will there be any differences 

between these agreements and those with the district health 

boards? 

 

(1130) 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member that 

what section 4 does, of the Public Health Bill, is basically 

empower through the Act to allow for this kind of contract to 

be established. 

 

It doesn't mean that in every case there will be that 

arrangement, but it will be allowed, and will be part of the 

operation if that is the choice.  I want to say as well that this 

already exists with the municipal government whereby some of 

these services are being offered at the municipal level already.  

And also in some other provinces we see this working very 

well, so this is not something that is new. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Do district 

health boards have an option to not undertake public health 

services if it feels this is in the best interests of the people 

within the district? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- At the present time there will be 

encouragement given to doing it through the health board but it 

will not be a requirement. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Who is responsible to oversee these 

contracts?  In particular, how would the department achieve 

quality control in the delivery of public health services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of 

Health will be responsible for overseeing and making sure that 

the services are provided. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- How will you define the level of 

acceptable performance of public health services by the district 

health boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- First of all there will be standards 

established, obviously, by which statistical analysis will then be 

charted to see that the outcomes are at a level that is necessary.  

And so you will basically see standards being established and 

then health outcomes will be charted on a statistical basis.  And 

it will be a controlled system where we will be able to follow 

very carefully the needs of the public and the results that are 

forthcoming from the changes that occur. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Along with 

passing off responsibility, the proposed Public Health Act 

raises a serious question about the financial resources required 

by local authorities to fulfil obligations under the Act. 

 

The Act and the wellness model as a whole transfers the 

obligation to provide a service without the certainty of funding 

to fulfil these obligations.  There's a provision in clause 5 for 

the government to make grants to local authorities, but there is 

not assurance that the funding will endure, or whether the 

funding will be adjusted in parallel with changes in the level of 

service expected. 

 

There may also be a risk of duplicated spending for 

administration.  There'll be many district health 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

boards starting up public health services and each of them will 

be incurring start-up costs.  It is likely these costs will overlap.  

As well, there is no mention of the start-up monies for local 

authorities to administer public health similar to the start-up 

grants for health boards. 

 

Regarding clause 5, Mr. Minister, I wish to ask:  will there be a 

start-up grant to district health boards for public health 

services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As it now stands, there is 

discussions going on with SAHO (Saskatchewan Association 

of Health Organizations) to see exactly what is needed in terms 

of financing or grants that might be needed.  But obviously 

there will be a flow-through of money for public health. 

 

And your argument that somehow it's more at risk being at the 

local level than it was at the central level, I simply don't buy 

that argument.  Because whether you cut the overall budget 

within the Health department or whether you do it once you 

have it within a health board, I think it could easily be argued 

that it's much more difficult once you have locally established 

boards with certain budgets set up to reduce all of them around 

the province than it would be to simply, at budget time, cut the 

budget of a certain area of government. 

 

So I don't think that should be of a concern to the health care 

providers within the system, because what we're proposing to 

do is flow the money through to the local boards, and we would 

certainly want to make sure that a continuation was there in 

order that the services would be provided to the public in a 

more meaningful and appropriate way. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Will local 

authorities be able to recover the costs of the services from the 

clients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, really nothing in that sense will 

change.  The department at the present time, if they decided to, 

I guess could charge a fee for service for various services.  The 

same will be true of the local boards.  However there will be a 

monitoring process and the ability of the minister to have 

control over fees that might be suggested to be charged. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Are you satisfied, Mr. Minister, that the 

local authorities will be able to continue to fund public health 

services over the long haul? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, there's no reason to doubt that 

the monies that are needed to protect public health will be 

available.  So I would expect the funding to be properly put in 

place to make sure that the public health and safety is taken 

care of. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- What will be the cost for the district health 

boards to inherit the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union) deal for the transfer of employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, as I understand it, 

there'll be no increase or decrease in the cost of staffing as the 

people will . . . positions will move along with the people and 

the contracts will basically remain in place.  So there will be no 

change in the amount of funds needed for staffing purposes. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In some respects 

the process to transfer public health responsibilities to local 

authorities creates a two-tier system.  On one hand there will be 

the districts created from existing public health agencies in 

Regina and Saskatoon.  Then there will be a second tier of local 

authorities, those just starting out and organizing themselves to 

offer public health services.  The established operations in 

Regina and Saskatoon will have . . . well of course they'll have 

the head start and in effect the other districts will be lagging 

behind. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you anticipated this differential?  And if so, 

what will be the effect on public health services in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The changes that will occur will not 

be different in the city versus in the rural from what's 

happening at the present time.  Already we have a very diverse 

and decentralized operation for public health. 

 

And basically what will happen is the employees will transfer 

from the department to the regional boards as the negotiation 

contracts are set in place.  But we don't foresee any change 

from their present pattern and delivery of service that occurs at 

the present time, that is, the quality of service in any way being 

diminished.  In fact quite obviously our intent is, is that the 

system will be improved by having the local input and local 

involvement. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, how will the funding 

authorizations change in Regina and Saskatoon, and will their 

grants continue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member should know that at 

the present time there is a municipal round table that is dealing 

with the issue of funding.  But my understanding is that at the 

present time the funding arrangement is 50/50; and as the 

change occurs, it will remain at 50/50. 

 

Now if there is something comes out of the round table 

discussions that would nudge that one way or the other, then 

that change would occur.  But my understanding is at the 

present time it's 50/50, and that basically remains intact. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm also concerned about the 

potential for this devolution of responsibilities to overload the 

early efforts of the new district health boards.  These are new 

organizations wrestling with the new realities of local 

responsibilities.  It's possible that the government is demanding 

too much of the new district health boards at once.  For this, 

there may be a risk of the quality of care deteriorating during 

the shake-out phase, I guess. 

 

In respect to clause 10, is there a plan to ensure that 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

there are an adequate number of public health professionals in 

every district? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member that as 

the devolution occurs, it will really happen at a pace that will 

be set by the districts as opposed to the department.  There will 

be no dumping out of public health provisions from the 

department to the community boards.  In fact it will be done at 

a pace that will be much more in tune to the readiness of the 

health board.  And so the member should know that there'll be 

a great deal of consultation and it will be really at the will of 

the health board that the transfer or the devolution will occur. 

 

Now one should know that we are obviously encouraging the 

change so we'll be working diligently with the health boards to 

get them ready for the transfer, but they will have to give us the 

green light before the change will actually occur. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Part III of the Act describes guidelines for 

water supplies, sewage disposal, food, the environmental health 

protection. 

 

I have a number of specific questions in the part regarding 

clause 14.  Clause 14(2) gives hamlets and towns time to 

remedy public health concerns with potable water and sewage 

disposal.  How many hamlets and towns do not now meet the 

requirements of this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll get that for you, to the member 

from Shaunavon.  I don't have that with me, but I can get that 

for you and get it back to you, let's say within a week or so. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Will there be 

any specific financial support from the provincial government 

to upgrade water and sewer systems to meet minimum 

standards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well certainly not through this Act.  

There's no provision for that kind of funding.  But through 

Municipal Government, as you probably know, there is already 

in place a program of assistance for treatment.  But that would 

have to be negotiated with Municipal Government.  Within this 

Act, there is no provision for funding for upgrading or 

treatment. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, how long do you anticipate 

that these towns will require to satisfy the requirements of The 

Public Health Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There won't be a deadline as such, 

nor do I think there ever can be, because this really is an 

ongoing piece of work.  As you know, good quality water and 

sewage treatment is not something that will someday all be 

done and we can be finished with, so there really is no deadline 

as to when this will be completed. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 15(b), 

the Act does not allow non-potable 

water to be offered to the public, but then provides for an 

exception.  Why would the regulations permit a non-potable to 

be made available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The exemption, I guess, already 

exists in regulations.  And the one that the member might be . . 

. if you think about it, in some of the cottage areas for example 

where lake water is used within the system for non-drinking 

water, where this kind of thing is allowed, obviously it makes 

logical sense that you wouldn't demand a different kind of 

system in those areas.  So this is a circumstance that you would 

probably be aware of. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 17, the 

Act no longer permits the sale of whole milk at the farm gate.  

What impact do you expect this to have on family farm income, 

and how many dairy operations do you think this will affect?. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As the member may be aware -- I 

wasn't -- but this actually was a federal law passed in 1991, so 

you may lean over to the member from Kindersley and find out 

why the federal government did that.  But seriously, this is a 

flow-through of a federal Act which, in seriousness, because of 

serious problems that can occur from unpasteurized milk, we 

are simply putting in place and standardizing our law as it 

would relate to the federal law. 

 

But we're going one step further than that and setting up a set 

of guidelines whereby farm families will know the regulations 

and the process for pasteurizing milk on farm, so they will then 

be able to continue to sell milk if it's part of their business 

operation. 

 

So just so you're aware, this is merely a levelling out of the law 

as it would apply at the provincial level and the federal level. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  With respect to 

clause 19, the  Act provides for a local authority to seize food 

that is unfit for human consumption. 

 

Why did the drafters of this legislation feel it necessary to make 

it possible to seize the food but they don't have to destroy it?  In 

effect, the authorities may seize it, let it rot, then return it to the 

owner.  I guess they must do that.  Please explain why this 

clause is written in this way. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to have leave to 

introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seated in the 

Speaker's gallery is a former minister of Finance in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Lorne Hepworth, and I'd like to 

have the members of the Assembly welcome him back to 

Saskatchewan and join with me in doing that. 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And as a former 

critic, Education critic, when Mr. Hepworth was Minister of 

Education and Minister of Continuing Education, it's a pleasure 

to welcome him to the Assembly.  And we all remember him 

for his very famous words as he listened very diligently to all 

the speeches in the House and then mentioned after each one of 

them that that was the worst speech he had ever heard. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to 

also say hello to my good friend, Lorne Hepworth, who is with 

us here today.  Lorne, as you know, is now employed with 

Canadian Agra Corporation in Ontario and we're very 

interested in trying to get Lorne to move back to Saskatchewan.  

And actually I should be having coffee with Lorne right now, 

but you'll understand why I'm not in my office, because I'm 

here. 

 

But I want to say that recently, in attending the Bruce power 

station and a bit of a reception that was put on by the local 

economic development authority, much to my surprise the CEO 

(chief executive officer), Lorne Hepworth, showed up at the 

reception and was good enough to send me, a short time ago, a 

sampling of a certain kind of beverage that is made through 

their operation in Ontario.  And I want to say that those who 

partook in consumption of it said it was very, very good.  So 

thank you very much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, not 

me. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 28 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member 

opposite that as it relates to the seizure of food under section 

19, really there is no change that is occurring here that's 

significant.  This has been the standard procedure in the 

department under the Act for many, many years.  And really 

the Act of seizure of food under these conditions I don't think is 

unusual or unexpected when the health of the public is at risk. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with regard to clause 21, this 

clause requires persons to report a known health hazard to local 

authorities.  Is this intended primarily as a means to punish 

known offenders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  I think if the member were to 

look at the section, basically it says: 

 

 A person who knows of the existence of health hazard and 

who believes that the local authority for the jurisdictional 

area in which the health hazard is located is not aware of the 

health hazard shall notify the local authority. 

It's pretty straightforward, that if you know of a health hazard, 

you should report it. And I don't think it's meant to do anything 

other than protect the interest of the public. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, the Act permits fines to a 

maximum of $75,000; however I'm sure that the fines under 

this clause will vary.  Will there be a schedule of fines within 

the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, there really is no schedule of 

fines.  The way the process works is if the charges are laid in 

fact, the courts would decide what the penalty would be.  So it 

wouldn't come as a fee imposed through this Act but as the 

result of a judgement. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, clause 25 empowers the 

local authority to remove or remedy a health hazard by order 

and then empowers the local authorities to do so without an 

order.  Are there measures to prevent arbitrary actions? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  So the member is aware, there 

will be powers in regulation to establish an appeal mechanism. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- It appears that this may occur without due 

notice.  Is this true?  Is it permissible in federal law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm just unclear as to what the 

member is saying might happen without due notice.  I'm not 

sure what the problem he's raising is. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'll perhaps come back 

to that question in a bit. 

 

The Act indicates that financial assistance may be available 

through the Department of Health.  Will there be an annual 

reserve fund for this purpose?  Is it likely that the funds will be 

available annually? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here again, I'm just not sure what 

you're referring to when you talk about a fund being 

established.  Fund for what purpose?  I'm not sure what the 

fund you're referring to is about.  Is there a clause in the Bill 

that you're working on?  I'm just not clear on what fund you're 

asking about. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Yes, I believe it's in clause 27. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I see, you're talking about the 

appeal.  No, there will be no special fund set up.  But as it says 

in, I guess it's 27(c): "request financial assistance from the 

minister to defray the cost of doing so."  If it were decided that 

it was appropriate, then funds could be allocated but it wouldn't 

come out of a special fund but merely out of the general 

budget. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 28, the 

Act requires a local authority to notify the minister if there are 

possible health hazards to 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

other jurisdictions.  Why does the Act not also require the local 

authority to notify the other jurisdictions in question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the reason it works this way is 

because the Minister of Health is still responsible for the whole 

province. 

 

So if there were problems that were related from the authority 

back to the minister and there was impact or implication in 

other areas of the province, this still falls within the purview of 

the Department of Health and the responsibility of the 

Department of Health to take care of the issue. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- With respect to clause 31, the Act defines a 

public health officer but it doesn't define a medical health 

officer.  The Act makes no mention of medical health officers 

and is otherwise silent on the distinction of the roles.  And I'm 

wondering, is this an attempt to eliminate the presence of a MD 

(Doctor of Medicine) in the public health system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, not at all.  The medical health 

officer will still be very directly involved but it will be . . . the 

provisions are being prepared right now, as we speak, through 

regulations.  So the role of the medical health officer will still 

be there. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Clause 31 requires doctors to report 

information on non-communicable diseases.  What sort of 

diseases would we be . . . you know, that are involved here, and 

can you give me some examples of occasions where this sort of 

information may be required? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The reason that we would want to 

know the kind of accidents or . . . in this case, the accidents 

might be related to a certain area of the jurisdiction where 

accidents are occurring regularly.  Let's use a railway crossing.  

And if you've had a number of accidents at a certain railway 

crossing, this could be determined to be an area that would 

become important under this section. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I'm not sure if I followed your answer, Mr. 

Minister.  You had referred to accidents and such.  I'd referred 

to non-communicable diseases and what sort of diseases are 

involved, and just some examples of this where the information 

may be required. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Let's say in your area of the 

province for example, there has been -- I think in the Climax 

area -- a concern about MS (multiple sclerosis) and what seems 

to be, to some people, an overly increasing number of MS 

conditions in the Climax area.  If that is noticed, then that 

would be one of the areas that might be of concern, and then 

further discussion and investigation that would go into it. 

 

Cancer, if you noticed in a certain area that there was a higher 

rate of a certain kind of cancer, that might be another area that 

would have impact. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Part IV of the Act provides a 

thorough set of guidelines with respect to reporting information 

on communicable diseases as well as measures for the control 

of epidemics.  I have a number of questions about this, both of 

a general nature as well as some specific questions. 

 

First, you have created two different categories of diseases, 

class I and class II.  Is this classification recognized nationally 

and internationally? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  No, we have developed our 

own system here in Saskatchewan, so it's not a national or 

international . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to move on to 

clause 31(1).  Does the obligation on doctors and nurses to 

report information in accordance with this clause conflict with 

their professional ethics?  And what advice have you received 

from the College of Physicians and Surgeons and SUN 

(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, we've consulted with them and 

they have expressed no concern about this section. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Clauses 33 to 36 of part IV replaces the 

venereal disease control Act.  Is there any risk of creating 

excessive levels of obligation and control on people in this 

legislation now that an Act specifically designed to manage this 

is now being repealed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, we don't think so.  It's just that 

all the powers are now in The Public Health Act. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, to what extent does this Act 

provide for confidentiality after due notification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the department treats 

confidentiality as a very, very important issue.  The staff in the 

department and in the area are well aware of this, and so it's 

also dealt with within the Act.  So confidentiality, as you are 

indicating, is of concern and is a very important issue. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, clause 31(3) requires persons 

diagnosed as having a non-treatable category II disease to "take 

all reasonable measures to reduce significantly the risk of 

infecting others, . . ."  In the case of AIDS victims, will the 

government regularly exercise its power to fine persons up to 

$75,000 for not taking reasonable precautions? 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if I might have the leave of the 

committee to introduce a guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Chair: -- Today is the last day for page, Lesley Strelioff, 

who'll be moving on to another job.  To observe her from the 

gallery, to make sure things go 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

well on her last day on the job, is her mother, Isabelle Strelioff 

from Saskatoon.  I wonder if we might extend her a warm 

welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1215) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 28 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  The Act wants to obviously 

try to stem the spread of HIV, and in doing that the logical 

thing that the medical officer may want to do is try to isolate 

the individual in order that the disease is not spread.  But as 

you know, this is a very, very complicated area.  The Criminal 

Code comes into effect where . . . could come into effect where 

somebody knowingly spreads the HIV.  And so it's a broad 

spectrum of actions that can be taken here.  And as the member 

might be aware, that many remedies are looked at before 

penalties or fines are considered. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, then to what extent 

will the government enforce and punish persons known to 

contravene this section of the Act?  How far are you prepared 

to go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We have not had a problem with 

cooperation of people who have had . . . let's use HIV as an 

example only, but there are other communicable diseases.  But 

we don't see a huge problem in this area with cooperation.  It 

hasn't been a problem in the past and we don't see that 

occurring now.  So your words punishment really haven't been 

appropriate and I don't think would be appropriate in the future. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 38, 

clause 38(2) specifies requirements that may be placed on a 

person in an order.  With regard to subsection (g), do any of 

these restrictions contravene the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code?  And what advice have you received from Crown 

solicitors on this aspect of the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, our understanding is there's no 

conflict with the Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- With regard to subsection (k), do any of 

these restrictions contravene citizens' rights under the 

constitution, and what advice have you received on the matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, it's my understanding that all 

these sections have been gone through by Justice, and we find 

none of them that are in conflict with the Human Rights Code 

or any federal regulations. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 44(1), 

a teacher or a principal may exclude a pupil from school who is 

suspected of having a 

communicable disease.  What would be the government's 

policy in respect to children infected with the AIDS virus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the only time the department 

might act is if a medical health officer would . . . who may be 

consulted by the school or be called in to do an examination 

would advise that certain procedures be set in place.  So the 

Department of Health wouldn't of its own volition become 

involved directly except on the advice and consultation of a 

medical health officer. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- With respect to clause 46(1), to what 

extent are the current regulations up to date and how long will 

it take to get the current regulations thoroughly up to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think at the present time we've got 

the regulations about half completed and I'm just not sure on 

how long the balance will take.  But my officials assure me 

they're working diligently on completing the task.  It is a very, 

very important piece of work and not an easy one because this 

is a complicated area.  But our expectations are that the work 

will be completed in the not-too-distant future. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 

53(1)(g), the Act states that a public health officer may require 

a person to produce records if requested.  How does the 

requirements under this Act correspond to the requirements of 

the freedom of information and privacy Act and the Human 

Rights Code? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I said earlier, all sections have 

gone to the Department of Justice, and the freedom of 

information requirements, along with all of the Human Rights 

Code law, would have implications.  So whatever the 

application of the various regulations, they would be met by 

this Act. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to clause 

65(2)(c), would the Minister of Health publicly announce the 

identity of an AIDS victim, believing it to be in the public 

interest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, it's not considered here under 

the section that you mentioned that the minister would ever 

publicly name a person who has been infected with HIV. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's the 

conclusion of my remarks, so I thank you and your officials 

today. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 79 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act respecting the Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

introduce the officials who have joined us here for this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd like to introduce to you first 

Maureen Yeske, the executive director of the health planning 

and policy development branch, and, Maureen, welcome here 

today; Diane Neill, legislation officer, who is seated to my left, 

and Gerry Tagert, Crown solicitor in Justice, who is seated to 

my right.  And I look forward to questions from the opposition 

members. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we just 

have a few questions on this piece of legislation.  I wonder if 

you would care to take the -- before the legislation passes this 

afternoon -- I wonder if you could take a few moments to 

describe the purpose of this Bill and the new Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission. 

 

(1230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Probably easiest, Mr. Chairman, if I 

just run through a few points of what the Bill is anticipated to 

do.  First of all, the legislation will establish the commission, 

setting out the number of members and the terms of their 

appointment.  Secondly, it will enable the commission to hire 

staff.  Third, set out the objectives of the commission, including 

the funding for research. 

 

It will give power to the commission so that it can fulfil its 

objectives.  It will establish the fiscal year and provide for the 

auditing and the annual report to be submitted to the 

Legislative Assembly and will enable the minister to request 

special reports.  And finally, enable the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to make regulations with respect to the commission 

and its operation. 

 

That's been a thumbnail sketch as to what the Act is intended to 

do. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Section 5 deals with the 

commission members.  It states by OC (order in council) 

remuneration and reimbursement for travelling and living 

expenses will be set out. 

 

Do you have any idea what these sums will be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I understand it, there are 2, 4, 6, 

8, 10, 12 individuals on the Health Services Utilization and 

Research Commission -- 12 people.  And of those, four of them 

actually get an honorarium.  Stewart McMillan gets an annual 

retainer of $20,000; Geraldine Dickinson, an honorarium of 

$200; and Meredith Moore, $325; and Richard Twanow, $325.  

The balance, eight people, receive no remuneration. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Section 12 states that 

the commission may make agreements with any person, 

agency, organization, association, or institution.  Is there any 

cap on the dollar amount the commission can spend or is it an 

open, blank cheque 

for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the total budget is 2.1 million.  

So it's not open-ended at all; it's limited to that budget for the 

year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, in addition the commission can 

appoint committees, define powers, purchase or lease property.  

What limits are there on the commission's authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the restriction is their budget 

and also the fact that they, I think, have about $1 million in 

direct grants.  So that would reduce their operating budget 

really, if you look at it that way, to about 1.1 million.  So that's 

the global budget that they have to work within. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that the 

annual report will be prepared and presented each year.  What 

sort of budget and support staff will be needed to accomplish 

that goal and will there be any additional positions as a result of 

that, and what will the costs be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There are no additional staff.  My 

understanding is there's 11 people who are employed now 

doing research.  And the annual report preparation and the 

work done on the annual report will actually be part of their 

responsibility as well. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to 

thank the officials who came in and helped us out through the 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. 

Minister, and to your Health department officials.  It must 

difficult for the Minister of Economic Development to stand in 

for the two ministers of Health.  I guess in light of recent events 

with respect to gaming, I understand the two Health ministers 

are probably manning the 1-800 drop-a-buck gaming line these 

days.  So thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Social Services to 

introduce the officials who join us here for consideration of this 

Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

To my right, Neil Yeates, associate deputy minister of Social 

Services, and directly behind Neil, Dave Hedlund, the director 

of child and family services.  I might just say that the officials 

have spent some time with the critics briefing them and that 

we'll be happy to respond to any questions that they may have. 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also thank you, 

Mr. Minister.  Indeed we have had some conversation about 

this Bill and, as I said in second reading, we agree with the 

thrust of the Bill. 

 

Apparently, as I read it, it creates an alternative to the adoption 

for extended families and things like that, and I think it's aimed 

primarily at placing native children with native families and so 

on.  And we did express our support.  But I have a couple of 

questions that I'd like to develop with you. 

 

In second reading, Mr. Minister, you referred to the 

consultation process and I think you mentioned something 

about 40 . . . Could you give us an overview of those 

associations or the groups were included in that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, you're 

right.  Basically the amendments, apart from some 

housekeeping amendments, are basically directed towards 

supporting aboriginal decision making over child care and their 

family services matters.  Consultations occurred with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Saskatchewan 

Metis Society, and especially the three tribal councils that we 

have entered into agreements with -- the Touchwood, Meadow 

Lake, and North Battleford Tribal Councils. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  This Bill provides an 

alternative to certain families.  Would you mind telling us 

what's different and why was it necessary to provide this 

alternative? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Basically the main item in the Bill is 

section 56 which transfers guardianship.  This allows us to 

transfer guardianship for children, who are currently 

permanently committed to the minister, back to, say, an 

extended family member or someone in the community, which 

currently we can't do . . . we cannot do.  This allows people to 

step forth.  This allows us to secure permanency planning, 

long-term placements for children in care. 

 

It also allows us to support the community in responding to the 

long-term care needs -- that is the aboriginal communities -- the 

long-term care needs of their children.  So that is the main 

section in this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I've got to be careful 

here -- I'll tear my ear off. 

 

In second reading, you mentioned something about birth 

parents also continuing to play a role.  Could you just give us 

an overview of how you see the child's parents having this role 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well in your second reading you 

said that the birth parents would continue to play a key role.  

Could you explain how you see that role, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, basically what this would require is 

-- regarding the process -- is that the . . . 

 where we can transfer guardianship to a third party.  We are 

not transferring that third party's authority to adopt the child 

out.  The birth parent still requires the approval for that to 

happen.  So that's where the birth parent continues to be 

involved in decision making.  It's in that sense that that 

involvement is continued. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

also placed a lot of emphasis on the fact that the transfer of 

guardianship will be permanent.  Does this relate to the role of 

the birth parent and will this process be reversible? And if a 

birth parent can prove competency at a later date, do they get a 

chance to come back and get their child back? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- That's a good question, a good point.  

Certainly at any point, even though guardianship may be 

transferred over to the minister, at any point, if the 

circumstances changes with the birth parent, you could go back 

to the court -- this would allow us to go back to the court to 

initiate the possibility of a transfer of guardianship back.  So 

that would be allowed to be considered, but the court would 

make that final decision if the situation with the birth parent 

was such that the needs of the child could be met. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

also, in the Bill, you go to great lengths to ensure that all 

interested parties -- this is the birth parents, the new permanent 

family, and the band members -- are consulted and are in 

agreement with the child's placement. 

 

Now we say this is laudable, but how will the situation be 

handled if there was a conflict between the wishes of the 

different parties?  For an example, if both birth parent and new 

family were in agreement with the child's placement but the 

band is not, what do we do in that case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Basically what your question I guess, is 

asking is what happens if?  And I think that what we're really 

trying to do here is to put into the legal framework what 

already is the practice.  And in a sense, when I say we're trying 

to . . . these amendments are really catching up to what the 

practice is in the field. 

 

If there is conflict, basically we . . . and there sometimes is.  

You try and resolve that through consultation, negotiation.  The 

fundamental principle always is the principle of what's in the 

best interests of the child.  And I mean that isn't always agreed 

to, as to what is in the best interests of the child but I'm advised 

that we could work that out most of the time, and there are 

usually arrangements whereby you can . . . maybe you can 

leave the guardianship the way it is, but make a placement 

elsewhere.  So there always are options through the 

consultation, discussion, and negotiation process. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

guess, yes, I guess I was doing a little bit of 



May 13, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

"what if", but I just kind of wanted to know.  And you're telling 

me that you're just covering off something that's already 

happening -- I can accept that. 

 

And while we sometimes don't like to get into "what ifs", there 

is sometimes that you see something that might be happening 

and we would like to know if you've considered it, and 

apparently you have.  And I appreciate that. 

 

And also in this Bill it provides for special monetary support 

for the new guardians if necessary.  And again I would like to 

ask: at whose discretion will it be given?  Will it be yours, or 

the band's, or will it be the child and family services?  This is 

kind of a multiple thing, but you could answer it I think fairly . 

. . Would the guardians not have access to normal benefits?  

Would the guardians not have access to normal benefits -- that 

is, tax credits, Social Services allowance, and so forth, that are 

already provided? 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, can you explain what your view 

is that the extra . . . the special funding is necessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, basically if the family does not have 

the resources to look after the child, but they are a loving, 

caring, supportive family who are willing to take the child, or 

who may have the child now.  And there may be special needs.  

We're talking about some situations here where there may be 

special considerations, special needs. 

 

Right now the option is, if they qualify for assistance, they can 

get that child added to their budget.  But sometimes the 

resources of a family just aren't there to take on another family 

member, another child, yet that may be the right place for the 

person.  It could be an extended family or a good friend or 

someone on a band. 

 

So it gives us flexibility to support people to take children and 

to make sure that they've got adequate resources to do that.  

We're talking about children who have been in the care of the 

minister, so there is some responsibility that the state has for 

the well-being, long-term well-being of those children. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, then I 

think what I hear you saying is, that if there is a child that has 

maybe handicapped or special social problems that they'd need 

extra help.  Where the normal family services and other things 

don't cover it, this will cut in so that that family would have the 

resources to do that.  Thank you.  I agree with you on that. 

 

Now there's one other thing I'd like to know about and it's on 

the issue of date of child and family services.  How will your 

department interact with the bands and tribal councils on these 

matters?  What will the funding structure of these agencies be, 

and will the band and councils be providing any of the funding?  

Will they have to come in on that to give you some help 

financially? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, actually our . . . in signing these 

agreements with the tribal councils, in a sense what we're really 

doing is just transferring over the legal authority to the 

agencies. And because they're treaty families, these are bands, 

the federal government then is picking up the cost of these 

agencies, not the province.  Unless, for example, there would 

be one of our children there, they would provide a service and 

then we would be billed.  But there's always a way to work out 

those arrangements.  But by and large, in signing the 

agreements, these become federally funded family, children 

service agencies on the reserves. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, at 

this time that's all the questions I have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, before I move to report 

the Bill, I would just like to thank my officials for their support 

and all the hard work that the department is doing in not only in 

this Bill, in the excellent work the department is doing in 

conjunction with the aboriginal communities.  We really 

appreciate that.  And to thank my hon. friend from Wilkie for 

his interest and very, very important questions and support to 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Before you do that, I would like to add my 

appreciation to the officials and the minister for bringing in the 

Bill.  And I also want to acknowledge the forethought he had in 

having a briefing before, and it certainly helped get through.  

And I want to again say thank you very much. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Public Health 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act respecting the Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1994 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


