






















































Hansard: March 03, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 581 
 March 3, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 
Clerk: -- Mr. Thompson, as Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Private Members' Bills, presents the fifth report of the said 
committee, which is as follows: 
 

 Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petitions for private Bills, and finds that the provisions of 
rules 59, 60, and 61 have been fully complied with. 

 
 Of the Saskatoon Foundation, of the city of Saskatoon, in the 

province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act respecting the 
Saskatoon Foundation; and 

 
 Of the Full Gospel Bible Institute, of the town of Eston, in 

the province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to amend 
the Act of incorporation. 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Wildwood: 
 

 That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills be now concurred in. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all of my colleagues in 
the legislature some 15 grade 12 students seated in the 
Speaker's gallery, in your gallery.  These 15 grade 12 Thom 
students are of course . . . currently belong in the constituency 
of Regina Churchill Downs.  It's my honour to stand in for my 
colleague, that member.  And I look forward to a photo with 
them immediately following question period.  And then a 
meeting for which I must thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the use of 
your boardroom following the pictures. 
 
I ask all colleagues to join me in welcoming this grade 12 
group from Thom Collegiate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 
to you and through you to members of the legislature, 30 grade 
12 students from Sheldon-Williams in your gallery.  Sheldon is 
only one block from my home so any time anybody wants to 
drop over for lunch or anything, it's fine. 

They're accompanied by Helen Toth-Douglas and Jan Collins.  
And I'll meet you later on the stairs for pictures and then a visit 
where you can ask questions and share information.  Thanks 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I looked up into the 
Speaker's gallery and to my utter amazement, Mr. Speaker, saw 
two people I'd like to introduce to the Assembly.  These are 
two people who have the onerous responsibility of, in the city 
of Moose Jaw, making the member for Moose Jaw Palliser and 
the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow look good and 
responsible -- our constituency assistants, Donna Corthey and 
Ruth Greer.  And I'd ask all members to welcome them here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
I'm sort of stepping in for my colleague from the constituency 
of Biggar today.  In your gallery I note that Ken Gidluck has 
joined us this afternoon.  Ken Gidluck hails from Biggar.  He is 
presently trying to make a living farming, like lots of other 
people in this province.  And he also represents his community 
as a delegate to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  So I want to 
welcome Ken to the legislature this afternoon.  I hope he has a 
safe journey home and that he enjoys our proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to also 
welcome Ken to the Assembly.  I know he's the biggest farmer 
out at Biggar and we used to go to school together.  And I'm 
sure that he won't mind if we have a little fun.  And I hope he 
does truly enjoy his stay in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crop Insurance Conference 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 
question is to the minister responsible for Crop Insurance. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday we learned that Crop Insurance was 
going to have a conference in Regina involving virtually every 
crop insurance agent, adjuster, and employee in the province 
and, as the letter of invitation indicated, part-time, full-time, 
temporary, even if you're not working. 
 
Mr. Minister, the information we have received is that the cost 
of this conference could be $80,000.  Mr. Minister, can you 
confirm this figure?  And if it is not accurate, can you tell us 
what the cost of this conference will be to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer and the farmers who pay into Crop Insurance? 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
well knows that the administration of Crop Insurance is not 
paid by farmers' premiums. 
 
In regards to this conference, Mr. Speaker, this conference was 
called because we are trying to improve the Crop Insurance 
Corporation.  When we took over this Crop Insurance 
Corporation we had 13,000 non-corrected errors and we have 
been working to improve this corporation from day one.  When 
I go out to the field and talk to farmers, one of the things they 
told us is they wanted things like spot loss hail and new crops 
and some options.  We provided those in the budget this time. 
 
The other thing that they tell me is that they need more 
coordination within your . . . that we need more coordination 
within this corporation, that when they talk to a CSO (customer 
service office), they get a different answer than when they talk 
to an agent; and they get a different answer when they talk to 
the people in Melville. 
 
I have told the corporation that that is not acceptable, that we 
have got to get better service to farmers and we've got to 
provide service, and that's what this conference is about -- to 
try to pull this corporation together and provide service to 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, let's 
stay on track.  Could you tell us how many people will be 
attending this conference, and how many Regina hotel rooms 
the government is paying for.  The information that we have 
received is that there will be approximately 600 employees 
there and that you have booked over 500 hotel rooms in 
Regina.  Can you confirm these, Mr. Minister, and can you tell 
us what the actual hotel bill will be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we are, as the 
member opposite has pointed out, bringing in all the employees 
and the agents.  They will be double-booking wherever 
possible.  We are paying for the motel rooms for our employees 
for one night.  Mr. Speaker, many of these employees come 
from places like Meadow Lake and like Shaunavon.  And it is 
impossible to have a conference in Saskatchewan that can be 
accomplished in one day, and therefore an overnight stay is an 
absolute necessity.  And those motel rooms will be paid for by 
Crop Insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 600 
employees, 505 hotel rooms booked.  Double-booking? 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that we first learned of this through 
a Crop Insurance employee.  This person believed that the 
conference was a waste of money, even though they work for 
Crop Insurance.  In all good 

conscience, this employee could not justify going to the 
Ramada Renaissance, bringing their spouse, having their hotel 
rooms paid for, attending two lunches, a banquet, a casino 
night, and a hockey game all on the taxpayers' tab.  And I 
applaud that taxpayer for having the courage to speak out. 
 
Mr. Minister, in recent years crop insurance premiums have 
gone up, coverage has been reduced.  More than ever, 
Saskatchewan farmers and all taxpayers need to know that 
they're getting their money's worth out of Crop Insurance.  Mr. 
Minister, do you honestly believe that the monies being spent 
on this weekend's conference is money well spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there are something 
like eight hours of session time.  I know the members opposite 
don't like to ever see anybody have any fun, in a gloom and 
doom scenario, but these people are working very hard.  This is 
a voluntary operation.  If employees felt that it wasn't 
worthwhile, I'm sure they would not be attending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company Conference 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 
Speaker, this morning is to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  Mr. Minister, this 
morning we received another call.  This time from an STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) employee who saw 
last night's story about the Crop Insurance conference.  This 
individual told us that STC has been holding a similar 
three-day conference at Fort San. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the purpose of this conference; how many 
people will be attending; and how much will it cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member, Mr. Speaker.  
STC is holding a conference at Fort San.  The conference is to 
deal and to talk to management over strategic planning.  I'm 
sure the members are aware that STC have made large gains in 
their losses -- over $3 million over the last two years.  We have 
to continue to do that to have a corporation that is strong for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Budget Effects on Farmers 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday we asked the ministers 
of Agriculture and Finance to instruct their officials to examine 
federal changes to the Income Tax Act which would deem debt 
write-offs as taxable income.  The Agriculture minister seemed 
genuinely concerned, but after a cursory glance at the changes, 
the Minister of Finance went to the defence of the federal 
government saying the new measures will have little impact on 
farms and small business. 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

I know it's odd that the government members opposite would 
even think of defending the Liberal government, but the farm 
financial management consultant we talked to -- who I might 
add was a former chief agronomist with the Bank of Nova 
Scotia -- indicated that the Minister of Finance was seriously 
underestimating the effect on small business and farmers. 
 
Madam Minister, have you had an opportunity to come up with 
a definitive conclusion on this matter?  Can you report to this 
Assembly what the effect will be on Saskatchewan farmers and 
on Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, there are two points that have to be made here.  First 
of all, this is not a tax change which is in effect.  In fact the 
only place that it is included in the budget is what's called 
notice of ways and means motion, which is at the end of the 
budget. 
 
It says that legislation has to be drafted yet and the explanatory 
notes for the legislation have to be approved.  So this is 
something in a very preliminary stage, and as I said yesterday, 
Ottawa will flag with us any change that affects farmers.  We 
have contacted the Department of Finance in Ottawa and I 
know the Minister of Agriculture has also written to his 
counterpart. 
 
The other point I want to make is that the members did not 
make it clear that there are two sections of the income tax that 
affect bankruptcies.  One is section 80 which affects 
commercial transactions.  One is section 79 which is the one 
which covers farm bankruptcies.  It's section 80 that is being 
changed. 
 
Now I wish the members opposite would give the federal 
government a chance to give us the proper information.  From 
what we've seen so far we're not about to run around alarming 
farmers.  But we will continue to monitor the situation on a 
regular basis and not play silly politics with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, we were not referring . . . 
Madam Minister, we were not referring to bankruptcies; we 
were referring to debt write-downs.  That's exactly what we 
were talking about. 
 
In your defence of the Liberal budget you said that this tax grab 
was not aimed at farmers and businesses.  Well, Madam 
Minister, people in small business and farmers will be impacted 
on this as was stated in the paper.  This bomb may not be aimed 
at farmers and businesses, but they may receive a significant 
amount of collateral damage when it goes off.  And as you said, 
the regulations are being formulated. 
 
And what of the target, Madam Minister, that being small 
business in Saskatchewan.  Have you determined what the 
effect to business and industry 

these changes will have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Once again, Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation has not been drafted.  We do not even know for 
certain that they are going to proceed with this legislation.  As 
with any changes to the Income Tax Act we monitor it on a 
regular basis. 
 
But what I would like to say to the members opposite: here 
they're running around trying to create alarms about something 
that may never even occur, but what they haven't pointed out 
about the federal budget in agriculture is that the Liberals are 
proceeding to implement the Tory cuts to the Crow; that the 
Liberals have said they're not sure they're going to keep the 
capital gains exemption for farmers.  Why don't they start 
defending the real threats to the farmers in this province instead 
of raising alarms about things that may never occur? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, every time 
there is a tax increase in federal taxes there is an equal and 
equivalent tax increase in the provincial taxes, even more so 
now that you have increased the percentage that you take. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell us how much extra taxes will go 
to the provincial treasury as a result of these tax increases -- in 
federal tax increases -- including the removal of the capital 
gains taxes exemption?  How much will your government 
profit from these measures on those taxes that you have 
changed because of the federal budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said before, the 
members opposite should remember that numbers are not their 
strong suit.  This is not a change which is necessarily going to 
even occur.  If it does . . . I should say something else about 
section 79, bankruptcies.  Traditionally, the federal government 
exempts all of that as income. 
 
But what I want to go back to is this: when they talk about the 
federal budget all the time, why don't they talk about the cuts to 
the Crow which means millions and millions of dollars taken 
out of rural Saskatchewan?  Why don't they?  Because their 
former colleagues, the Tories, are like the Liberals.  They both 
believe in cutting the Crow.  Why don't they talk about those 
issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hemophiliacs 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
to the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, Saskatchewan hemophiliacs became infected 
with HIV (human 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

immunodeficiency virus) because of a contaminated blood 
supply.  The Krever Commission has just begun its 
examination into how this tragedy occurred.  Is it reasonable to 
expect that the victims of this contaminated blood be forced to 
settle their compensation claims by your March 15 deadline, 
before the commission's report has been completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With respect to 
the money that's available for hemophiliacs, there have been 
insurers that have agreed to put money into the package.  As far 
as I am aware, there will be no extension with respect to the 
package, and part of the reason for that, of course, is that the 
additional money will not be available.  In order to come 
together with a national strategy across Canada with respect to 
hemophiliacs and the package of compensation that was 
offered, it was necessary to have a uniform policy, and the 
uniform policy that came forward put a deadline on when the 
offer would be . . . a deadline for the offer to be accepted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 
Minister, those who are suffering from HIV infection in 
Saskatchewan because of contaminated blood products have 
the right to be fully informed about what happened before they 
are expected to sign away their rights to further claims.  I ask 
you today, will you show fairness to these people, and provide 
them with an interim settlement and extend the March 15 
deadline? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The answer to that is, Mr. Speaker, there 
is a national plan that provinces have all bought into across the 
country and Saskatchewan is not about to deviate from that. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, time is a 
precious commodity for HIV-infected hemophiliacs, and 
nobody hears the clock ticking louder than they do.  In fact 6 of 
the original 27 Saskatchewan claimants have died waiting for 
the truth. 
 
The March 15 deadline is forcing these victims to obtain a 
certificate of legal advice which claims that the client, and I 
quote: 
 

 . . . entered into the said Release willingly and not under any 
duress exercised by and without pressure or influence on the 
part of any one . . . 

 
Do you not consider that deadline constitutes duress, pressure, 
and undue influence on the part of your government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
compensation package, people do not have to accept it if they 
don't choose to.  That option is there.  But if they choose to, in 
the offer that is being made across Canada in every province, 
there has been a deadline set and that is what has been agreed 
to. 
 
It took us a considerable amount of time, right across 

Canada, to obtain that agreement amongst the provinces.  And I 
want to also point out that there is a very comprehensive 
response to this particular problem in terms of the care that's 
being provided in the health care system and also with respect 
to the fact that welfare benefits are available to people who find 
themselves in this position, in addition to the possibility of 
accepting the offer of compensation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, many of the 
people in our province who are affected by this are considering 
that they don't have many options.  The Law Society has 
cautioned its lawyers against the certificate of legal advice, 
saying that there is extreme duress evident in all of these cases.  
The Law Society has suggested that lawyers who sign the 
certificate themselves, leave themselves open to legal action if 
their HIV clients who change their minds about accepting the 
package could come back and sue their own lawyers for 
negligence.  Will you reconsider the deadline?  Will you 
reconsider this certificate and offer these people an option of an 
interim settlement until they can actually find out why it is they 
were the people who became victims of contaminated blood? 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, it's not open to 
Saskatchewan to change what has been agreed to on a national 
basis by all the provinces.  The member opposite also has to 
recognize that by asking us to do this she is putting in jeopardy 
a considerable amount of money that has been agreed to be 
paid into the process by the outside insurers. 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Monopoly Policy 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond 
to a question by the member from Souris-Cannington. 
 
In response to his question, Mr. Speaker, first of all, it is not the 
policy of the government to infringe on the rights of an 
individual to do business in the province of Saskatchewan.  In 
fact, job creation and economic renewal is a high priority with 
this government. 
 
It is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, in Mr. Klein's case, who 
operates an auto body business, that this is not the real issue 
here.  However, Mr. Klein's wife is now operating a 
Co-operators Insurance brokerage from the auto body shop.  It 
is SGI's (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) policy not to 
adjust claims in the premises of a major insurance competitor. 
 
It is well known, Mr. Speaker, that Co-operators would not be 
willing to adjust claims on the premises of an SGI broker.  But 
in order to have convenience, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
understanding that SGI officials have found another convenient 
location where claimants whose vehicles can still be driven can 
go to other claims adjusters.  In cases where the vehicle can't be 
driven, SGI adjusters will continue to visit Mr. Klein's shop for 
on-the-spot adjusting. 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

Court-House Closures 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is to the Minister of Justice.  I'm glad he's sitting up 
and taking notice.  Mr. Speaker, the other day we received 
notice that the court-house in Moosomin was going to be 
closed down.  And I had a chat with the minister and I 
appreciate the responses the minister has given. 
 
The disturbing part about all this, Mr. Speaker, though, and for 
communities right across rural Saskatchewan, is the fact that it 
affects jobs.  It affects jobs in our small communities.  I'm 
wondering, Mr. Minister, how many other communities are 
affected by this announcement, and I'd like to know where they 
are and how many jobs are affected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are no other court-houses that are 
going to be closed this year.  Last year we closed two -- one in 
Shaunavon and one in Assiniboia.  And we did it because they 
had practically fallen out of use and it just didn't make sense to 
continue them as judicial centres. 
 
This year, as I regretted to inform the hon. member, Moosomin 
obviously fell into that category as well.  But we have no plans 
to close any other court-houses at this time. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, as you are aware of through our discussion -- and 
certainly the media was beginning to wonder if indeed I was 
beginning to speak on behalf of the government versus take an 
opposition role of speaking out on behalf of the 
community -- when we look at communities across rural 
Saskatchewan and the community of Moosomin that they're 
directly affected by the loss of a part-time position. We look at 
the loss of jobs that have taken place in hospital closures, 
reduction in school divisions, rural service centre closures, job 
losses in agricultural sector, Gateway very disappointed with 
the co-gen announcement. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I'm wondering, what other options your 
government . . . or is your government looking at options that 
would provide job opportunities for the many residents and 
communities across this province?  I wonder if there's a 
response, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to answer 
the hon. member's question.  It just happens today we were in 
Rosetown launching the regional economic development 
authority in that area.  And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well 
the member from Morse can be critical of that.  But I can tell 
you, had he been at that meeting in Rosetown this morning, he 
would know that there is a great deal of excitement about 
economic development in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
All one needs to do is go to communities like Rosetown, like 
Nipawin, like Humboldt, like Prince Albert, and watch what 
the regional economic development authorities are doing to 
create business 

and create jobs and you would know that there's a great deal of 
work being done by the partnership between business, local 
communities and the provincial government to create jobs and 
a great deal of work is being done in a very, very successful 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Co-generation Projects 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Minister, a Biggar, Saskatchewan company, owned by 
Stewart Busse, Environic Energy, was one of the several 
companies to submit co-generation proposals to your 
government. 
 
Mr. Busse said he lost more than $100,000 on that project and 
he said that for him, that is almost catastrophic.  He said, we 
put a lot of time, money, and energy into it and then the 
government pulls the rug out from under our feet; that he didn't 
think a Crown corporation should treat people so shabbily and 
that SaskPower will eventually use some of the technology they 
gleaned through our proposals. 
 
Mr. Minister, after treating these corporations so unfairly, you 
should at least give a commitment not to hold the 
proprietorship on the technology that you have gained at the 
expense of the businesses.  Will you give that commitment 
today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. 
member, obviously SaskPower is not intending to build any 
co-generation plants, so there's obviously no intent of using the 
technology that might have been gained. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, before the Minister of 
Energy was a member of cabinet, he was on the steering 
committee reviewing projects like these -- the committee that 
recommended the government go ahead with these types of 
projects.  He encouraged companies to use their time and 
money and energy towards developing co-generation projects, 
then kiboshed it when he became the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, when a groom leaves a bride standing at the altar, 
she can sue for breach of promise.  You not only left the bride 
standing at the altar, but you ripped her veil off as well.  When 
asked by the official opposition if you were going to at least 
refund the fees, you basically said, nobody asked.  Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Busse has asked for his money back.  Are you or 
are you not going to give him the money and the rest of the 
companies their money back as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to make 
the comment to the member opposite that it's obvious they have 
new people writing their speeches; there's a little bit of humour 
involved.  But I say to the members opposite again, that 
SaskPower and the 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

Government of Saskatchewan are committed to co-generation.  
There's never been any lack of commitment. 
 
The member from Shaunavon, who also sat on that committee . 
. . and if you grab the report you'll see his name on the report as 
well.  The commitment is there to co-generation.  The fact is, 
the power is not needed at this time.  And to spend the 20 or 
$25 million on a co-generation plant or to buy the power from a 
co-generation plant, that is not needed, would mean higher 
power rates. 
 
Now at the same time the members of the Conservative caucus 
and Liberal caucus are saying, power rates are too high.  They 
then say, but please build more power plants that will jack the 
rates even higher, even though we don't need the power.  
Where is the logic in your comments, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 
information generated by the project Mr. Busse had in mind 
says that the project would have meant a savings of $14,000 to 
the community of Kindersley and the taxpayers of the 
community of Kindersley.  In addition it would have created 
many, many . . . $14,000 per month incidentally.  In addition it 
would have created many jobs, construction jobs and many 
trades jobs, tradespeople jobs.  And I thought that was one of 
your priorities, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question was very simple that I asked you.  
Will you or will you not refund the money that they paid, the 
proponents paid -- the deposit -- as your minister suggested he 
would after a company asked for it, as Mr. Busse has done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously the Minister 
of Energy and Mines will deal with the proponents as to the 
issue that you refer to.  But let me say to you very clearly: in 
Saskatchewan at the present time we have capacity of 2,900 
megawatts of power.  And if the member from Kindersley 
would listen instead of acting like a buffoon in the back 
benches, he might learn something. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I think I'm going 
to ask the minister to withdraw that statement in referring to a 
member as a buffoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my reference to the 
member from Kindersley as a buffoon was out of order and I 
would . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I asked the minister to categorically, 
unequivocally withdraw the statement without any reference 
and apologize to the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize.  And in 
doing so, I want to respond to the member. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I asked the minister also to withdraw 
this statement unequivocally. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I withdraw this statement 
unequivocally.  But I want to say if the member would listen 
up, I will tell him this about the power supply and needs in the 
province. 
 
We presently have a power supply of 2,900 megawatts -- 2,900.  
On the coldest day of the year, the highest peak usage was 
2,400 megawatts or 2,500 megawatts; that leaves us a margin 
of 400 megawatts of extra power.  You're arguing that we add 
to that system, which will add directly to power rates.  I say to 
you, you can't have it both ways. 
 
You can't argue -- and the Liberals cannot argue -- that power 
rates are too high, but that we should build more power 
capacity we don't need; it's illogical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Land Titles Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 24 -- An Act respecting the Convention on the Law 

Applicable to Trusts 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the Convention on the Law Applicable to Trusts be 
now introduced and read for a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Trustee Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Trustee Act be now introduced and read for a first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act respecting Frustrated Contracts 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Frustrated Contracts be now introduced and read for 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I missed ministerial 
statements.  I wonder, by leave, if I could make a short 
ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Regional Economic Development Authority 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
announce today the establishment of the second regional 
economic development authority, which we announced today 
in Rosetown.  Attending the meeting was the mayor, Subhas 
Maharaj, and the member for Rosetown who attended the 
official opening of the regional economic development 
authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may recall, the government's Partnership 
for Renewal economic strategy recommended regional 
economic development authorities, or REDAs, as a tool for 
economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, REDAs are made up of representatives of 
municipal government, business, and other organizations.  
REDAs provide structures to coordinate and pool 
organizational, professional, and financial resources to 
encourage new jobs and new investment.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the 1994-1995 provincial budget sets aside $750,000 for REDA 
development. 
 
I'm pleased to report that I was in Rosetown this morning and 
had the privilege of joining Roy Haddock, the chair of the 
Entrepreneur's Regional Economic Development Authority, in 
announcing the establishment of Saskatchewan's second 
REDA.  This region of the province has long been in the 
forefront of regional cooperation and aggressive pursuit of 
economic development opportunities. 
 
In Rosetown the local economic development authority has an 
agreement with the Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
for the city of Coimbatore of India for business development 
and cultural exchanges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rosetown is also the home of Precision Metal 
Fabricating, part of one of the province's first community bond 
ventures, financed by local investors for $800,000.  Prairie 
Malt of Biggar is also the second largest malt producer in 
Canada and has markets around the world. 
 
What Mr. Haddock and I basically announced today, Mr. 
Speaker, is nothing less than harnessing all of that expertise, 
creativity, and competitive drive into a team called the 
Entrepreneur's Regional Economic Development Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, economic development isn't only about 
economics; it's about people, communities, and cooperation, 
and it's about creating opportunities now for future jobs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure today to announce the official 
opening of the Rosetown and the regional economic 
development authority in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to congratulate the people of Rosetown on doing 
what they have shown in the past they do very well.  And I'm 
very familiar with Mr. Haddock and the community bond 
development in Rosetown, and very familiar with the malt 
project in Biggar because those were all initiatives undertaken 
under the previous administration. 
 
I find it strange, Mr. Speaker, that the basis for all of this, the 
RDCs (rural development corporation) that were formed under 
the previous administration, simply don't enter into anything 
that the minister says because a lot of those are the very 
foundation of the thing that he talks about today.  And the 
people of Rosetown and area had a lot of this figured out well 
before the minister ever showed up with his enlarged concept 
of RDCs. 
 
Simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that today there are 12,000 less 
jobs in this province than when the minister and his 
government took over.  There's 21,000 more people on welfare 
today than when the minister and his government took over.  
And all of the pronouncements about job creation that we've 
seen in this province over the last two and a half years have 
rung absolutely hollow.  The Minister of Finance doesn't even 
have the courage to put a job number in the budget any more 
because they simply don't come up with the numbers. 
 
Now the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, if this thing is turned 
around it will be because people like Mr. Haddock and his 
friends in Rosetown and area will drive it.  It has absolutely 
nothing to do with the policies, the tax grabs, of this 
government.  So, Mr. Speaker, we join in congratulating the 
folks of Rosetown today but we have no congratulations for the 
minister and his economic development schemes that this NDP 
government has failed to deliver to the people of this province. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to question 
no. 35, I request that it be converted to motions for returns 
(debatable), and as it relates to questions 36 and 37, I hereby 
table the answers.  And as it relates to questions 38 and 39 I 
would request they be converted to motions for returns 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- Question 35, 38, and 39, motions for return 
debate.  And questions 36 and 37 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 
Saskatchewan Universities 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

rise and move second reading of a Bill to establish Crown 
Foundations for Saskatchewan Universities.  The Bill permits 
the establishment of a separate Crown foundation for the 
benefit of each of the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina.  Under the federal Income Tax Act, a 
person may make donations to charitable organizations and 
receive a tax credit only to the extent that the donations do not 
exceed 20 per cent of the donor's net income.  However, tax 
credits for donations made to the Crown are not limited by the 
net income of the donor.  This income tax treatment of 
charitable donations discourages larger contributions by 
provincial residents to publicly funded institutions. 
 
In an attempt to encourage large donations to universities, 
many provinces have created Crown foundations to act as a 
conduit between the donor and the institution.  By making a 
donation to the Crown foundation, the donation will still be 
directed to the university, but the donor will receive a Crown 
donation receipt rather than a charitable donation receipt.  This 
will help the universities' fund-raising campaigns to attract 
larger donations.  The government was approached by the two 
Saskatchewan universities and asked to establish Crown 
foundations in Saskatchewan, as has been done in British 
Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, and other provinces. 
 
I'm pleased to introduce this legislation in response to the 
universities' requests.  This Bill is very similar to the enabling 
legislation used for Crown foundations in other provinces.  The 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina have 
been consulted and they support this legislation.  As well, the 
federal Department of Finance and Revenue Canada have 
approved the proposal. 
 
I would be pleased to answer questions concerning Crown 
foundations when discussing this Bill at Committee of the 
Whole.  It therefore gives me great pleasure to move second 
reading of An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 
Saskatchewan Universities. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments before I move to adjourn the debate on 
this Bill this afternoon. 
 
I guess the major concern, Mr. Speaker, is not that the 
opposition would be opposed to the formation of Crown 
foundations, which would allow individuals who would want to 
make contributions to universities to receive a charitable 
donation receipt to use for income tax purposes over and above 
the 20 per cent.   The concern we would have, Mr. Speaker, is 
that, why universities?  Why not other charitable organizations? 
 
(1445) 
 
Universities receive the majority of their funding from 
governments already.  And now what we're doing is basically 
allowing the two universities in this province, and it's obvious 
that a number of universities across Canada have the same 
option, the 

ability to derive extra revenue; whereas there are many 
organizations across this country that are doing humanitarian 
work, doing services for the public, and are having great 
difficulty trying to get extra funding or funding through 
charitable donations because of the fact that individuals are 
limited as to how high they can go if they're going to get an 
income tax credit for it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, although we don't oppose the formation 
of a Crown foundation for funds that are donated to 
universities, it would seem to me it would be only fair that we 
would look at other organizations, charitable organizations or 
church organizations, whose total funding comes through 
donations and through donations made by individuals who 
believe in supporting . . . 
 
And let me throw out, for an example, organizations like World 
Vision that reach out to help and to meet the needs of young 
people, boys and girls, not just in Canada but around the world.  
There's just a list of organizations that get all their funding 
strictly from individuals such as myself and many people in 
this Assembly here today.  And so, as I've indicated, that is 
probably the major concern we would have.  We would just 
suggest why would an agency that receives significant 
government funding now be given another avenue whereby 
they can continue to draw on added support, and yet other 
organizations that receive no government funding -- they 
strictly receive their support from individual donations -- are 
left to work with and receive from people who are limited 
through their ability as far as charitable donations go. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is probably one of the areas that we'd 
certainly like to get into discussion with as we get further on in 
the Bill.  Therefore at this time I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
The Chair: -- I will first of all ask the minister to introduce his 
officials to the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the officials who are assisting 
me today are the same ones that were assisting me yesterday 
afternoon when we began consideration of these estimates.  Ms. 
Shiela Bailey, who is the chair of the Public Service 
Commission; Rick McKillop, who is the executive director of 
the employee relations division; and Ms. Elizabeth Smith, who 
is the director of administrative and information services with 
the commission. 
 
Item 1 
 
The Chair: -- I welcome the officials back to the committee. 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I'm pleased to be 
here to assume the questioning for the Public Service 
Commission that was begun by the Leader of the Third Party 
yesterday.  May I begin by welcoming the officials to this 
Chamber today. 
 
Before I begin asking you new questions, I would like some 
clarification of answers you provided this House yesterday.  
When you were asked about the number of new appointments 
made, you replied that with respect to in-scope appointments 
there were 688 competitions.  You also replied that with respect 
to out-of-scope appointments, there were 190 appointments 
made. 
 
Do I understand then that these 190 out-of-scope appointments 
did not all go through a competition process?  What I want you 
to tell me today is, of those 190 out-of-scope appointments, 
how many were made following an open competition?  And if 
your answer is anything less than 190, would you please tell me 
what the hiring process was for those individuals and why an 
open competition was not used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for her question, Mr. 
Chair.  Of the 190 out-of-scope appointments made in the first 
10 months of this fiscal year, 184 were appointed by the 
commission pursuant to competition.  That leaves six, which is 
the subject of your question. 
 
Four of those six were individuals who were affected by the 
transfer of the functions of the Agriculture Development Fund 
to the Department of Agriculture and Food.  There were four of 
them, and they moved from management positions or 
out-of-scope positions with the Agriculture Development Fund 
to similar positions, out-of-scope positions, in the Department 
of Agriculture.  And I have their names here.  In those 
circumstances they are entitled to be appointed without 
competition. 
 
That leaves two.  Those two were order in council 
appointments made by order of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council.  And both of those were made pursuant to a 
competition that was run.  But the appointment is made by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council rather than by the Public 
Service Commission.  But the process was the same in each of 
those two cases. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I want to begin by 
welcoming the officials also.  And sorry I was little late. My 
colleague had to fill in for me. 
 
Just so I'm clear, I missed a portion of that answer, Mr. 
Minister.  Of the four individuals, you have the names that you 
can provide?  Is that with the salaries of what they received in 
ADF (Agriculture Development Fund) -- salaries and benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We don't have the salary information in 
the Public Service Commission.  That would have to be 
obtained from Agriculture. But I can give you their names, and 
I'll do that right now if you 

want that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh, just provide it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  Okay.  Well I'll send them across 
to you, but I have their names.  They're all program 
coordinators with the present Department of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Of the other 
two, they were appointed by order in council, did I hear that 
correctly?  And were you going to provide their names, 
salaries?  And also I'd be interested in knowing why those 
positions weren't open competition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- They were open competition.  There 
were competitions run in exactly the same way as regular 
competitions, but the appointing mechanism is different.  In the 
case of the 184 people that I first mentioned, those 
appointments are made by the Public Service Commission. 
 
The two positions that you're talking about were positions that 
were required to be appointed by order in council, but they 
were appointed after competitions had been run and the people 
appointed were the people who had won the competitions. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just a few new 
questions.  Mr. Minister, could you please advise me what 
capital purchases were made for the minister's office during the 
past year?  And I'd like to know what capital asset items your 
department purchased for your office, including but not limited 
to things such as VCRs (video cassette recorder), or computers, 
or cell phones, and the like. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is nothing -- zero.  No 
money spent on no capital assets. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chair, in 
last year's budget your government cut 291 government 
positions.  Could you please advise this House what was the 
financial cost in severing those employees? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, in response to the member's 
question, the total costs of severance in respect of the 
downsizing that he referred to involved almost 2.8 million, just 
a few dollars short of 2.8 million. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Chair, there is just a little more 
information I would like on these positions, and if you could 
provide it, Mr. Minister, at a later date.  First, the positions 
abolished, including the position number and their working 
title; also the name of the employee employed in the position at 
the time of the abolishment; seniority or years of service of 
each terminated employee; the amount of severance paid to 
each employee; whether the employee has since been 
re-employed within government and where; and what was the 
effect in the departments where staff 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

were eliminated?  For example, how many jobs were 
reclassified and at what cost, in order to absorb the duties of the 
terminated employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, can I clarify with the member 
that this was the downsizing in the '92-93 year, or is he talking 
about downsizing in the '93-94 year which doesn't end until the 
end of March this year.  What job abolishment period is the 
member interested in? 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Well I guess we'll have to take it for the 
previous year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, we can provide that 
information.  It may be very difficult to answer the very last 
part of the member's question which is the impact on individual 
departments.  It is likely that the Public Service Commission 
does not have that information, but on the other hand, it may 
have.  We'll do the best we can with the question anyway. But I 
just warn the member that we may not be able to be very 
precise on that part of the question.  The rest of it will present 
no problem. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Well I guess, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, for 
the last question perhaps it would be difficult to establish the 
cost, is what you're saying, but as far as the reclassification part 
of the question, it should be no problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday you agreed to respond in writing to a 
number of written questions submitted by the official 
opposition.  I'm asking today if you'd please ensure that we too 
could get copies of those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, we'll do that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 
yesterday we started to get our feet wet on this subject.  And it 
was good that we were able to have the evening to go through, 
to reflect on what had happened, and to allow those people in 
the public to get a chance to respond to what was going on.  I 
was surprised to find out that there are as many people out in 
the rural -- and a lot more, maybe, than I had thought -- that 
didn't understand exactly what's going on here, besides myself. 
 
So the exercise seems to be fruitful, that we should go through 
in some detail to find out what in fact this department of 
government is all about -- the reality being, as I study through 
this, that we do spend an awful lot of money here and we do 
have, more importantly, an awful lot of people's lives at stake 
in a very real way.  We take care of the hiring and firing and 
processing of a lot of job opportunities and a lot of people to 
fill those opportunities, and as a result it becomes very 
important in the employment process. 
 
The first question I want to ask today, Minister, is if Sally Doe 
decides that she wants to put her name into the computer bank 
to apply for a government job, how does she go about doing 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, we don't have a 

computer bank such as the one that the member suggested.  We 
do however advertise positions that are vacant.  And we 
advertise them, as I indicated yesterday, in two ways: for those 
that will be filled internally, the opening is advertised in the 
internal bulletin; for those that involve outside competition, 
they are advertised in the newspapers.  And in order for people 
to become considered for government employment, they have 
to answer those advertisements.  There is no automatic 
mechanism by which people who haven't advertised are 
considered as applicants for any position. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 
Public Service Commission offers opportunities in areas of 
development for departments and training for departments.  
Would the minister give me an overview of the different 
departments or different branches of the departments of 
government that the Public Service Commission has been 
involved in in the past year, for staff development, and for 
providing departments with a mission statement, and those 
kinds of functions?  Would you be able to provide that to us, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We don't have a listing with us today, 
but the information that the member asks for is easily put 
together.  So I propose that we put it together and send it to 
you. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- In the process of doing that, do you take those 
programs that you provide for staff development within Crown 
corporations . . . or the Crown corporations and departments 
and whoever asks.  Do you charge them for that as a part of a 
cost to the department, or do you take that out of an allocation 
of funds directly from the vote that you've been given here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
commission has throughout its history provided the kind of 
training that the member speaks about, but at the present time 
we're not able to do that because of budget cuts that the 
commission has made as its part in the cost-reduction efforts of 
the government. 
 
So that at the moment the commission is not providing any 
training from the commission -- in other words, the kind of 
training where people could come without cost and be trained.  
We do provide training now in response to a need within 
government but we do that on the basis of cost recovery, so that 
the people who enrol in the training programs have to pay a fee 
to the commission and we recover our costs in that way. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Do you cover that cost by having them 
present a budget for the volume of work that you're going to do 
and then do you price that out in a competitive sense so that the 
departments know and understand what they have to pay for? 
 
Crown corporations, I know, for example . . . I know this 
because a friend of mine did some work with ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) in staff 
relations and she provided that to them through a counselling 
service in Swift Current.  And I was 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

wondering whether you provided or asked the department to 
come forward with a budget to give you an overview of the 
expectations they had of you in providing that service to them?  
Do they do it that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the members, I am 
advised that how it works is as follows.  There is a council, 
there are staff development people involved in the various 
departments.  And they come together and they work out their 
needs for training of their staff in the coming year.  And some 
of this training I suppose is done in-house but some of it can 
better be done centrally because people from different 
departments then come and attend the same course. 
 
We work very closely with that council and determine what 
training development programs are going to be offered for the 
year.  We then cost those out, figure out how much it's going to 
cost to get somebody to do the course and any materials that 
are necessary for the course and incidental expenses and then 
set a fee then for each participant.  And we do the calculation 
for that and the departments pay the fee so it's on a 
cost-recovery basis, by that method. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- When the department provides that for you, 
do you have staff on hand that can provide some of those 
functions back for strategic planning?  How many of those 
kinds of professional people do you have on staff that can do 
that?  And for what areas are they qualified to handle it, and 
then going from that, then I'd probably be able to assume some 
of the other things about who you have to get for certain other 
areas of development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, we have six people involved 
in the staff development function and they coordinate and work 
with the council and plan and do all the things that you have to 
do in order to deliver the training, but they don't actually 
deliver the training themselves.  We don't have anybody on 
staff who actually teaches anybody anything.  We arrange for 
the courses and contract with people to come in and do the 
training, but we don't actually deliver any ourselves. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Who gives the go-ahead for the departments 
and Crown corporations to do this?  Is it the individual 
minister?  Is it the deputy minister?  Does that individual do it?  
Does the president of the corporation do it?  Does the board of 
directors do it?  Could you give me an idea of who initiates that 
consultation process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The Crown corporations no longer 
receive any service from us.  They used to in the past, but they 
no longer do.  As to who approves the training requirements of 
the departments, that would most likely be the deputy ministers 
of the department.  It would be included in their budget under 
one or the other of their lines, and in that sense would receive 
ministerial approval and indeed approval of this legislature.  
But the specific approvals would come from the deputy 
minister involved. 

Mr. Martens: -- When you do this, an evaluation of the staff 
development, do you have a process or a measurement of how 
to evaluate whether there is in fact an enhancement of the 
performance of the employees as they deal with their jobs in 
the public service? 
 
And the reason I ask that question, I personally was involved in 
some of the changes early on in the '80s, in middle '80s, when 
some of them told me that the most difficult part of working for 
government was that there was no recognition of their services.  
And that was a detriment to them as individuals and there was 
nothing to build them up and lift them up.  And that's not to 
speak poorly of public employees, but that's what they kept 
telling me.  And the job performance in those kinds of 
conditions has a tendency to curve downwards. 
 
And so I was interested in whether there was any measurement 
that might be subjective or whatever. But there might be a 
measurement that you use to see if there was in fact more 
performance after you have had these with the various 
departments compared to what they were before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, that is a very interesting 
question; leads to a very interesting area.  I'm going to answer 
it on a number of levels. 
 
First of all, at the end of these development sessions there is an 
evaluation that every participant fills out, and they're quite 
extensive and really quite revealing.  And you get immediate 
feedback then from the employees involved as to what they 
thought of the day or the three days or whatever the session 
happens to be, so that you get that immediate response from the 
participants, and that's very important. 
 
On a second level, the clients for the sessions that we organize 
are the various departments and agencies of government.  And 
they have training and development and educational needs 
which they identify in the way that I described in my previous 
answer.  And in the longer haul, they would be making 
evaluations as to whether this training was worthwhile.  We 
don't know what their evaluations are because they don't 
necessarily feed it back to us.  They may do it just accidentally 
or sort of by chance, but there's no organized way of feeding 
back. 
 
But I think what the real measure of the response is, is that they 
continue to require training.  They haven't stopped asking for it, 
so it must be working.  And we know they pay attention to it 
also because the performance evaluation process in the public 
service, with which the member as a former cabinet minister 
will be aware, has sections that deal with the education or the 
development and training needs of the individual employee.  
And there's a section in there where you would set out your 
learning objectives for the next year.  And so they are thinking 
about it. 
 
They're specifically addressing the question of what 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

were the shortcomings or what training was thought to be 
necessary; has that training taken place.  And the form directs 
their attention to that question so they are able to evaluate 
whether the employee has in fact learned anything from the 
course that they took and whether it had the desired result.  
That's a process that goes on as we speak.  You know, just 
every day, all the time. 
 
And I just assume from that that the training is thought to be 
valuable or we would be hearing from it, but in fact we're . . . 
we would be hearing from the departments that the training 
wasn't meeting their needs.  We are not hearing that so we are 
assuming that it does.  And their continuing demand, as I said 
earlier, indicates that they view the service as valuable and 
want us to continue. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- There's a question that comes from that then, 
and in the business function you would evaluate it in light of a 
number of economic areas.  In government you can't quite do it 
that way. 
 
For example, is the customer satisfied that the service has been 
provided adequately in dealing with the clientele.  And is there 
a way to evaluate it from not only the scope of the individual 
employee but for the person who gets to receive the benefit?  
Have you received . . . or is anything being done in order to 
enhance that opportunity with reflection on providing seminars 
so that they can better qualify themselves to help people out. 
 
Just as an example, today I had . . . and it doesn't deal with your 
department.  Today I had an individual call me who was 
referred to a facility for alcohol and drug abuse.  And I called 
five places before I got someone who could at least tell me 
what the qualifiers were for this individual to go to that facility. 
 
If he would have called that himself, he would have quit. And 
so then at some point in time you have to say, is there some 
direction that needs to be applied by the Public Service 
Commission in saying there is a customer service that has to be 
filled here so that the end result is that this individual has a 
direct response to the inquiry or a direct response as a customer 
to that individual agency that is being dealt with. 
 
And that's what I'm going for here and trying to have the Public 
Service Commission assist these people in somehow 
developing that style so that it can help the people who are the 
taxpayers, who are the customers, who in lots of cases will pay 
more for quality service if they know they are going to get it. 
 
For example, they'll buy one car over another car because even 
though it costs more, but it might have some of the incidental 
things that they may want to have.  And so what you have to do 
is make sure that the customer is well served. And I want you 
to respond to that if you would, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I'm glad the member asked 
that question because, as it happens, the Public Service 
Commission itself had done quite an 

extensive audit just in the immediate past -- this past summer, 
May and June of last year -- an audit of the services that it 
provided to its clients.  Now that's a little easier than some 
other departments because our clients in the commission are the 
departments of government. 
 
But in any event, we went through a careful audit to determine 
how effective the services that the commission offers to the 
departments is being delivered.  And that's exactly the kind of 
audit that the member has in mind, albeit an easier one than is 
the case with most of the departments. 
 
To the credit of the previous government, the commission had, 
I think in 1990, conducted a long series of seminars with the 
theme: serving people first, to emphasize the service aspect of 
what government does so far as the public is concerned.  And 
as I say, the former government should be commended for that, 
and I do.  And we have tried to carry that theme forward and 
strengthen it wherever we can. 
 
And that's particularly a challenge at a time when we're 
downsizing the public service in the way that we are because it 
inevitably results in fewer people trying to do the same amount 
of work, sometimes even trying to do more work, and it's a real 
challenge.  Hopefully, and I think it to be the case, that the 
department managers and the ministers are paying attention to 
that question of service and trying to run their audits and get 
some organized feedback to determine whether the service that 
they're mandated to supply and organize to deliver is in fact 
being delivered effectively and to the satisfaction of the 
customer. 
 
But I can't speak to that because we have no mechanism to 
monitor that and we simply don't have the resources to do it, 
but our understanding is that the individual departments should 
be doing that themselves. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Martens: -- The Provincial Auditor went through one 
department -- it was the Department of Highways -- in putting a 
value-for-money audit together for one department.  And I was 
wondering whether the Public Service Commission had input 
into that value-for-money audit through the employees, 
whether they got any feedback from the employees as to the 
value that it had been in dealing with it in the department, 
whether they got any benefit from it from the very fact that 
there was a value-for-money audit, that they looked at certain 
things and said we can do this better, or we don't have to do 
that.  Was the Public Service Commission involved in any of 
that discussion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I can tell the member we 
were not involved in any aspect of that audit. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, 
yesterday we talked a little bit about some of the employees 
and how they managed to get their 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

positions.  Members from the other party alluded to that in their 
questioning as well. 
 
But I'm a little confused as to how this process works.  It seems 
that people who want to work for the government, in different 
government offices, come to the Public Service Commission 
with their rsum and they submit that and they get put into the 
file.  And somehow the computer sorts out what their good 
points and bad points are and they get sort of sent to a direction 
of one department of government or the other.  And then when 
there's a job opening, their rsum would be considered for that 
job if they were most likely to be there. 
 
Now if I've summarized that correctly I'm sure you'll say so or 
not.  But that leads me then to the question of . . . as I started to 
talk about yesterday and then unfortunately we ran out of time 
for you to finish -- but in the case of people like Virginia 
Wilkinson who have worked as partisan members within a 
political party, how is it that they are able to go from working 
for the press, which obviously is not a government job, 
immediately to working into info services? 
 
How is that possible to walk through the whole system and get 
priority over all of the other people that are in those files where 
there are supposedly -- as you mention -- 10,000 names?  
Seems to me there must be somebody in those 10,000 names 
that would want to have the job in info services that would 
have applied before Virginia Wilkinson decided to become a 
political hack and quit her job with the press corp and apply to 
work for you folks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want first of all to address that part of 
the member's questions that related to the process by which 
somebody gets to work for the government.  And the member 
had asked that question earlier but I think had to leave the 
House, so I'll just go over it again. 
 
We have no process such as the member described.  We don't 
have any computer bank of names nor do we accept rsums 
just in a general way.  In order to get employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, you have to apply for a 
particular job.  That job will be advertised.  With respect to all 
of the positions that the Public Service Commission appoints 
to, it will be advertised in either the internal posting where the 
job will be filled internally by competition among those who 
are now working for government; or we may go external, in 
which case the advertisement will be in the newspapers as well 
as in the internal circular. 
 
And people have to apply then in response to those 
advertisements for the particular position, and that's how they 
get to be considered for public service employment.  Then they 
go through the processes that are followed by the Public 
Service Commission, and at the end of the day someone is 
selected and hired.  There is just no such thing as collecting a 
lot of rsums and then sorting through the rsums to see if 
there's anybody qualified.  They have to apply for the particular 
job. 

Now there are a number of positions that are order in council 
appointments and those are not within the reach of the Public 
Service Commission.  Those are not within the jurisdiction of 
the Public Service Commission.  So I can't answer for those. 
 
But the member will know that that is not a new phenomenon.  
The idea that the Lieutenant Governor in Council will appoint 
to certain positions is long established in this province.  I think 
that in the current year there are 200 such positions in 
government.  That's what I am advised.  But a scant five years 
ago there were 360 such positions.  So that's not a new one, you 
know. 
 
Now those are outside the processes of the Public Service 
Commission, and those are the people who work for the 
Premier and in the ministers' offices and in Executive Council 
and that sort of thing. 
 
Now turning specifically to Virginia Wilkinson, I'm really 
astonished that the member should select Ms. Wilkinson as the 
example.  Because I would have thought that every member of 
this House would have been familiar with her work as a 
long-time journalist with the CKCK television station, and the 
really high reputation that she had in that job.  And if she was 
politically active, I'm not aware of it -- if she was politically 
active, I am not aware of it. 
 
I am aware that she is highly qualified for the position that she 
served while she worked in the cabinet press office.  And I 
think it natural that in the disbanding of that office, which was 
by order in council appointment, she would have been 
considered qualified for another position in what is, in effect, 
the same field.  I'm sure the member is not trying to allege that 
Virginia Wilkinson is not highly qualified for the position that 
she is occupying and I'm really sorry that he used her as the 
example to make whatever point it is that he was making. 
 
But I just remind the member that the number of such positions 
in government has practically been cut in half since the 
heydays of 1988 and that it is certainly a small number when 
you consider that there are over 10,000 positions in executive 
government in this province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, I'm not 
the one that's going to be sorry before the day is over.  The 
general public is going to judge you, not me.  I'm asking the 
questions and they're judging your answers. 
 
We are talking about a job, Mr. Minister, that pays well over 
$40,000 a year, that was not, in your words, advertised 
externally.  There were no indications to the general public that 
this job then would be available, so obviously no one could 
apply for it.  So it is obviously a rigged advertisement, if that's 
what you could call it at all, is an advertisement of any kind. 
 
So further, Mr. Minister, we have an Anne Davis, the wife of 
the 1991 NDP candidate for Melfort, was given a position in 
info services as well.  Again, the 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

position was not advertised externally or internally as far as we 
can find out, and others who may have qualified were not 
allowed to apply for this position, so far as we are able to 
determine. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Minister, that a job of $4,584 a month, there 
would be plenty of people who would have been interested in 
working in information services for that kind of money.  Now 
as the head of the Public Service Commission, Minister, are 
you going to put a stop to this kind of thing?  Are you going to 
start being fair to people who might want to apply for these 
kinds of positions, people who are qualified, as well qualified 
as these other people and perhaps even better? 
 
They can't be judged because you give them no opportunity to 
apply, Mr. Minister.  What is the point of having a Public 
Service Commission, if fairness isn't being practised in these 
kinds of instances?  Now info services, I will remind you, sir, is 
not the press secretary to the Premier and it's not an internal 
cabinet job.  It's not a highly governmental NDP (New 
Democratic Party) sensitive type of job or a partisanly sensitive 
job.  This is information services where all parties have to have 
confidence in the employees to be impartial.  There is quite a 
difference here and I would like your answer to reflect that 
difference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I can say, Mr. Chair, to the 
member -- as I've said before -- that order in council 
appointments, of which there are relatively few in this 
government, are not within the reach of the Public Service 
Commission so I can't answer the member's questions. 
 
He mentions the name Anne Davis.  I think I know who that is.  
I know her name over the telephone because I've talked to her 
on the telephone when she telephones my wife, but I don't 
know her personally.  And it's not my responsibility, Mr. Chair, 
it's not my responsibility to answer for appointments to that 
particular office. 
 
But let's not be cute about this.  The member knows perfectly 
well that there are a number -- quite a number -- of positions in 
government, 200 order in council positions out of well over 
10,000 in this government, who are appointed by order in 
council.  And the particular appointments that he's talking 
about to media services have been filled by order in council for 
decades, as long as anybody can remember. 
 
The previous government under the premiership of the member 
from Estevan appointed people to that unit, all during the 10 
years in which he was the premier, by order in council.  We 
appoint people to that position by order in council.  When did 
the hon. member get religion?  What is this all about? 
 
I mean we all must recognize that there are positions that have 
been appointed for decades by the route of order in council, and 
there are a number of criteria by which those decisions have 
been made as to which will be, and which won't be, and then 
there's nothing 

new here.  The member is approaching it as though we had 
suddenly devised this brand-new method of appointing people 
to jobs in order for some political and nefarious purpose.  And I 
just simply say to the member, that's how the previous Tory 
government did it, that's how the previous NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government did it under Premier Blakeney.  
That's how the Liberal government from 1964 to 1971 did it 
under Premier Thatcher.  That's how Premier Douglas did it 
prior to 1964.  So what's new? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, info 
services is new in the way that it's being handled.  The process 
has been changed.  That's what's new.  As for digging around in 
the past and looking for excuses to justify the present because 
of what happened in the past, I'll remind you that the past 
governments that practised this kind of process have been 
defeated by the people of the province.  That included Allan 
Blakeney's government of the 1970s.  So you go back all the 
way to them, saying that this is great because that's what they 
did.  Well they got defeated.  Obviously something was wrong.  
People didn't like what they were doing. 
 
So what I'm saying to you is that there's something wrong with 
this whole process.  While in opposition the now Premier 
promised to appoint an independent commission to review all 
appointments to ensure that they were made based on merit, not 
on politics.  Those are his words, not mine; your Premier, not 
mine.  Now where's that commission today, Mr. Minister?  
Where is the open and honest government without patronage in 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I don't know what the member 
expects of me.  I mean is he asking me to answer for another 
department?  And he's certainly been trying to do that by 
raising these examples about a unit within the Executive 
Council.  He must know that I can't do that. 
 
I've tried to answer the member's question in general terms 
about the two kinds of appointment that are done by this 
government and by every other government in this 
country -- some by order in council, some by Public Service 
Commission. 
 
And in this province we have, I think, probably among the best 
ratios in Canada as between positions appointed by the Public 
Service Commission and positions appointed by order in 
council.  So I think we have nothing whatever to be ashamed 
of. 
 
And I just will simply have to leave it to the president of the 
Executive Council to answer specific questions about people in 
his particular department. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, before 
we move on to another area of discussion, another estimate, I'd 
just like to ask one question regarding the Public Service 
Commission.  Does the Public Service Commission hire all 
employees that work for government?  In particular, the reason 
I'm asking is because on another day I'd like to review it.  But I 
want to make sure that we're not overlapping.  If 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

we're in the wrong office then I'll get into the particular 
department.  But the Executive Air, who hires the pilots that fly 
Executive Air, government air?  Is that handled under the 
Public Service Commission or would that be under Property 
Management Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm advised, Mr. Chair, that the pilots at 
Executive Air are hired by the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, and the Public Service Commission 
does not handle their human relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the committee reports 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
 
The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I am pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the committee, 
Mr. Marv Hendrickson, the deputy minister.  Behind Mr. 
Hendrickson is Ms. Margaret Eagle, who is the assistant deputy 
minister for Metis Affairs.  And behind me is Mr. John Reid, 
the executive director of strategic planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
The Chair: -- Item 1, is that agreed? 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Not just yet, Mr. Chairman, thank you.  Welcome 
to the minister and his officials, and we look forward to a very 
productive discussion as we discuss the portfolio of Indian and 
Metis Affairs Secretariat. 
 
Mr. Minister, over the last little while there's . . . certainly the 
previous government and now your government, we've had a 
lot of discussions at the federal level.  And when we look back 
to the Charlottetown accord and the Meech Lake accord, there's 
been a fair bit of discussion as to how we settle treaty land 
entitlements. 
 
Discussion has taken place in regard to native self-government, 
and I think I have a few understandings of what I perceive 
maybe native self-government means.  Maybe there's, who 
knows, maybe there's 3 or 400 different ideas of what people 
across this country -- or maybe even larger than that -- of what 
they perceive native self-government being or meaning in the 
realm of self-government. 
 
And I'd be interested as we get into the discussion and in 
hearing you lay out what you perceive the term native 
self-government meaning, in light of the fact that there's a 
discussion taking place regarding the transferral of some $550 
million to the native community, that we'll certainly get into a 
discussion a little later on as we continue on with our questions. 
 
Before you possibly get up and give us a  

response as to what the responsibility the Indian and Native 
Affairs Secretariat is, the parameters under which it operates, 
and then give us an idea of what you perceive native 
self-government meaning, I just want to also indicate that you 
may have received in your office today a list of questions, just 
standardized questions that were sent up to your office. 
 
We're doing that, Mr. Minister, to try and help the process here, 
so we don't take a lot of time just getting numbers and names 
and figures and facts thrown out at us.  And I'd just appreciate 
your assurances that as soon as possible, we'll be able to get the 
responses back to those questions in case as we get into the 
debate, there may be questions arising from the responses as 
well. 
 
So those are three or four areas I've given you to start with, Mr. 
Minister, and I'd like to hear your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and I want to thank the 
member for opening these discussions in the way that he has.  
One thing that has so deeply impressed me in the discussion of 
these issues is the amount of consensus that exists in Canada, 
certainly at the political level, but I think at all levels, the 
amount of consensus that there is around these issues. 
 
When I say these issues, I mean the issues of self-government 
and the related issues that the member referred to in his 
opening remarks.  The level of consensus is heartening, and the 
absence of political controversy around these issues is also very 
heartening -- one of the few areas of government activity that is 
not characterized by party fights, at least by political bickering 
and partisan debate.  And I think that is very heartening, and I 
know that the aboriginal communities appreciate it, and 
appreciate it deeply. 
 
Let me cite in support of what I just said, the work of the 
previous government on the treaty land entitlement process.  I 
think that was a remarkable piece of work.  It involved the 
federal and provincial governments coming together with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations in an effort to settle 
an unpaid debt of more than 100 years.  This was land that had 
been promised to the Indian peoples under treaty and which 
had never been delivered. So that Canada and more recently 
Saskatchewan owed them that land and simply did not 
acknowledge the debt and didn't make any effort to repay it 
until the 1980s. 
 
And as I say, the previous government picked up what could 
have been a hot potato and decided to do something about it 
and to settle it once and for all and made great progress in that 
before the election in 1991.  And when this government 
assumed office, we picked up that file and carried it through to 
conclusion.  And we're proud of the work that we did on it, as 
we know you must be proud of the work that you did on it in 
order to bring that very important matter to a conclusion. 
 
And finally we can write . . . we can stamp paid to a debt that 
we owed to those entitlement bands who 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

had simply never received the land which the Queen had 
promised to them through the treaties that were entered into 
over 100 years ago.  And I think that's a proud moment in the 
history of this province and a proud moment in the history of 
both of our political parties and the governments that we 
formed in the '80s and now in the '90s. 
 
When the constitutional discussions began in the Canada 
Round under the chair of the Rt. Hon. Joe Clark, we found a 
similar situation existed.  We found that governments of all 
political stripes representing all the provinces and territories of 
Canada, together with the federal government, came together 
and on our first day of meetings each jurisdiction confirmed 
their recognition of the inherent right of aboriginal people to 
govern themselves. 
 
And that recognition held all the way through the 
Charlottetown discussions and was never wavered from and 
was never put into any question.  All those discussions 
proceeded on the basis of the recognition of the inherent right. 
 
And again it made me, and I know the other ministers who 
participated in that conference, those long series of meetings, 
very proud, proud that we in Canada were able to take a unified 
position on this important question without partisan differences 
and without trying to gain any political points on what is a 
potentially controversial issue. 
 
So I just wanted to mention that by way of backdrop, because I 
know since we've been in the government the official 
opposition has been very supportive of the things that we've 
been trying to do with respect to the Indian and Metis peoples 
of Saskatchewan, and supported, for example, the treaty land 
entitlement Bill in this House by a unanimous vote. 
 
We hope we can continue with that level of political agreement 
and we'll strive on our part to achieve it. And in that regard we 
will share with you all the information that we have and all of 
our plans and be quite open and above board with respect to 
what we're trying to do. 
 
(1600) 
 
I want to now finally come, after all that preface, to the 
member's concerns, and that is what does self-government 
mean.  My answer is that I don't know exactly what it means.  
No one knows exactly what it means.  People have theories and 
some glimmering of understanding perhaps of what it means, 
but we will not know what it means until we have found the 
process by which we will sit down, all levels of government in 
Canada, that is federal, provincial, and aboriginal, and work it 
out. 
 
And the reason why we have to approach it that way is that it is 
going to be different in different parts of the country, and it is 
going to be so because aboriginal peoples will require it to be 
so.  The appetite for 

self-government that you will find among the Inuit on Baffin 
Island is much different than the appetite for self-government 
of Metis living in Saskatoon or Indians living in the Yukon or 
Indians living in Nova Scotia or the . . . and I could go on and 
on with examples. 
 
The Indians in British Columbia have never had a treaty.  So 
they approach the whole question much differently than do the 
plains Indians who are covered by treaty and who have a 
history of the kind of governing arrangements that pertain to 
treaties under the Indian Act and under the administration of 
the Department of Indian Affairs. 
 
So you just can't find a generic definition of aboriginal 
government that will cover all these circumstances.  In a city 
like Toronto, self-government for aboriginal people living in 
Toronto is probably going to involve the administration of 
certain services, maybe social services, health services, justice 
services, and the like.  Some of those programs they may want 
to control and manage by themselves, and I think that's a 
doable thing.  In fact, I think that would be a good thing. 
 
But that level of self-government is not at all what the Inuit in 
the western Arctic, the Inuvialuit, see as self-government 
because they're already doing that and they have in mind a 
more complicated form of government for their region than is 
the case in Toronto. 
 
And so that in effect is my answer to the member.  There is no 
generic all-encompassing definition.  It is something that is 
going to have to be worked out and worked out over, I think, a 
relatively long period of time because it'll require some careful, 
careful negotiation and careful consideration. 
 
Probably we wind up with something that is fluid and flexible; 
a little bit now, a little bit later, all depending upon the 
circumstances of the aboriginal people and what's happening in 
the country and province at the time, but marching steadily, 
marching steadily towards the goal of aboriginal 
self-government in order to recognize fully their inherent right 
to govern themselves. 
 
Just before I sit down, and I know I'm in danger of taking too 
much of the time of the committee, let me just talk about the 
idea of inherency.  When the first European settlers landed on 
the shores they found a civilization, they found people were 
living here.  They were called Indians because the people who 
landed thought they had reached India, and they have been 
called Indians ever since that time. 
 
But there was a functioning society here.  It was different than 
the society that we know today and different than society that 
the Europeans who landed had known in their home countries. 
But none the less it was a self-contained and unique and 
self-governing society. 
 
And the simple point is that they have never given up that right 
to govern themselves.  That right has in fact been recognized 
throughout the sweep of the history of settlement on this 
continent, and this country in 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

particular, as being a continuing right. 
 
And as I say, I think all of us can be very proud of the position 
of all of our governments right across this country in 
recognizing that that right has never been extinguished, has 
never been given up, but continues as an inherent right.  And it 
is now our responsibility here in the 1990s to move towards 
putting some flesh upon the framework of that idea and 
actually giving aboriginal . . . not giving but allowing 
aboriginal people to develop their own form of governance 
with respect to the issues that are close to them and their way of 
life. 
 
Now I'm just about to sit down.  The member I don't think 
wants me to get into the details of the 550 or the details of 
treaty land entitlement.  I'll wait for specific questions on those.  
But I did want to respond to the member on the very important 
concept of self-governance. 
 
And I'll conclude on this note.  What I learned during the 
Charlottetown process, what every government learned during 
that process is that we had to give up on our idea that we 
should define what is self-government.  And there was a great 
appetite, Mr. Chair, and to the member -- there was a great 
appetite around that bargaining table to define what it was; 
what would aboriginal governments do. 
 
And then after we weren't able to make any progress along that 
line, we tried defining what aboriginal governments would not 
do, with the implication that they could do all the rest.  And 
that didn't take us anywhere either.  We weren't even able to 
agree between ourselves on those points, leave alone with the 
aboriginal governments, aboriginal groups represented. 
 
What we learned was that we didn't have to know with precise 
certainty how it was going to come out.  We learned that our 
desire that we know, is a value that we hold in our society.  Our 
society and our governments like to know with as much 
certainty as possible how something is going to turn out before 
they commit themselves to it. 
 
Aboriginal groups, on the other hand, pay attention to process.  
And if they could agree upon a process for working these issues 
out and for arriving at agreements, that was enough.  We didn't 
have to know exactly where we were going.  We didn't have to 
know exactly how it would look before we'd begin discussing.  
As long as we could set up a process of discussion that had 
integrity, that was sufficient. 
 
And it took us a long time -- and I'll conclude on this note, Mr. 
Chair -- it took us a long time to accept that that was a 
legitimate way of doing things.  In that exercise it was the 
white governments, if I can use that term, of the provinces, 
territories, and the federal government that learned from the 
aboriginal people that their way was a more practical solution 
to this.  And we all recognized that in the end, to the credit to 
all of us, I think. 

Pardon me for being so long-winded, but I think the member 
knew when he asked the question that I would have to give the 
full nine yards of answer. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and you're quite right, I 
was quite well aware that we might get a fairly lengthy 
dissertation. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when it comes to self-government -- and I 
think that was one of the, I guess the key words in even the 
whole Charlottetown accord -- and on the street, you talked to 
people and people wanted to know what I thought 
self-government meant.  I asked them what they perceived 
self-government to mean.  I'm sure even amongst the native 
community, as you indicated, the native community may have 
different reserves or different areas of the country would have a 
different concept of what self-government would mean. 
 
What I find, most non-natives would perceive self-government 
as meaning a type of government whereby they would begin to 
not only provide government for themselves, whether it's 
through their own band councils, maybe providing policing, 
maybe providing some medical help, maybe even take care of 
social needs on the specific reserves or in a jurisdiction, like the 
province. 
 
I think the other area that the non-native community would 
look at self-government and their interpretation of what 
self-government would mean is, is the native community then 
taking control of their lives totally, where they start to generate 
some of their . . . basically through business, generate some of 
their own taxable revenue or revenue.  And I think that's one of 
the major concerns that is ongoing in our society and certainly 
in our province as you travel around the province, rural 
municipalities are running into a problem as to some of the 
treaty land entitlements that we have arrived at. 
 
But I guess what I'm trying to determine is, when we talk 
self-government are we looking . . . does the process include 
some form of native involvement in really providing for their 
own livelihood down the road?  And I think there are a number 
of bands across Canada already have shown that if given the 
opportunity, they can provide a very solid form of governance, 
where basically they don't really need the taxpayer of Canada 
to provide a lot of money because they have generated a fair bit 
of revenue through their own initiative. 
 
And so I'm wondering if that's possibly some of the discussion 
that has taken place.  And what I'm also wondering, I guess the 
major question, Mr. Minister, is where are we today?  What is 
the process today?  Are there ongoing discussions?  Is there 
debate between the native community and all levels of 
government, or is it kind of on the back burner for the time 
being and we're going to get into it down the road, or just 
exactly where do we sit regarding self-government today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- One of the fundamental objectives of 
Indian, Inuit and Metis peoples in these 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

discussions about self-government is to attain economic 
self-sufficiency so that they can take their place, along with all 
the rest of Canada, as productive members of society and stand 
tall, as it were, with everyone else and end some of these 
terrible myths and negative perceptions that exist in our 
society. 
 
And it is clear that they intend to look to their own resources 
first in running the governments that they're able to develop.  
What that means will remain to be seen also, but they certainly 
look to economic development and to jobs, gainful employment 
of every kind, and provide themself with a revenue base before 
they look to either the provincial or federal government for any 
help. 
 
Now I believe that it will take a long time to do that.  How long 
depends upon the development of the Canadian economy. But I 
think we ought to know that it will take some time and that 
some level of support from both the federal and provincial 
governments will continue. 
 
The way I look at it is this. The federal government is already 
expending really huge sums of money in order to provide 
services to the aboriginal people.  One of the difficulties that I 
have with it is that so much of that money never gets down to 
the level of the Indian or Inuit person; that it's lost in the 
delivery of the programs, in the expenses involved in delivering 
those programs. 
 
I think that the same situation pertains in many provinces.  A 
lot of money is spent.  In Saskatchewan we've grossed it up as 
being about $550 million.  It's hard to be accurate about that 
figure, but I think that's a best estimate. 
 
(1615) 
 
Here's my point.  If you took all the money that all the 
governments in Canada are now spending on aboriginal 
peoples, and just simply handed that money over, you would 
have people with a high income.  You'd have aboriginal people 
with an average income that would probably be above the 
national average.  So there's enough money in the system to run 
the system.  But so much of it, I think now, is being wasted, 
and wasted on other than aboriginal people themselves. 
 
So I don't look at self-government arrangements as being 
terribly expensive as far as our government is concerned or the 
federal government.  I think we're now spending all that we're 
ever going to have to spend. 
 
The rural municipalities.  I want to just touch on them for a 
moment.  With respect to the treaty land entitlement bands, I 
think everyone agrees that there is no problem.  There is a fund 
available there which was negotiated with the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and which 
is sufficient to satisfy the transactions that will take place 
within that framework agreement.  Where we have the problem 
is outside of treaty land entitlement where you have 

what we call specific claims, and that is where the land wasn't 
turned over under the treaties but has been lost, usually by the 
fraud of some Indian agent or some other person, that the land 
was sold out from under them or they lost their land, and now 
we have to go through the process of correcting that fraud and 
getting the land back to them.  On those claims, Mr. Chair, and 
Mr. Member, on those claims the federal government has not 
been willing up to this point to provide the same tax 
consideration as under the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework 
Agreement. 
 
It is the position at SARM and the rural municipalities 
concerned that the same arrangement should be made for those 
specific claims as under treaty land entitlement.  That's our 
position too, and we agree very strongly with the RMs on that 
because our negotiators were in the room when this matter was 
being discussed at the treaty land entitlement negotiations.  
And the federal government agreed that these specific claims 
should be handled in this way, the same formula as treaty land 
entitlement.  So we regard it as a closed issue. 
 
Now there was a lot of backing and sliding by the Department 
of Indian Affairs after the TLE (treaty land entitlements) 
signing.  In the last days of the Conservative government, just 
before the last federal election, the federal minister recognized 
their responsibility here and said that she would deliver on the 
tax aspects of specific claim, wrote a letter to that effect to 
everybody concerned, and we got a copy of that letter.  It is not 
clear what is the position of the new federal government.  It 
remains an open issue. 
 
Now finally to the member's final question which was, where 
are we today in the self-government process?  We are here.  
The federal minister has recognized on behalf of the federal 
government, their commitment to or their recognition of the 
inherent right of aboriginal people to govern themselves.  He 
then says he needs six months to consult with aboriginal groups 
and with the provinces in order to determine the process that 
should be followed in putting some flesh on this idea, in 
working out what self-government means.  He's in that process 
now. 
 
We agree that he needs some time in order to do that, and we 
have given him the benefit of our advice and our experience in 
this area.  I expect that at the expiration of his six-month 
period -- which I think is in June, June or July -- he will have 
some ideas about a process, and we'll come together and work 
out what that process should be.  In the meantime we're not 
quite marking time, but we really can't do very much.  We can 
talk, we can explore ideas, but we can't really make any 
significant progress.  The federal government is the main actor 
because they have the constitutional responsibility that they 
have under section 91(24) of the constitution. 
 
So until they determine what process they're prepared to 
follow, we're sort of stuck in place; we're stymied.  But we will 
continue to work on it to the extent that we can. 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I 
quite heartily agree with you that certainly, even amongst the 
native community, there are some major concerns regarding 
funding and how the funding will be allocated.  And just to, 
say, turn over a lump sum of funds whether or not the funding 
will reach down to the average, ordinary, everyday native 
person from the children up -- and certainly there are a lot of 
questions out there.  And I think there are some . . . many, if 
not all, of our native leaders are well aware of that. 
 
And as you continue into the discussion of self-government and 
funding and their funding, I think those are some of the things 
that you as minister, and your Justice officials, your 
government, even we as opposition members, and all 
governments must continue to bring to the forefront so that 
we've got some agreements and understandings.  Because as a 
society, they're part of our society, part of our province and 
country, and at the end someone's going to be responsible to 
meet some of those needs if they aren't looked after today. 
 
Mr. Minister, you had talked about certain claims and the 
taxation process.  And I'm sorry, I missed exactly what you 
meant by that.  I'm just wondering what . . . claims that were 
arriving outside of the treaty land entitlement.  And I'm 
wondering if you could be a little more specific regarding some 
of these claims, what we really mean, what we're really talking 
of, as I missed exactly where you were going.  And I wonder if 
you could bring that to our attention, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to just draw again the difference, 
define the difference between the specific claims, as everyone 
refers to them, and the treaty land entitlement claims. 
 
Under the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreement, the 
federal and provincial government pay into a fund.  They pay 
27.5 times the assessed value of land that is claimed within a 
municipality.  That goes into a fund and it is drawn upon by 
RMs (rural municipality) each year in lieu of land taxes. 
 
The payment into that fund is 70 per cent federal and 30 per 
cent provincial, and the estimated size of that fund is $50 
million.  That applies to all of the treaty land entitlement bands, 
which were bands that were short-changed, never did receive 
their entitlement under the treaties.  So that's the unpaid debt 
that I referred to earlier, and we're now in a position to mark 
that as paid, although the payments will go over a period of 12 
years. 
 
With respect to specific claims, you have there a land claim 
which is based upon a fraud usually.  These are bands that 
received their entitlement after the treaties were signed, but 
have lost their land since then or lost part of their land since 
then, usually because of somebody's fraud -- the Indian agent 
sold the land, the land was somehow sold out from under them.  
The band lost their land, and they come forward now and make 
a claim to be compensated for that land. 

These claims are no part of the provincial government.  We're 
not involved in these negotiations directly, because it's entirely 
up to the federal government to make up that shortfall.  Their 
people caused it or allowed it to happen, and they have to pay 
it. 
 
But the tax issue arises there because the RMs are in the same 
position as under the TLE.  They've got an Indian band that 
claims land in their area or . . . I don't say claim land; they buy 
land.  All of this is on a willing seller, willing buyer basis.  
Nobody is forced to sell their land to an Indian band.  But if a 
band acquires land within a municipality, the tax problem for 
the RM is the same, because the band is by treaty not required 
to pay taxes with respect to land.  The offer from the federal 
government is only five times the assessed value, and that 
doesn't give the RM any comfort at all, and they're very, very 
concerned about it. 
 
I know the member heard me earlier when I said that we take 
the side of the RM on that question because our negotiators 
were in the room when this was discussed, and we heard the 
agreement that was made.  And the Department of Indian 
Affairs backtracked on that agreement. 
 
That's our position, and that's with the knowledge of what went 
on in the room.  They have backtracked on that agreement.  
And the federal minister of the day, Pauline Browes, reinstated 
that agreement and said that the same arrangements as under 
treaty land entitlement would apply to the specific claims. 
 
Then the election happened, and the federal government now, 
the Liberal government, are wrestling with this question, I 
suppose, of what they do with specific claims.  I know they're 
wrestling with it. And I don't know what the result of that will 
be.  But we're on the side of the RM because that was the deal 
that should have been made, and that's the deal that was made.  
It's the only deal that makes any sense.  If that deal isn't in 
place, then the specific claim process in this province will 
become very, very controversial, and frankly, perhaps 
unworkable.  So we continue to press that position very 
strongly. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, how many specific claims 
would there be in the province that would fall under this 
specific claims issue, and where are they and who are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I'll give 
you the global numbers.  The federal department advises that 
there are currently 40 specific claims that have been made.  
And they advise that settlement of these claims may result in 
approximately 420,0000 acres of land being purchased and 
attaining reserve status -- 420,000 acres. 
 
Now we have in the department but not here in the Chamber 
today, the specific claims in question, what bands, where, and 
how much, but we can provide that to you and we will.  There 
have been some recent settlements and I just might mention 
those in passing so you get some idea of what the current 
situation is. 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

There have been six settlements since 1986 and they include 
the White Bear settlement where the Ocean Man and Pheasant 
Rump Nakota bands received over $16 million to purchase up 
to 34,485 acres.  So you see the size of that. 
 
I'll send this over too, rather than read it all into the record.  I'll 
send this information to the member as well.  But you've got 
some idea of what the situation is with respect to settlements 
that have been made up until now.  But there are 40 more that 
remain in the pipeline. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Toth: -- So what you're telling us, Mr. Minister, then is at 
present there were 40 specific claims ongoing; there have been 
6 settled.  Is that 6 of the 40?  And that's 420,000 acres 
approximately that . . . and I suppose that may change a bit if 
land values change because I'm not exactly sure.  The 
entitlements that are coming out or the claims are settled, the 
bands I believe settle for a certain dollar amount and then how 
much land . . . they have the ability then to go and purchase the 
land. 
 
And if they purchase at six or seven or nine times the 
assessment, if they pay a higher premium for the land, then it's 
going to mean fewer acres that they're going to be able to 
purchase. 
 
So I guess what I'm wondering is -- we're roughly talking of 
420,000 acres -- that's a lot of acres of land that is going to fall 
out of the taxation base for rural governments as far as 
providing services around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could respond on that.  We 
understand that this is a federal issue, federal responsibility; the 
province really isn't involved in it.  And these 40 claims, as I 
indicated earlier, and certainly in my area one RM is basically 
facing a real problem already as to the amount of land that they 
are able to tax and the tax revenue that they're losing because of 
one of the settlements that's taking place.  And that's creating a 
major problem for the specific RM of Hazelwood and, I'm not 
sure, all the other RMs. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Minister, while you're speaking on that.  
How many of these claims are involved in large urban centres?  
Like we are aware of the . . . I think there was a claim in the 
Fort Qu'Appelle area regarding . . . that's been ongoing.  And 
I'm not sure if it's still ongoing.  I'm wondering if there's any 
claims that are being presently brought forward that affect large 
urban centres in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, these 
claims are the subject of negotiation between the federal 
government and the band.  And they are based upon how much 
land was stolen or sold out from under the Indians.  And they 
arrived at a compensation package for that. 
 
As in TLE, it is our understanding that there is a requirement 
that the band spend a portion of that on 

land.  And then they have discretion to spend other money on 
other things -- maybe economic development, or what have 
you.  We're not involved in those negotiations at all. We're 
aware of them, but we're not involved.  We think that the 
situation is that those six settlements I described are included in 
the figure of 40, so that would leave 34 unresolved.  Probably 
20 of those are not yet at the table; the balance of 14 would be 
at the table and being discussed. 
 
As yet the question of a tax cushion or tax arrangement for the 
RMs has not been arrived at, and I've gone through that 
problem and the present state of play with respect to that 
problem.  But the member is correct; that remains unresolved. 
 
Now with respect to the question of land acquired by Indian 
bands in urban areas, we have of course in the past seen that in 
Prince Albert and in the very recent past in Saskatoon, and then 
just this last three or four months in Fort Qu'Appelle. 
 
The Fort Qu'Appelle acquisition was the first acquired under 
the treaty land entitlement arrangements.  "Under" is not quite 
the right word because it's not really under the agreement but it 
is pursuant to the agreement.  And the member will be aware of 
the controversy that occurred at the local level and how that 
was eventually resolved by a referendum. 
 
That matter has been settled now between the town of Fort 
Qu'Appelle and the Star Blanket Cree First Nation.  And we 
were present . . . I was present at the signing of that agreement 
a couple of weeks ago with the member, my colleague from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and the member from Melville where the 
Star Blanket Band is located, were present in Fort Qu'Appelle 
for that signing.  I'm happy to report that all the issues there 
appear to have been satisfactorily resolved and the service 
agreement is in place and both parties look forward to a long 
and happy life together. 
 
And I believe that that agreement has shown the way for 
similar situations if they arise elsewhere in Saskatchewan.  
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) has 
been close to that operation and I think they have, in effect, 
developed an agreement in which only that some blanks would 
be filled in in order to accommodate future such situations if 
they occur in the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now, Mr. Minister, this 
may fall out of your jurisdiction as well, but you made a 
comment . . . mentioned the fact that there were land 
entitlements years ago, treaties that were signed and some of 
this land has disappeared; they've fallen under specific claims.  
I gathered from your comments that there were specific acres 
involved at that time. 
 
What's taking place right now?  Is the government looking at 
giving back the equivalent acres or are they taking into 
consideration the land values right now?  If you were to look at 
what, say, the different reserves 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

had of the day versus the price of land where it may be sitting 
today, some of these reserves may be looking at smaller 
holdings.  And it's not that I'm standing here specifically 
arguing for the same holdings or larger or smaller reserves. 
 
I'm just wondering first of all, are we trying to, or is the federal 
government to your knowledge trying to give them back what 
was put in the treaties as far as land entitlement, and who's 
paying for that?  You indicated that part of the pay-out that's 
been agreed to by reserves is that they're able, they go and buy 
their own then, rather, and they may not specifically get the 
same amount of land. 
 
Another question that arises.  When these entitlements or land 
claims or specific claims are in place, what happens to, say, 
natives who have moved off of the reserves and aren't living on 
the reserves now, and they may want to migrate back or 
become part of the reserves and be involved?  Are they 
included or are they on the outside then looking in? 
 
Say if they moved into a large urban centre, left a reserve say 
up in the Melfort area or wherever -- there's reserves all across 
the province -- are they included in these entitlements?  What 
happens to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Sorry to take some time with that, Mr. 
Chair, but the rules -- or the answer is different under TLE as 
compared to under specific claims.  I have the sense that 
members opposite know as much about this as I do, at least 
some of them.  But this is an exam.  You tell me at the end of it 
whether I passed or not.  This is a very interesting subject. 
 
The work of Cliff Wright as the treaty commissioner was 
crucial to resolving long-standing issues that couldn't be agreed 
to at the negotiating table.  And those recommendations of Mr. 
Wright in his capacity as treaty commissioner, broke the 
log-jam and allowed the agreement to be made. 
 
Let's talk about treaty land entitlement first and the shortfall of 
the entitlement.  The shortfall of the entitlement was calculated 
in the following way. How many members of the band were 
there at the time of the signing of the treaty that ought to have 
been included in calculating the land entitlement?  And you did 
that by taking that number times 128 acres per head, and that 
gave you your total entitlement.  But they never got that land, 
or there was a shortfall. 
 
Now that figure, that acreage figure has to be acquired by the 
entitlement band.  The amount of their settlement has to include 
the purchase of that much land.  Now the amount of the 
settlement that a band is entitled to under the TLE was arrived 
at by using that same acreage figure, the amount of the shortfall 
times $260 an acre on average -- $260 an acre which was the 
genius of Mr. Wright in cutting through all of the 
considerations and spelling out that number, and everybody 
could live with that number.  It wasn't anybody's number but it 
was one that everybody could accept. And that gives you your 
dollar number. 

Now of that dollar number, the land that I mentioned in the first 
part of my answers has to be acquired, so the band goes out and 
acquires that land from willing sellers.  They have no power to 
expropriate; they have to find somebody who wants to sell.  
They have to want the land and they enter into the transaction.  
That has up to this point involved almost all rural agricultural 
land. 
 
There are some exceptions and we've talked about one of them 
with the Star Blanket Band picking up that property from the 
federal government in the town of Fort Qu'Appelle.  And we've 
talked about that already so I won't dwell on it any longer. 
 
Now then, let's leap over to the specific claims country.  And 
the acreage there is the amount that was -- I use the word 
stolen.  I don't want to use it in any technical sense.  The 
circumstances vary, but that land was pulled away from the 
Indians in one form or another.  I've indicated that in many 
cases it was the result of the fraud of the Indian agent of the 
day, or some other federal official.  But in any event, the 
federal government acknowledges responsibility for making up 
that land. 
 
They now do that.  They negotiate that at the bargaining table.  
They are not bound by the treaty commissioner's 
recommendation, and I don't know whether that forms any 
basis for discussion or not, because we're not at that table.  But 
they work out the amount of that entitlement.  And presumably 
they have some process for reacquiring the land and having a 
requirement for reacquiring that land similar to the treaty land 
entitlement. But we don't really know . . . the federal 
government has a policy on it, and we don't know the details of 
how that is administered. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you've given us a bit of an overview 
of . . . perception of how the land entitlements are going to be 
arrived at, going back to some of the original treaties. 
 
But the other question that we're still looking for a response 
and an answer is the native people who are living presently off 
the reserves and are looking or want to be reincorporated into 
the reserves.  I believe they're called C-31s.  And certainly if 
you're looking back to when the treaties were signed, no doubt 
many reserves, the population has grown over a period of time.  
And I can understand the complexity of trying to determine 
how we arrive at sizeable reserves or land acquirements in view 
of the population increases. 
 
But the other thing, Mr. Minister, is for the individuals who 
want to go back and be part of the reserves in this land 
entitlement, what is happening with them?  What's the process 
and are they being incorporated in?  Is that part of the 
agreement that's taken place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm sorry for having missed that in my 
previous answer.  I just hadn't noted it down. 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1994 

The off-reserve Indians were included by the bands and by the 
governments in the calculation of all of the numbers.  And they 
participated in the process and in fact voted on the result. 
 
There are two types of Indian peoples involved here.  There 
are, first of all, the band members who are living off reserve 
because they're working in the city or something like that.  And 
the Bill C-31 people who are entitled to be . . . who are part of 
the bands, you know, who are in that Bill C-31 process.  I won't 
go through all of the details of that, but they are also included.  
So they're included in the numbers and they're included in the 
ratification processes. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Okay.  Number one, Mr. Minister, you've 
indicated just a few moments ago that -- and I believe this was 
under the Wright Commission -- they had agreed to land values 
of $260 an acre.  Or was that . . . is that including the off 
reserve or the C-31's going back to the reserve, all the 
individuals being part of the agreement?  Is that included in that 
figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer to the member's question is 
yes.  That's a simplistic answer to a difficult question.  The Bill 
C-31 people like to use that expression, have been applying for 
years to regain their status, and the federal government deals 
with those applications.  And they go on -- most cases -- onto 
the band list.  If they are on the band list they were included.  If 
they're not on the band list they're not included. 
 
And then you get down into really technical differences 
between band lists and general lists -- and I don't pretend to 
understand that.  But the general answer to your question is yes, 
band members living off reserve and Bill C-31 entitlees were 
included in the numbers. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Minister.  You're indicating to us that, to 
your knowledge, all C-31's or all individuals off reserves are 
included in the numbers here. 
 
The reason I'm asking this question, Mr. Minister, is because I 
believe -- especially when you look at SARM and SUMA and 
local governments -- is the concern they have is if all these 
individuals aren't included.  And I know it gets to be somewhat 
of a touchy subject as well because if people that aren't 
included, and yet should be included at the end of the day when 
we finally arrive at finalizing these agreements . . . and all of a 
sudden we find that there's still a large pocket of native 
population wasn't included.  And then we're going to be left in 
another situation of addressing the concern of well, how do we 
look after these people?  Where do they fit into the scenario?  
Are they then left under the responsibility of the provincial 
government? 
 
And even though this is in many cases a federal responsibility, 
it would seem to me, Mr. Minister -- and I'm sure that your 
officials and your government's quite well aware of it -- it's 
something that you want to be pressing Ottawa, to make sure 
that they're 

covering all the guidelines.  Because I don't think we or local 
governments want to be left with looking after, or realizing that 
we still have, a major cost on our hands when we thought we 
had basically covered it all and that we are arriving at some 
form of self-government that was allowing the native 
community to govern themselves and look after themselves 
without being -- can I use the term -- an added cost to the 
taxpayers of Canada or the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The question is a good question.  The 
way in which the Bill C-31 people were treated was worked out 
at the bargaining table and was very much a matter of 
compromise.  And the result of the compromise is, as the 
member indicated, probably about half of the Bill C-31 
Indians -- maybe a little less than half -- have been reinstated.  
And most of those would be on band lists.  But the other half 
are still in the pipeline somewhere.  It's up to the federal 
government to process these applications and they have been 
processing them very slowly.  So there would be another . . . at 
least an equal number of Bill C-31 people who were not on a 
band list and who have not been included in the calculations. 
 
Now that was a point of contention at the negotiations and was 
finally settled out, along with everything else, by the three 
parties to the negotiations.  And it is the situation today. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what you are saying is that as far as 
you know today, about half of the C-31's or the people that 
would be classified as C-31's have been incorporated into the 
negotiations regarding treat land entitlement or specific claims; 
about half are not. 
 
How do we deal with this?  Or what are you and your 
department doing to deal with the individuals who haven't been 
incorporated?  Because at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, if 
they are not included and we reach some agreements and 
finalize agreements and find out that we have a significant . . . 
when you say half, I don't know exactly what the number is.  
And that could be a significant number of individuals that then 
are going to have to be looked after.  They become a burden to 
society and they're going to have to be taken care of.  And that's 
the concern we have, Mr. Minister.  Not just us the opposition, 
my colleagues and I, but certainly local governments.  And I 
think, as a province, it should be a major concern to us as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The global figures for Bill C-31, as we 
understand it, is that there are 10,000 people that have been 
reinstated under Bill C-31, and there is another 10 to 15,000 to 
go.  So that means there's something between 20 and 25,000 
entitlees, you know, people entitled. 
 
Now those aren't the numbers we should use in this discussion.  
And the reason is that the entitlement . . . there were only 27 
entitlement bands out of the total of 72 bands.  So, is that about 
a third?  So probably a figure of about a third with respect to 
those numbers I've just given you would be the right number. 



March 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

And I just wind up my answer in this way: that this was a 
contentious discussion item in negotiations and finally was 
compromised on the basis that if the Bill C-31 person was on a 
band list, they were included.  If they weren't, they weren't.  
And the deal was finalized on that basis.  Not a perfect result 
and everybody knew the consequences.  And the member's 
touched upon one of the main ones, but that's how it was 
compromised out in the end along with a lot of other 
compromises that all parties had to make. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I would like the committee to now report 
progress. 
 
The Chairperson: -- It being near to 5 o'clock, this committee 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


