






















































Hansard: February 15, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 189 
 February 15, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce 21 grade 2 and grade 3 students from 
St. Pius X School in Regina. They are in your gallery and they 
are being accompanied by their teacher Madame Bzdel and by 
Ms. Perron. I'd like to ask the members to join me in greeting 
them, but before we do that there is one particular person in 
that group that I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, and that's 
a very special girl, my daughter Marin. Would the members 
please join me in greeting these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce 
to you and all the members of this Assembly, four young 
people from different parts of the province: Dan Little, Nikki 
Hipkin, Richard Lamontagne, and Kim Emerson. Please join 
me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery are some good friends of mine, the Kovach family 
from just north of Mistatim. The Kovach family run and 
operate the Circle Lake Angus Vacation Farm and they are 
very successful in helping the tourism industry of this province. 
And I would like all members to join with me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
the Speaker's gallery, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the Legislative Assembly, Pastor 
and Mrs. Peter Enns and family of Kindersley. Mr. Speaker, 
they are here in Regina on business, and I think they'll take a 
great interest in the proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Elimination of Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today 
to take another important step in the reform package the 
opposition is introducing to the session, this session of the 
legislature. 
 
Today members of the opposition will be asking a number of 
questions we received directly from Saskatchewan residents. 
And we'll be sending the written transcripts of the question and 
the government's answer to the person who sent the questions. 
We feel this is a good way to reform the Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, and make it more meaningful to people. 

 
So with that in mind, I would like to ask two questions received 
from Pastor Peter Enns of Kindersley. I should note, although 
we are asking Mr. Enns's questions, we received similar 
questions from a number of other people. So on behalf of Mr. 
Enns who is with us here this afternoon, and all others who 
asked about this issue, Mr. Premier, I want to know why I 
should trust your government. In 1991 you said you would 
eliminate the PST (provincial sales tax), among other 
provinces, upon being elected. Mr. Premier, why are we still 
waiting for you to come through on your promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 
answer that question. When we became government and we 
established the Gass Commission to open the books of the 
province, what the Gass Commission told us was that we had a 
significant problem with our deficit and our debt. 
 
Now we thought long and hard about how to deal with that 
problem and there are two different routes that you can see in 
Canada today. One is the Alberta route, which is to take deep, 
painful — in some cases perhaps brutal — cuts. Or there's 
another approach which is a balanced approach, which is to 
balance cuts and reductions with some tax increases. 
 
After long, hard thought we decided on the balanced approach 
because we thought this was more consistent with 
Saskatchewan's traditions and was more compassionate for 
some of the most vulnerable people in our community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Abortion Plebiscite 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I direct my 
questions to the Premier of the province. Mr. Premier, a second 
question from Peter Enns which again I believe reflects a 
concern which is raised by a number of the letters we received. 
 
Mr. Enns asks: Mr. Premier, I want to know why your 
government decided to ignore the results of the plebiscite 
regarding the public funding of abortion, a matter in which you 
clearly ruled against the majority of Saskatchewan residents, 
many of whom placed you in office. Mr. Premier, I'd like to 
know when you chose to abandon democracy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition are 
following an interesting line with these questions. When we 
were in opposition, we were in touch daily with people who 
were telephoning our 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

office suggesting questions to us. And day after day we stood 
up in this legislature asking those questions without making 
such an obvious grandstand play of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member knows perfectly well what 
the answer to the question is but I'll repeat it. With the 
decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada touching upon the 
question of abortion, it is not possible for this province to enact 
the kind of legislation that is described in his question. It would 
be struck down by the Supreme Court of Canada. The members 
opposite know it, everyone knows it; and there's nothing that 
we can do about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Brand Inspection Costs 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for the Premier, and it has to do . . . in relation to agriculture. 
The question is from Dale and Marsha Cannon of Rush Lake, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And they write: Mr. Premier, I want to know if an agreement 
can be reached with the packing plants in Alberta to 
acknowledge Saskatchewan brand inspection, to eliminate the 
current requirement forcing producers to pay for brand 
inspection both here and in Alberta. It is in the interest of all 
involved to resolve this, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you for the question, to the 
member opposite. Mr. Speaker, I would like to take notice of 
that question. 
 

Proposed Gravelbourg Hospital 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a question that I'd like to direct to the Premier. This 
question is from Donna Fortnum from Landis, who I 
understand, Mr. Premier, used to live in the Gravelbourg 
district. 
 
And she writes the question: Mr. Premier, I would want to 
know if it is true that you are going to build a new hospital in 
Gravelbourg. If so, why, when you just closed down one 
brand-new hospital in Lafleche only a few miles away? I 
thought the plan was to save money. I can't see where this is 
happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the hon. 
member for that question because there is a substantial 
misunderstanding out in that area with respect to whether or not 
there's going to be a hospital built in Gravelbourg. The 
government has not approved the construction of a new 
hospital in Gravelbourg. 
 
What the government has done, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
the long-term care needs of Gravelbourg, is we have approved 

the planning and the proceeding with the replacement of their 
long-term care facility. As you know, there has been a 
considerable amount of problems with the safety of that 
facility. 
 
With respect to acute care needs, any acute care needs in that 
particular district will be dealt with through the district health 
board when they do their needs assessment and determine what 
the acute care needs are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government appears unwilling to protect rural Saskatchewan 
from decimation. They've closed hospitals and schools. STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) bus service has been 
cancelled in the rural areas. 
 
At a recent meeting of federal and provincial Agriculture 
ministers in Winnipeg, this government was the only 
government, was the only province, that didn't support GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program). 
 
To the Minister of Agriculture, or Acting Minister of 
Agriculture: will the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
admit that it has failed to support rural Saskatchewan? Will you 
finally see the light and reconsider help for our families, the 
way in which other provinces have chosen to stand behind their 
farm families? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
member opposite, the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Department of Agriculture in Saskatchewan has been around 
the province consulting with farmers in many, many 
communities, and certainly support the concept as mentioned in 
Ag 2000. And I wish the member opposite would read that 
document. 
 
The document suggests that the family farm is the . . . has to be 
protected in this province. And it also recognizes that 
agriculture is our number one industry in this province. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I note that we didn't get an 
answer to the GRIP question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the meeting of federal and provincial 
Agriculture ministers in Winnipeg, it was revealed that the 
province of Saskatchewan is projecting a $320 million surplus 
in its GRIP fund. To the minister: what plans do you have for 
this money; and will you commit to returning this money to our 
farm families immediately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thanks for the question, to the member 
opposite. And of course I'm sure that the member opposite read 
the report of the Farm Support Review Committee on safety net 
designs. It's a very 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

good document. It gives government the ideas of farmers and 
what farmers want. And I would hope that he would read that 
paper so he could better understand the farm situation. 
 
The farmers want more a market-sensitive program, they want 
protection of the family farm, and they want people to 
understand that agriculture is the number one industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, my question had to do with 
what they intend to do with the $320 million surplus, not about 
what's in Agriculture 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the news today we heard that the Provincial 
Auditor is looking at the operation of the Lloydminster heavy 
oil upgrader. He's investigating writing off the upgrader's debt. 
The minister in charge of Crown Investments says the cost of 
writing off that debt would be a hundred million dollars. 
 
To the Agriculture minister: the government has choices to 
make. Are you going to return the GRIP money to farm 
families, and will you write down Crop Insurance debt the 
same as you do for the megaprojects like the upgrader? What 
are your priorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, again I say the 
priorities of this government is to recognize that agriculture is 
the number one industry in the province of Saskatchewan. The 
safety net people, the Support Review Committee, had a very 
definite guiding principle when they went to the different 
communities in this province. The purpose of farm support, it 
was decided, is to maintain the number of viable farmers in 
order to strengthen rural communities by encouraging 
agriculture which is economically and environmentally 
sustainable. 
 
I don't know what more I can say to the member opposite but 
that agriculture is very, very important to this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, last month a judge ruled in 
favour of a farmer who challenged the Manitoba government's 
decision to reduce his 1992 coverage under GRIP. In effect, the 
judge said the government breached its contract with the 
farmer. 
 
To the minister: in view of this development, will the NDP 
government repeal its legislation preventing farmers from 
taking the government to court? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I want 
to mention the Farm Support Review Committee who believes 
that the broad program concepts described in this very 
important report is what the farm people of this province want; 
it is what they need. The concepts are satisfactory to the 
agricultural industry. 
 
And again I want to stress that I'm from a farm, agriculture is 
important to me; agriculture is very, very important to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, these answers to the 
questions are going to be more than interesting to read later in 
Hansard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has admitted it breached its GRIP 
contract with Saskatchewan farmers and immediately moved 
on the ramrodded legislation preventing individuals from suing 
the government. If the government breaches the GRIP contract 
again, farmers still can't sue. 
 
Mr. Minister, the government in Manitoba was respectful of its 
farmers and allowed court action. In the latest case, the farmer 
won. Are you afraid Saskatchewan farmers would win if they 
were allowed to take court action against your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
wondering what the member opposite has in mind for a new ag 
policy. Is it the old GRIP policy? Or is it a policy that is very 
similar to the old GRIP policy? Or is it a good, solid policy, 
one that is taxpayer friendly, sustainable to the agricultural 
community long term? 
 
I'm wondering what his policy is, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Selection of Provincial Ombudsman 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Justice. My question today 
deals with the current process underway to select the provincial 
Ombudsman. 
 
Mr. Minister, on December 1, 1993 your news release on this 
matter indicated that the opposition would be consulted and our 
input would be considered. We're still anxiously awaiting that 
opportunity; however the invitation has not yet been extended 
and we have a number of concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, number one, it seems that a member of the 
selection committee is the Deputy Premier's former 
constituency secretary, which I believe taints the process. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you justify the fact that a member of the 
committee struck to select an Ombudsman for Saskatchewan is 
clearly an NDP partisan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm a bit mystified as to who the hon. 
member is referring to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don't have the documents with me but some time 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

ago I wrote to the Leader of the Opposition suggesting a 
process and naming the individuals that we proposed would 
look at the applications. The applications came to us pursuant 
to advertising in the newspapers. And they would look over the 
applications and begin the process of selection and try and boil 
it down to a number of names. I think it was five. But in any 
event, a small number of names. And at that point the Leader of 
the Opposition, the Leader of the Third Party, and I would get 
together and make the final choice. 
 
Now I'm not aware of the individual, who it is that the member 
is objecting to. I know that one of the people who I had asked 
to serve on that three-person committee has resigned because a 
relative of hers has applied. And she stepped off the committee 
and somebody else went on; I've forgotten who it was. But I 
think that I just have to ask the member to identify who it is 
he's complaining about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, and to the minister, the important 
thing that we're raising today, Mr. Minister, is the fact of the 
establishment of an all-party committee. And I refer you back 
to Democratic Reform for the 1990's, a policy put out by your 
party prior to the 1991 provincial election, which said that: 
 

  . . . an all-party standing committee of the Legislature be 
established to select and appoint the Ombudsman. Only 
appointment by such a committee can provide this officer 
with the legislative mandate that he or she requires. 

 
It would seem, Mr. Minister . . . Now you've just indicated that 
you were going to cut . . . go through the process and eliminate 
down to five members and then maybe consult the Leader of 
the Opposition and the third party leader. I would think that if 
we're going to see the process work properly, if we're going to 
indeed follow the guidelines that your party has set up, that you 
would have an all-party committee review and screen all the 
applications so that at the end of the day the person that is 
chosen would meet the criteria of being favourable to everyone 
in this House. 
 
And I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, if indeed you would do that. 
Before you screen any applications, ask the Leader of the 
Opposition and the third party leader for involvement in this 
committee to screen all applications. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well this line of questioning, Mr. 
Speaker, surprises me for a couple of reasons. First of all, it is 
the official opposition who when they were in government 
appointed the last Ombudsman without consulting a single 
soul, without consulting the opposition at all. But merely came 
into this House and tabled a motion that a certain person be 
selected as the Ombudsman. So it lies ill in their mouth that 
this process is not a proper process. 
 
Secondly, and even more surprisingly, is I wrote to the Leader 
of the Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party several 
weeks ago and outlined a proposed procedure for arriving at the 
appointment of an Ombudsman which I thought took fully into 
account the principles that lie behind the member's question 

and the appointment of an Ombudsman. And I thought it was a 
fair process. 
 
And I must tell the House that so far as I am aware, the Leader 
of the Opposition did not object, either in writing or in any 
conversation with me, to the proposal that I put forward. If they 
had objections to it, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought I would 
have heard about it; then I could reconsider the process. 
 
It's important to us that we appoint, from this legislature, an 
Ombudsman that enjoys the confidence of the whole House. 
That is the purpose for consultation. That was the reason why 
we objected so strenuously back in 1987, I think it was, to the 
process that was used then. 
 
And so if the present process is not satisfactory I thought I 
would have heard about it before now. And to hear about it in 
question period is really a surprise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it 
interesting that the minister would continually revert back to 
the 1980s and suggesting that what may have happened then 
may be responsible for what's transpiring today. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have the opportunity. This party has already 
put out . . . forward a number of ideas — the current members 
sitting here — of reform of this House. And it would seem to 
me that a committee, an all-party committee, to look into the 
appointment of the Ombudsman would give you the real 
opportunity to show that this Legislative Assembly is open to 
total reform. 
 
And what we're asking you, Mr. Minister, is not to go back 
against agreements like you did on the electoral boundaries and 
how many other agreements, like you've just done with 
farmers, but make a commitment, a real commitment, that you 
were talking of when you were on this side of the House, to 
reform and allow a process that allows everyone to be involved 
in the democratic process. 
 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the member scores a 
perfect 10 on the sanctimony scale. The reason why we keep 
referring to the 1980s is that it is the benchmark, Mr. Speaker, 
the low benchmark, the low watermark, the low watermark on 
the functioning of this House. And when the members opposite 
stand up and lecture us upon the niceties of democratic reform 
we just can't help but remind them from 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

whence they come on this issue and ask them on what road to 
Damascus they were when the brilliant light shone in their 
eyes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I repeat, Mr. Speaker, we have tried 
and proposed to both opposition parties a process for the 
naming of an Ombudsman that will enjoy the confidence of all 
corners of this House. If they object to that process, I thought I 
would have heard about it before now and in a different forum 
than question period. 
 
And if they have objections to it, then I would be glad to sit 
down with the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the 
Third Party, if she wishes, to review the process that I 
proposed, that they did not object to, and see whether we can 
proceed on that process or whether they want another one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the Minister of Justice is 
looking for a benchmark, and possibly he shouldn't be looking 
at the 1980s for his benchmark. Maybe it's time the minister set 
the benchmark. The benchmark was set by your caucus or your 
party when you suggested an all-party committee. 
 
Will you make a commitment today, Mr. Minister, that you 
will renew and look at a different benchmark, a renewal of this 
Legislative Assembly, and allow for an all-party committee to 
be involved in the appointment of a new Ombudsman for the 
province? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm really going to 
insist that if my friend, the member from Moosomin, insists on 
asking me questions, that he at least listen to my answers. 
 
I have said I am prepared to meet with the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party to discuss the 
process. And if they have objections to the process that I 
outline to them, I'm prepared to consider other processes or 
amendments to the process. 
 
I am not prepared to stand here in question period and 
dramatically change the whole rules on the basis of a question 
from the minister without the kind of consultation that his 
question invites, namely, he's saying that process is not 
satisfactory to us; we want you to consider another. 
 
I said in my previous answer, I repeat now, I'm pleased to meet 
with the opposition leaders to consider how the process can be 
improved so that it meets their satisfaction. What more can I 
say, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cabinet Press Office Closure 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it has come to my 
attention that you have disbanded the cabinet press office, the 

office which has been charged with assisting the Premier and 
cabinet ministers and putting political spin to the members of 
the media. 
 
Now we congratulate you, Mr. Premier, if this appears to be a 
downsizing of Executive Council. Mr. Premier, could you tell 
this Assembly where the people who had formerly worked in 
the cabinet press office, where are they now working? And I 
would specifically ask you, sir, for where does John Millar, 
Carol Bentley, Darcy McKenzie, Lisa Thomson, Lisa Simpson, 
Wendy Ward, and Virginia Wilkinson, and Chris Scherle . . . 
are now working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I very much appreciate 
the words of commendation from the member from Wilkie 
about our attempts to control the size of government. And I 
think we've done a very admirable job in doing so. 
 
And I would say also in furtherance to the hon. member's 
question, when one compares the record of this government to 
what they're trying to do in Alberta to downsize, downsize is 
rather a euphemistic word to describe the Alberta situation. The 
Alberta situation is rather brutal, to put it bluntly. I think that 
we have in fact found the proper combination of achieving 
fiscal responsibility. 
 
Now with respect to the Executive Council question, the 
member asks a number of detailed points about individual 
people. I can provide this information at the time of estimates. 
I'd be more than pleased to do so. We always have done so and 
we'll be prepared to do so again at the appropriate time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Community Bonds Act be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
table, pursuant to subsection 22(4) of The Constituency 
Boundaries Act (1993), the report of the Constituency 
Boundaries Commission, 1993, signed by the Hon. E.C. 
Malone. 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

Mr. Koenker: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with 
leave to make a private member's statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

John Howard Society Week 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in recognition 
of John Howard Week in Saskatchewan, which is February 13 
to 19. In 18th century England and Wales, John Howard 
devoted his life and his fortune to making prison conditions 
more humane. And today the John Howard Society brings 
together community volunteers who accept responsibility for 
understanding and dealing with the problems of crime. 
 
The John Howard Society believes the community must be 
involved in ensuring that the criminal justice system works in a 
creative, humane and progressive fashion. Through reform 
advocacy, direct services, and public education, the society 
works to reduce the consequences of criminal experience for all 
those who are affected by it. 
 
The problem of crime in our society can be addressed from 
many angles, but we certainly must attack its root causes, 
including poverty and ignorance. Simply put, it's not feasible 
economically or socially to lock all offenders behind bars and 
simply throw away the keys. Most offenders in our criminal 
justice system are non-violent and do return to society to make 
positive contributions. And the John Howard Society helps in 
this process. For many of these men and women, contact with 
organizations like John Howard Society is an important step in 
building a positive relationship with the larger community. 
 
And so today, with members of this Assembly, we extend our 
appreciation to all those who devote their time and personal 
energy and resources to the work of the John Howard Society. 
They demonstrate that every one of us in society can play a 
positive part in making society healthy, cooperative, and a safe 
place to live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I also ask leave to respond to the 
member in recognizing the John Howard Society. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well I 
would like to join with the member and extend our sincere 
congratulations to each and every one who have been involved 
over the years in working with the John Howard Society, 
reaching out to individuals who are looking at trying to reform 
and change their lives and get back into the mainstream of life. 
 
There's no doubt that individuals who have maybe been 
sentenced for a crime — whether it's minor or major or how 
significant it is — when they have the opportunity to get back 
on the street, find it very difficult. And so it's very important 
and we want to commend each and every one involved, the 
volunteers who have given their time so ably to reach out to 
these men and women and teenagers and working with them to 

help them get back into the mainstream. And I think it's 
appropriate that we recognize the John Howard Society and the 
work they do in our society. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
question no. 24 put by the member from Moosomin, I would 
request it be converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Motions for returns (debatable), question no. 
24. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 
Whitmore. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak to the address in reply with a feeling of considerable 
anticipation and I admit with some trepidation. 
 
These are my first remarks as a member of the Liberal Party 
and of the opposition. I'm very happy to be here, but I did not 
arrive here easily, nor have I taken the journey lightly. On the 
contrary, the decision was very, very difficult. It was made with 
both the head and the heart and it stands as one of the great 
watersheds of my life. 
 
Not everyone appreciates my decision, and I understand their 
feelings. It is probably as hard for some of them to accept the 
choice as it was for me to make them. To them I offer two 
comments. First of all, we should keep in mind that there is a 
difference between sticking to a political party and sticking to 
what you believe. Beliefs should stand the test of time; political 
parties come and go. And I say it is more important to hold 
onto your beliefs than let the party machinery hold onto you. 
 
Second, I suggest you keep in mind how the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) was started. Mr. 
Speaker, every member of the CCF was once a member or a 
supporter of another party. Every one of the original members 
made a conscious decision to change. They made their 
decisions for 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

what they thought were good reasons. None of the members 
opposite would be opposite except for the people who went 
before them and one by one decided to make a change because 
they wanted to make a difference. 
 
I have made my decision for good reasons and I want to deal 
with some of them and how they relate to this government and 
its Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when many of the original CCF members made 
their decision to join the party opposite, they believed they 
were joining a party at the leading edge, a party of new 
thinking, a party of the people. How ironic today we see this 
supposed vanguard party, this leader of the people, left in the 
dust of its own meaningless rhetoric. 
 
The old vision is gone. The NDP has been bypassed by history. 
All that is left now are the power ambitions of its leadership 
clique. They play the old tunes but no one is left to dance with 
them. 
 
The Premier likes to say that he has hard things to do — 
unpopular things — because he has no money. Mr. Speaker, the 
government opposite is not suffering because it is financially 
bankrupt; it is suffering because it is intellectually bankrupt — 
out of touch and out of ideas. Its roots have withered and dried 
up. It is unable to inspire, unable to call forth the best in people 
because it has no concept of what that means in the 1990s. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are more willing to sacrifice for their 
goals. They have always been. It is one of the great 
characteristics of this province. What they represent is being 
made to suffer needlessly by a government that makes it up as 
it goes, has no plan, has no vision, led by people who do only 
what they are forced to and not what they ought to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Douglas government had no money either, but 
its outstanding feature still was its vision, it's leadership and 
inspiration. The outstanding feature of this NDP government is 
it's self-centredness, its egomania, and its ambition of its 
ministers and the absence of new ideas. This government does 
a good imitation of leadership when the TV cameras are on, but 
it is still all an act. There is no beef in the bun. 
 
The government has managed a great feat, Mr. Speaker. By its 
lack of inspiration, by its play-acting at leadership, it has 
managed to coop up this province in a dungeon of despair and 
despondency — something no one has ever done, not even in 
the depths of the thirties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot in the throne speech about 
cooperation, about partnership, about working together. The 
Premier hopes we will rally and stand behind these ideals from 
the past. I say they have it backwards. The government 
opposite is suffering not from a lack of loyalty, but because it 
knows nothing about loyalty. The government used its 
supporters, took their votes, took their commitment, and started 
walking away from them the day after the election. It broke its 
contract with the people. Is it any surprise that these people, 
betrayed and snubbed by the power brokers, are now walking 
away from this government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the major reason I made my choice is that the 

government of the Premier opposite no longer stands for what 
it was elected on. Today it stands for nothing more than what 
will please the media on a given day. It is opportunistic, 
cynical, and grossly disloyal to its own platform and to the 
hopes of the people. What a sad commentary on the party once 
led by Tommy Douglas. What a sad result for this great 
province. 
 
A prime example of this government's loss of trust is in its 
record on health care. I'll be the first to admit the government 
opposite did not inherit a pretty situation in health care. The 
Conservative government it replaced was financially 
incompetent. Maybe the worst in Canada. For 10 years they 
bled money, threw it away, wasted every asset we had, and 
piled up a stupendous debt. 
 
Our health services needed reform, but this government hasn't 
reformed a thing. It has simply thrown the former government's 
policy into reverse. Where the Tories wasted by opening, the 
NDP is wasting by closing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health reform presented a golden opportunity. The 
public was ready for change. This government, as I quickly 
learned, was not only not ready to step into the breach, it was 
scared witless at having to make a decision. For eight months 
they purported to talk, pretended to consult, and held endless, 
shallow meetings until everyone was sick to death of it, and 
then decided to offload the problem onto the communities 
under the guise of local control. 
 
I am a strong advocate of local control. I believe local people, 
regional people, can make the best decisions, and I believe they 
must be given the authority to make them and the responsibility 
to live with the results. 
However, local control means a shift of power out of the 
central bureaucracy. 
 
Because the government opposite is a captive of its 
bureaucrats, it failed totally. Its health reform is a wasteland of 
lost hope, indecision, bungled opportunity, that has sapped the 
will of even the strongest supporters. 
 
How could this government announce a program of health 
districts under local control, then only weeks later announce 
that it was closing down 52 hospitals before the districts were 
even organized? How can these people promise local decision 
making and then shut down 52 community hospitals in one fell 
swoop? How can they talk about district boards having control 
when they still have no formula in place to pay out money two 
years after starting out? 
 
Does the Minister of Health not talk to the Minister of Finance, 
or the deputy of Finance not talk to the deputy of Health? Do 
these people have any idea of 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

what they are doing and what it means to their fellow citizens? 
 
The answer is simple. They do talk. But it is not about helping 
the local community. It is about how to retain power. 
 
They shut down hospitals out of fear the boards might choose 
to keep some open. They have no formula because they needed 
a closed system with rules and conditions that they dictate — 
rules that will prevent local volunteer boards from having any 
real chance of controlling their own services. Saskatchewan 
health care reform has become little more than a life-support 
system for bureaucrats. 
 
I would like to suggest to the Minister of Health that she have a 
chat with her husband, the Minister of Economic Development. 
If the government can write a throne speech promising to hand 
over tourism to an authority with regional control and to set up 
trade corporations, why could it not offer some measure of 
genuine control to people over their health care services? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party believes many government 
services could be managed best by local people. We advocate a 
community health system in which the province raises funds 
beyond local funding abilities and parcels them out in lump 
sums to local authorities who make the decisions on what 
services they want to offer. If the lump sum amounts must be 
reduced to tackle the deficit, so be it. But let the local people 
make their choices on how it is used. This is not to be 
interpreted to mean that the provincial government should not 
have a responsibility to ensure proper standards are met. 
 
Saskatchewan's genius is its ability to get things done, its 
ability to write the answer and make it work. We need to free 
the Saskatchewan spirit, move the bureaucracy aside, let those 
with the ideas move ahead. We believe the Swift Current model 
with its roots in the municipal doctor service could show the 
way for health reform. We want no more arbitrary hospital 
shut-downs on orders from Regina. We look forward to a 
genuine autonomy that will allow local people to get back in 
charge of important parts of their lives. 
 
(1445) 
 
The record of the government reveals no pattern or logic to 
how it approaches major issues. The throne speech is striking in 
its lack of content on agriculture. Here is a prime industry that 
is being left alone to starve in the dark. While the government 
cannot keep itself from tourism authorities and regional 
economic development boards, it has nothing for the farm 
industry but platitudes of its Agriculture 2000 paper. We have 
to wonder if the 2000 refers to the number of farm families 
who will be left by the time this administration wakes up to the 
fact of the farm crisis. 
 
The throne speech notes that farm families are adapting more 
quickly to the crisis than government is adapting its policy. I 
congratulate the writer for his candour but I ask what this 
statement tells us about the government. The government's 
smug and disdainful attitude is depressing to farm people. All 
rural residents who struggle daily amid the ruins of their 
hospitals, schools, boarded-up stores, and pock-marked 
highways to find a bit of cheer would appreciate some sign of 
government interest. 

 
The Liberal Party would advocate more attention to the 
on-farm component of agriculture. Processing is fine but it does 
not add directly to the stability of farm families. We need 
programs to help individual farmers improve their marketing 
skills, gain access to information, to make links with the 
specialty crop markets. 
 
Saskatchewan should aim to develop the trading and marketing 
skills in agriculture that we find in other industries. We have 
excellent facilities for exporting our minerals such as potash. 
Farmers however rely solely on established marketers or an 
underdeveloped sector of small marketers regardless of their 
ability to respond to those markets. Here is an area where the 
government action could be greatly beneficial with lasting 
impact and none of the side-effects of the money programs of 
the last administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have made but a few suggestions of what I 
believe the people of Saskatchewan needed and deserved in a 
throne speech. The people of Saskatchewan are waiting for the 
Premier to once and for all show leadership or move to the 
sidelines and let those that can do so take control. 
 
I am unable to support the motion but I do thank you for this 
opportunity to speak today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to start off 
my remarks by congratulating you for the excellent job you've 
been doing in the House lately. I still will do that, 
notwithstanding the fact that you had a momentary lapse of 
remembrance in terms of what the name of my constituency is. 
 
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker. I've watched 
over the last couple of years; you are definitely becoming much 
more seasoned. Indeed some would say you are maturing and 
ageing in this job. You're becoming much smoother and 
certainly much more sure of yourself and the rules of this 
House. So I would like to congratulate you for the job you're 
doing. 
 
I'm very happy to take part in the throne speech debate. Unlike 
some members opposite, I very much believe in the 
parliamentary tradition in this country. I believe in the value of 
debate, in nailing one's colours to the masthead, so to speak, for 
all people to see. 
 
It is somewhat obvious, Mr. Speaker, why some members 
opposite refuse to fly their colours and why they complain 
about the throne speech process. They have precious little to be 
proud of in their political 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

history, as the Premier so eloquently reminded us yesterday. No 
wonder they don't want to speak to the throne speech debate. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, found it to be an amusing coincidence that 
the Leader of the Third Party called the proceedings, of which 
she is a part, she called those proceedings drivel, Mr. Speaker. 
She said this after the camera broke down just before her 
speech and miraculously corrected itself when she sat down. 
And they say machines have no mind of their own. 
 
I want to join with the other members of this legislature in 
welcoming the new member from Regina North West. During 
her tenure in the House, which I am sure she will understand 
when I say I hope it's a good time but not a long time, I hope 
that she offers genuine choice to her constituents — choice in 
all areas, including the area of women's reproductive rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that we have three members of the Liberal 
Party, it seems to me we can look forward to not getting three 
new ideas a week on the economy instead of just not getting 
one new idea a week as before. 
 
I note that there's a rather unusual and interesting seating 
arrangement on the other side of the House now that there are 
three members of the third party. They're all lined up in a row, 
like kids from a day care hanging onto a rope on an outing in 
the big city. I would have expected, given all the talk I hear 
about process and so-called democratic reform from the Leader 
of the Third Party, that she would have wanted them all to be 
sitting together, all on the same level. That would have been 
much more egalitarian and much less regal. And indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, it's a wonder to me that the Liberal leader trusts 
having both her colleagues sitting behind her back. 
 
I note in the campaign literature from the new member for 
Regina North West that she's a psychologist, just like her 
leader. I wonder how the member from Shaunavon feels about 
that. It must often seem to him that he's like a patient stuck 
between two psychologists, or the boloney in a particularly 
wholesome sandwich. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been very interested in the way this throne 
speech has developed, not just because some of the opposition 
says that they do not want to participate. I want to begin my 
remarks by offering my congratulations to the mover and the 
seconder of the speech. They did us all a favour by pushing the 
debate beyond just the contents of the throne speech into 
contemplation of the nature of government and the relations 
between government and society. I congratulate them for their 
very thoughtful and thought-provoking speeches. 
 
There is much to praise in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, as 
members who have preceded me have done. There's much to 
speculate about, as also many members have done. I have a few 
comments of my own, a sort of member's thoughts in progress 
about some of the things I would like to see happen — some 
dreams I have for this province and this legislative session. I 
want to focus my remarks today on those thoughts. 
 
Much has been made in this session of the Saskatchewan 
tradition of radical reform — justifiably so. We're meeting in 
1994 on the eve of the 50th anniversary of Tommy Douglas's 
first term. There are many phrases which the old-line parties 

are tired of hearing but they do apply to our province. For 
example, we are indeed, as has oft been quoted, Canada's social 
laboratory. 
 
We're seeing the laboratory at work again in the wellness 
model, the Partnership for Renewal, the creation of the position 
of children's advocate, and so on. The tradition of radical 
reform is a key part of our history. Even before Tommy 
Douglas we saw it with the Pools and the co-ops. I'm very 
proud to be part of this tradition and the history of our 
province. 
 
We've always had a progressive, people-based social 
movement here in Saskatchewan, a progressive movement to 
counter the excesses and the gluttony and the greed of the elitist 
approach taken by the Conservative and the Liberal parties, the 
black cats and the white cats. 
 
Many people have referred in their speeches to Tommy 
Douglas. I too want to take a look at our history, though not 
back quite as far. I want to refer to the wisdom and counsel of 
another fine social democrat — Allan Blakeney. 
 
Allan Blakeney used to talk about the three phases of 
development in post-war Saskatchewan, of course starting with 
the Douglas government. First of all he talked about the era of 
the creation of the major social programs, beginning with 
hospitalization, carrying on through medicare, the phase that 
took at least 20 years and is still being modified and honed and 
adapted to our present-day needs. 
 
Indeed as the Associate Minister of Health points out, our 
wellness model is the natural extension of the work conceived 
earlier by Douglas and implemented when Blakeney was 
Health minister. Right from the start it was recognized that 
medicare was only the first step. 
 
To truly bring about the necessary reform and empowerment of 
the health care system that the health care system requires, we 
need, as both Douglas and Blakeney always said, we need to 
reform the administration of the system to involve communities 
and individuals in a meaningful way; to put the power for 
decisions about health, not just illness, in the hands of the 
beneficiaries of the system. To turn the system, so to speak, on 
its ears and to develop a community-based system, not an 
institutional-based one. 
 
So as Blakeney said, we first started as progressive social 
democrats in this province in the late '40s with the first era, the 
creation of major universal social 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

programs, of which health care is but one example. Then we 
had the second era, which occurred mostly during the 1970s, 
during which we began to wrestle control of our economic 
destiny out of the hands of outsiders, the multinationals, the 
eastern Canadian interests. 
 
This is the era the opposition loves to ridicule because one of 
the main instruments of economic maturity in this province was 
the Crown corporation. Another was government partnership in 
exploration. When people ridicule Crown corporations — and I 
should add, it is only the fiercely partisan who think they might 
gain some stock or some ownership advantage by doing so — I 
point out to them that the broad base of the people of 
Saskatchewan do not think Crown corporations are frivolous or 
ridiculous or a drag on the public purse. They recognize the 
value of the resource development, control, and ownership 
inherent in Crown corporations. 
 
As proof, I point to the massive rallies and public outpouring of 
sentiment when the former Tory government tried to privatize 
SaskPower in 1989. There was widespread, legitimate and 
justified public indignation that their public utility should be 
put on the sales block, like a trophy, for the privileged few. 
 
Regardless of one's opinion of the days of the '70s, during this 
time, the time that Blakeney calls the second phase, or the 
second era, the universal social programs were expanded 
because the government very carefully managed the resources 
of the province. 
 
For the first time in our history the government took us out of 
the group of have-not provinces. We were paying our own way 
and managing our own house. As a collective group of people, 
we had control of some of the major economic levers of this 
province. We were able to redistribute the wealth created 
through the Crown corporations. This was not taxation, it was 
not even indirect taxation; it was resource development by the 
people, for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — And the Blakeney government did all that, Mr. 
Speaker, so that we could begin to move into phase 3, what 
premier Blakeney called, beyond universality. It was time to 
begin finessing some of the big programs, to target special 
groups, to direct funds and energy at those for whom universal 
programs were simply a means of maintaining the status quo. It 
was time to look at the problems of a universal system that at 
best simply created a system of state-endorsed and supported, 
genteel poverty. Or as Blakeney put it, we have resolved many 
of the problems of adversity; now is the time to tackle the 
problems created by affluence. 
 
(1500) 
 
That era was to be the trickiest, the most challenging, the most 
modern, because it was to attempt to deal with areas in which 
there's not always general agreement on what needs to be done. 
There's not even agreement on whether anything needs to be 
done at all. 
 
We're talking here, Mr. Speaker, of programs like child care, 
like pay equity, like, perish the thought, quotas in the 

workplace for disadvantaged groups, preferential hiring. 
 
Of course this phase, beyond universality, was put on hold and 
the province was kicked back a hundred years or so by the 
combined forces of Reaganism, Thatcherism, Mulroneyism, 
and even Devine-ism, and all the greedy, self-centred notions 
of individualism that those movements implied. 
 
No, this third phase, after the creation of universal programs, 
after the creation of the solid, state-supported means of funding 
them, this phase that would have moved us beyond universality 
was put on hold while the province was treated to nine 
profligate years of Devine government. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the member knows that she 
may not use the name of an individual but must refer to their 
constituency. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was checking to 
make sure you were listening. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. That 
was just an attempt to gain a little bit of time while somebody 
told me what the constituency is actually for the member. 
 
In any case, back to my remarks, Mr. Speaker. Here we are 
again with a $15 billion IOU on our back, but we're just about 
ready to have another go at phase 3, as the former Premier 
Blakeney called it. It'll be a little less grandiose than before 
perhaps, because of our situation, a little more modest 
certainly, because our resources are limited. And more 
importantly, because the taxpayers have told us, have told all 
governments loudly and clearly that they have reached their 
limits of tolerance, we have to make do with what we have. 
 
But we also have to do more than we are doing, and to do that 
we have to start to ask ourselves some questions that we 
haven't asked before. We have to, for openers, question some 
of the assumptions that have not heretofore been questioned. 
As the member from Regina Lake Centre said in her opening 
speech, we have to name the issues if we are going to tame the 
problems. 
 
For example, let's start by junking the terms, right-wing and 
left-wing, and the quote, easy solutions, that supposedly go 
with each part of that bird — those solutions that one side or 
the other side automatically dismisses out of hand. 
 
As we're looking for new thinking, the nature of society and 
poverty is a good place to start examining some of the 
assumptions that have been built up over time. Traditionally, 
the right blames poverty on the individual's lack of gumption 
and will. The system is not at fault, the person is. If only people 
would get up and work, poverty would get up and go. 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

The Leader of the Liberal Party and her constant call to put 
more regulations and guidelines on individuals because human 
nature is not to be trusted is a good example of this attitude. 
Those of us on this side of the House reject that elitist, 
non-trusting attitude towards human beings. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, historically, the left has tended 
to blame the system. Society is at fault for poverty — the Jean 
Jacques Rousseau approach to social issues. The individual in 
poverty is a victim, blameless. Everyone blames someone else. 
No one takes any responsibility, especially the bureaucracy. So 
often, therefore, good ideas become captive to an illogical, 
self-serving, flabby bureaucratic system. 
 
What happens, of course, under both views is that not a whole 
lot gets changed at the basic level. Poverty remains and the big 
question is only how much we will do to alleviate the worst 
consequences of poverty. The right, supposedly, does as little 
as possible, such as Ronald Reagan's declaration that ketchup 
should be classified as a vegetable so that he could feel good 
about balancing the meals of his nation's poor children. The 
left, in its turn, does as much as it can to soften the worst blows 
of poverty by increasing welfare payments and so on. 
 
But the cycle still goes on. We've done what we think has been 
the best we can do and we have made progress in 
Saskatchewan. And particularly we've made progress by 
prodding the federal government and other provinces into 
generally more humane, tolerant, human, safety net programs. 
 
We've done so well in fact that the language of the left, the 
social democrats, has been appropriated by the right. These 
days it seems every political party talks about caring and 
sharing, compassion and justice. Of course, as the saying goes, 
the proof of the pudding is in the eating. And it's been an 
especially bitter and meagre pudding for most people when 
governments of the right have been in power. 
 
The same goes for labour legislation, Mr. Speaker. We've 
operated on a pendulum for the past 50 years. One government 
with legislation favourable to working people, the next 
removing what it sees to be anti-management restrictions. 
 
We on this side of the House are justifiably proud of 
occupational health and safety amendments and workers' 
compensation changes. But I have no doubt that if the other 
side got in tomorrow, the first thing they would do is give those 
changes back to the owners, as they have said they would do. I 
shudder to think what they would do with our proposals for 
Trade Union Act amendments and Labour Standards Act. 
 
Our goal now, Mr. Speaker, as we approach the 21st century, 
has to be to stop that pendulum-swing effect, to move beyond 
the traditional schisms of the left and right. We need to 
conceive of government's role in labour-management 
legislation, not as a pendulum; rather, it needs to be a circle 
growing larger and more empowering, encompassing and 
legitimizing the needs, aspirations, and concerns of both labour 
and business. Recognizing that at the end of the day, both 
labour and management have the same goals — the 
expectations of a safe and stable work environment where they 
can both maximize their returns. The one in the form of wages 
and working condition benefits, the other in the form of profits 

and improved competitiveness. 
 
If we can do this, Mr. Speaker, if we can truly bring 
Saskatchewan into the 21st century, able to cope successfully 
with the growing trends towards globalization, able to compete 
internationally, we will be able to build on the stable, strong, 
energetic, and efficient workforce we have here and 
Saskatchewan will take its place in the sun in the 21st century. 
 
But first we have to stop the pendulum swings. We have to stop 
the incomplete analyses based on rigid, doctrinaire positions, 
either from the perspective of the right or the left, that have 
kept us from moving into what Allan Blakeney called the third 
era of social democratic development in Saskatchewan. 
 
In other words, poverty is still with us 50 years after Douglas, 
60 years after J.S. Woodsworth, 2,000 years after the person 
who said: suffer the little children to come unto me. We're still 
on the pendulum. We still think in ideological extremes. We 
still haven't solved anything really. We've just kissed the 
wounds here and there. 
 
I'd like to tell you now a fable by the American humorist, 
James Thurber, called The Lion and the Lizard. He writes: 
 

A lion and a lizard kept the halls where once a prince had 
slept. The prince had died, as even princes do, and his palace 
had fallen to rats and ruin. The lion destroyed the rats, but he 
could never find the lizard, who lived in a crevice in the 
wall. There was royal food in the ruined kitchen, and royal 
wine in the ruined cellar, but the lion got it all, for the lizard 
was afraid to emerge from his hiding place. So the lion got 
fatter and fatter, and drunker and drunker, and the lizard 
grew thinner and thinner, and soberer and soberer. Weeks 
went by, and the weeds grew and the walls crumbled, as the 
lion ate six meals a day, washing them down with a total of 
eighteen different wines. One (day) . . . as the tawny master 
of the palace was topping off his sixth meal of the day with a 
tankard of brandy, he fell asleep on his golden chair at the 
head of the ornate table. The lizard, with his remaining 
strength, which wasn't much, crawled up on the table and 
tried to nibble a crumb, but he was too weak to eat. The lion, 
awakened by a tiny tinkle of spoons, tried to crush the 
unwelcome guest with one blow of his mighty paw, but he 
was sated and obese, and his paw was no longer mighty. He 
passed away in his golden chair, spilling the last of the 
brandy, as the lizard gave up the ghost among the crumbs 
and silver. 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

And the moral, Mr. Speaker, writes Mr. Thurber, is "he who 
dies (stuffed) . . . is as dead as he who starves." So we stuff 
ourselves or we starve. We don't look for the solutions that 
would truly change the kingdom so there's sufficient for both 
the lion and the lizard. 
 
To do this, we must finally start to think about stopping 
poverty, not just ministering to it. We need to stop trivializing 
its causes and stop minimizing its effects. And as the member 
from Regina Lake Centre said, this is everyone's job, not just 
the politicians and the opposition and the bureaucrats. 
 
We're not, for instance, getting very much help from the media 
who seem to think that a hot lunch and a warm third-page story 
about a dedicated child worker is their contribution. I would 
remind them that the words media and mediocrity have the 
same root, and they don't seem to be doing too much to 
separate the two. 
 
Okay, so what are some of the questions that we haven't been 
asking, or some of the realities that we haven't been facing? 
How about these. First, we make it too easy for people to be 
sentenced, willingly or not, to a lifetime of poverty subsistence, 
and we probably even perpetuate it by making welfare a barely 
acceptable lifestyle if one sets her sights low enough. We do 
after all, we have to acknowledge, have third-generation 
welfare cases in this province and elsewhere. Until we 
acknowledge that the system might be part of the problem, the 
problem will stay. 
 
Secondly, poverty is primarily a women's issue. Therefore it is 
a volatile political issue. More women than men are poor, for 
all the reasons that we know about having to do with the 
responsibility for childbearing and raising, and with unequal 
education and work opportunities. 
 
For instance, of the scandalously high number of 80,000 people 
in this province on social assistance, 32,200, or 41 per cent, are 
from single-parent families. That's women and children we're 
talking about, not beer-guzzling welfare cheats. This isn't 
ideology, Mr. Speaker, this is fact. And until we address this 
real issue, the feminization of poverty, the cycle will continue. 
Poverty destroys the body, the mind, the spirit. It gnaws away 
like a cancer. It is no accident that most victims of brutality, 
alcohol abuse, and gambling are poor and hopeless. 
 
And to return to my earlier point about old, worn-out phrases, 
this isn't bleeding-heart liberalism, this is simple reality. Those 
of us, which unfortunately as most of us, who watch far too 
much Detroit television, see nightly the despair, the violence, 
the depravity that comes from being poor. And those spasms of 
violence spill out of the ghettos and touch the lives of those 
whose income and position supposedly protects them. 
 
(1515) 
 
For it is unfortunately true, Mr. Speaker, that if people don't 
have a legitimate way to earn a living they'll find an 
illegitimate way, often at great human cost to the very people 
they love, their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a poverty industry in this country — 
charities, bureaucracies, departments, academics, consultants, 

churches, food banks, and so on. And don't get me wrong. All 
of these people do the best they can to help a seemingly 
insoluble problem. But we keep applying the band-aid, 
debating only the size of the band-aid, not the cause of the 
wound. We are in a sense handcuffed by universality in some 
areas. And I hope that no old CCFer is going to hear me say 
that out of context. 
 
As Mr. Blakeney said, we have to do some targeting to help 
specific people up and maybe even to help some people off the 
welfare rolls. New thinking might have to be hard thinking. We 
have to confront some unpleasant truths. We need to move the 
debate beyond the tyranny of the restrictions of politically 
correct thinking, beyond victimization, beyond special interest 
groups. 
 
We need to emphasize the duties, the responsibilities, that all 
citizens have, everyone from the grandiose corporate welfare 
beneficiaries like the Peter Pocklingtons of the world, to the 
hard-pressed, middle class taxpayer who conveniently forgets 
to acknowledge all the program entitlements he or she has 
when complaining about government spending, to the high 
school drop-out UI (unemployment insurance) ski team 
champion, to the welfare mom in the bingo hall trying 
desperately to grab the brass ring of hope. 
 
All of us have duties as well as rights in this quest to reform 
and rehumanize our social safety nets. We need to do this for 
our children. It will be hard, but it will be necessary. And I 
think that we should start doing it. And I know that this 
government has the gumption and the ability to do it. 
 
Of course, we have to be careful not to distance ourselves from 
our roots. As many speakers have said, the same principles that 
have motivated us for generations still apply, the principles that 
some people would call biblical — the principles of love, 
sharing, compassion, and so on. These principles still apply. 
 
The principles, the basic principles of social democracy, are 
even more relevant today as we embark on the third phase of 
renewal — the principles of community, cooperation, economic 
and social justice. 
 
Other political parties give lip-service to these lofty notions. 
The NDP, this government, this throne speech, will move to 
make those notions a reality in this province. 
 
And we have much to build on. We don't need to start all over. 
We just need to switch lanes a little. 
 
We might, for a start, move beyond privilege. We 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

 might, for example, review middle class entitlements and 
business grants. The middle class, yes, is besieged and 
beleaguered. That's unfortunately the definition of middle class. 
But in the main, it does okay for itself. And business, quite 
frankly, has always claimed that it can stand up for itself. And I 
for one believe business people when they say that. 
 
Marcel Proust, a French writer, once said: the real voyage of 
discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes but in having 
new eyes. On this voyage, Mr. Speaker, we will, we must, see 
things with new eyes. Poverty gnaws at the body and the spirit, 
both of individuals and of nations. Poverty is the key issue that 
we must deal with as we look to the next century. 
 
All over the world we're seeing the anarchy, the tribalism, the 
warfare, the despair of urban ghettos as the forces of 
globalization and de-skilling of workers and trashing of women 
and children take hold. This cannot, this must not happen in 
Saskatchewan; it must not happen in Canada. We need to come 
to grips with the problem and radically change the poverty 
industry where we have social workers administering instead of 
ministering, where we have food banks instead of savings 
banks for poor people, where work-for-welfare schemes are 
proposed to bounce people from UI to welfare to training to 
minimum-wage jobs and then back to UI and to welfare and so 
on and so on. 
 
There's a desperate need to redraw the political, social, and 
economic map of Canada for the 21st century. We've made a 
start here in Saskatchewan with initiatives like democratic 
reform measures, reshaping our economic development 
approach, proposals to modernize labour legislation and to 
improve both security and productivity. And in this throne 
speech we are seeing the start of a solid action plan for children 
that will finally deal with the real issues of poverty and welfare. 
 
Welfare cannot be fixed simply by tinkering with it. The whole 
system has become the mutation of a polluted society all across 
this country. There are too many interests competing at the 
public trough in the name of poor people. This thwarts the 
self-determination, the effort, and the initiative of poor people. 
 
I said at the start of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that this speech 
was really a work in progress, something like Finnegan's Wake. 
I'm not here to pronounce on government policy, merely to 
suggest some directions that we may want to consider as we 
embark on the journey of discovery of new ways of effectively 
dealing with old problems. 
 
I believe that we have implemented the building blocks to start 
this fundamental change. We have moved beyond rigid, 
doctrinaire thinking. We do not blindly blame the system or the 
individual for poverty. We do not look solely to the free market 
or to the controlled market, to government transfers, for 
solutions. We know that economic development occurs at many 
different levels. 
 
Job creation is not solely the job of governments. We know we 
have to create stability and security in labour markets. We 
know we have to provide appropriate and adequate job training 
that reflects the realities of the labour market and the realities 
of the recipients. 
 

We know that we can't insist that a mother take an upgrading 
course if she doesn't have adequate child care options. We 
know that we can't focus exclusively on the individuals or the 
system as we seek solutions. We need a multifactored 
approach. We recognize that the basis for a strong society is a 
strong economy, characterized by fair distribution of work, 
wealth, and income. 
 
Our Partnership for Renewal, started in the last legislative 
session and continued and strengthened here, is more than an 
economic strategy. It is the blending, the marriage, if you will, 
of social and economic policy. 
 
We are moving in Saskatchewan to integrate economic 
development, labour market policies, income support programs, 
and individuals' initiatives. The result will be a comprehensive 
strategy to reduce and prevent poverty and decrease the 
dependency on income support programs. 
 
Saskatchewan has inherited many problems — our massive 
public debt, the pernicious reliance on government to resolve 
everything, clashes of values and of ideologies. But we are also 
a very fortunate province. We have a forward-looking, futures 
orientation. After all, it's not for nothing that we joke about this 
being next-year country. 
 
We have a history of bold social experimentation with safety 
net programs. We have general agreement on the principles of 
the worth and dignity of all people. And we have a collective 
sense of social responsibility. So we can be bold as we look at 
our social programs, as we grapple with the issues that Allan 
Blakeney called, beyond universality. 
 
One option that I hope that we will consider very carefully in 
the months to come is the option of a guaranteed annual income 
coupled with our initiatives towards a full employment policy. 
A guaranteed annual income is a proposal to encourage effort 
through a progressive and sensible tax-back system; a proposal 
to move resources into the hands of people who really need 
them; a proposal that deals with all ages including children and 
seniors; a proposal that will encourage opportunities, duties, 
and responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me in closing that education, a secure 
home environment, and jobs are the key to what is needed to 
reverse the poverty cycle. We have announced initiatives that 
will begin the process of improvements in all these areas. I look 
forward to working for progressive programs that finally deal 
sensibly and sensitively with the key, underlying issue of 
poverty in our province. 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

I'm pleased to support this throne speech — this sensible and 
sensitive, visionary and holistic approach to resolving poverty. 
To paraphrase Tommy Douglas, we may not complete building 
the New Jerusalem today, but we can certainly move a lot 
closer to it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's a 
pleasure once again to see you in the chair in good health and 
in fine form as you preside over this Assembly. 
 
And I'm proud to say that decorum has been restored. I have 
talked to high school principals who have visited this Assembly 
prior to '91 and have personally told me they were not bringing 
their class back because of the actions that were taking place in 
this Assembly. And I'm proud to say that, Mr. Speaker, you've 
restored decorum to a very sensible level. 
 
And since talking to the same principals that did come back to 
this Assembly after '91, they are very pleased with that. And as 
well, Mr. Speaker, as you having something to do with this, I 
think this weighs heavily on the members behaving themselves 
in this Assembly. 
 
I want to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the throne 
speech, the member from Regina Lake Centre and the member 
from Biggar. You did a fine job and your speeches were filled 
with many positive things. Congratulations once again. 
 
I would also like to welcome the new member from Regina 
North West. Even though the weather was quite frigid, it was 
part of this government's commitment to democratic reform 
and having timely by-elections — that we did — to make sure 
that constituency could be represented in this Assembly during 
this session, Mr. Speaker. It's just a small part of our 
democratic reform. 
 
And while talking about the Liberal members, last fall when I 
was swathing, my wife brought out a couple of press releases 
stating about the defection of the member from Shaunavon. 
And the first thought that came to my head was, the Liberal 
Party would have a new theme song that Ernest Tubb wrote, 
and it's called "I'm Walking the Floor Over You." 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, did you ever wonder why in history other 
members have walked across the floor, but when Grits or 
Tories defect from their party they always sit as independents. 
It seems every time somebody is leaving the New Democratic 
Party or the CCF Party the opposition members always want 
them in their caucus. 
 
(1530) 
 
And it's something I haven't thought about too much till just 
lately and I guess it's because we certainly don't want to have 
Grits or Tories in our caucus, and I guess everybody wants us 
because they can trust us — because we tell the truth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I'd like to talk about my constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, 
the constituency I represent. There are many fine, hardworking 
people there, and once again I thank them for the opportunity to 

represent them. And very few people do get this opportunity. 
It's something not to be taken lightly and one should never 
forget his or her responsibility not only to their constituency 
but to the province of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
And talking about my constituency, some time ago, a couple of 
weeks ago, on February 3, 4, 5, and 6, the town of Wadena had 
the privilege of hosting the Scott Tournament of Hearts. They 
did a fine job of hosting that tournament and I would like to 
thank the town of Wadena and surrounding area for a job well 
done. I would like to also congratulate the winners, which is the 
Sherry Anderson rink. 
 
On that Friday when the tournament was going on, there was a 
banquet held in Wadena. The guest speaker was Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor who was quite an avid curling fan and 
gave a fine address. We also had the pleasure of having Dave 
Ridgeway attend for the entire weekend. He was accompanying 
one of the rinks. He stayed in the El Kuroki and I'm sure the El 
Kuroki had a lot of excitement during that weekend. 
 
One of the opposition members asked what the El Kuroki is, 
and I will tell you it's a hotel in Kuroki which is called the El 
Kuroki. 
 
Attending that banquet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well was the 
Sandra Peterson rink. And as all members will know, they are 
the reigning world champions. Just think about that for a 
second — the world ladies curling champions from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this year at the Scott Tournament of Hearts in 
Kitchener-Waterloo, we will have two teams from 
Saskatchewan, one of course being Team Canada and the other 
the Sherry Anderson rink. We have two teams representing us. 
 
And while I'm on personalities, I would like to just mention a 
few of the more prominent personalities that came from the 
constituency of Kelvington-Wadena. And there are a lot more 
that made the likes of the NHL (National Hockey League) but 
they are too numerous to mention, so I'm just going to name a 
few. 
 
We have the point leader of the St. Louis Blues for almost a 
decade. It was Bernie Federko, who is from Foam Lake. We 
also have the present coach of the Los Angeles Kings which is 
Barry Melrose, who's from Kelvington. We also have the 
captain of the Toronto Maple Leafs which is Wendell Clarke, 
who's also from Kelvington. We have also one of the co-hosts 
of prime time news, Pamela Wallin, who's from Wadena. And 
we've also got country music artist, last year's CCMA 
(Canadian Country Music Association) male vocalist of the 
year, Gary Fjelgarde, who's from Rose Valley. 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

We have a very fine province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a lot of 
positive attitudes, a lot of things you can be, but you have to 
think positive. I know that the weeklies in my riding all portray 
a positive attitude. You can pick up a weekly any time and it's 
filled with good news. 
 
The dailies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm afraid to say, are a little 
more negative. And they control a lot of the attitude in this 
province. And the dailies, I have a message for you: bring a 
little more positive attitude, a little more good news; the whole 
province will benefit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the earliest session in over a 
decade. And on Thursday next when the budget will be brought 
down, it will also be the earliest budget in over a decade. That 
is quite a commitment from this government to the people of 
Saskatchewan to let them know what their government is 
doing. It's just a part of the open, accountable, and honest 
government. 
 
In the debate on the throne speech, the Leader of the 
Opposition talked a bit about democratic reform. But if one 
thinks about it, it's more along the lines of Reform, some of the 
things he was talking about. One thing that comes to mind is 
the recall of members. I know it was Reform policy. And the 
last federal election in the debate in Kelvington there were five 
candidates seeking that riding. Sherwin Petersen was one. 
 
And when the question came from the floor about the recall of 
members, he had the simple answer and I respect him for that. 
But what Sherwin had said about recall is that of all the five 
people sitting up here, I'm the only one that had total recall. 
And he went on to say that it wasn't very much of a pleasure, 
but the point, he said, is this is our system. That is what you 
call democracy. And if you don't like what we're doing, every 
four years there is an election and you can vote us out and vote 
in somebody else. 
 
I find it a little bit ironic when he was in government they 
actually went five years, but it was a good point indeed. We do 
have a good system and it's called democracy. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's our system. It goes back to the 
first parliament, the days of Oliver Cromwell. And since that 
time . . . It was predominantly Tories and Grits representing the 
people. And the Tories believed that the people should live off 
bread and water, and the Grits felt they should live off bread 
and milk. And the people suffered in those times, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But 50 years ago there was a big event in history, and I'm sure 
every member knows what I'm talking about. And that's the 
election of the first social democratic government in North 
America. You can never, never underestimate this importance. 
It changed the continent. 
 
And one major accomplishment was universal medicare. 
Universal medicare, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Very important. 
Quite a benefit and something that originated here in the 
province of Saskatchewan some 32 years ago. And now finally 
the United States of America is debating whether in fact they as 
well could have universal medicare. 
 

And while I'm talking about Tommy Douglas, one of his last 
speeches he gave, he talked about the two phases of medicare. 
And he said the first phase was what they implemented, and it 
was removing the financial barrier between those that provide 
service and those that need the service. He said the second 
phase that would have to be done some day was remodelling 
the whole system. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he said that 
second phase was going to be the hard part. 
 
This government has the political will and the political courage 
to make that change. And while doing that, we're letting the 
communities decide; we're empowering the communities to 
decide what they need in each of their own areas. And they're 
doing that according to their needs. 
 
No doubt there is going to be many changes, and unfortunately 
there's going to be some jobs lost. And the people should be 
concerned about their jobs. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can't 
think of health care as job creation. And hopefully these people 
that work in the health care field can take some retraining and 
work in other areas of health care, something such as home 
care. 
 
When we talk about health care, the first thing that comes to 
mind is our institutions, our special care homes, and our 
hospitals. We think about physical health, but there is more to 
health care than physical health. There's mental and there's 
spiritual health as well. 
 
There is a community in Russia where some people have lived 
to the age of 140 years. Just think, when you reach 70 years of 
age, you're at mid-life. The biggest difference that people 
studying why this happened was more to exercise and diet. 
They found that society had treated their elders with great 
respect. Old age was looked upon as a good accomplishment 
and you had many wise things to tell those that followed you. 
You were looked upon as an outstanding person in that 
community. And it's somewhat different here in Canada. So 
mental health does play a lot in determining many factors of 
your longevity. 
 
There was also a university in the United States who did a 
study in a special care home where the residents were 
bedridden; they couldn't feed themselves. Some counsellors 
came in and started counselling these residents, started doing 
some exercise programs. And within two or three months they 
found that these residents could once again feed themselves; 
they could start walking around. They could go to the 
washroom at night on their own, something they couldn't do 
before. The interesting thing about this is that the age of these 
residents was between 87 and 92 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

years of age. 
 
So wellness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is much more than physical 
health. It's about feeling good about yourself. It's more than 
good eating habits and exercise, although those two are very 
important. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's also about mental and 
spiritual well-being. 
 
Recently I spoke in Wynyard at the Shamrock teachers' 
convention, and the topic was called, managing stress in the 
'90s. There's nothing new about the '90s. The only difference is 
we're more open about this today. 
 
Talk about stress at work. When someone goes to work and has 
a bad day or the boss doesn't totally agree with him, and he's 
going home and gets caught in traffic and is in a terrible mood, 
and walks in the door and instead of greeting his wife with the 
good news and how are you, he chews her out because he's in a 
bad mood. And then all of a sudden the wife takes it out on the 
children and then the children go and kick the dog. It's just 
stress in everyday life is very harmful. And although we see the 
situation every day, unfortunately for many children this 
situation is much, much worse. 
 
(1545) 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, stress starts in your personal life. 
And you can do all the stress management you want but it is 
only a short term gain. It's more about your personal 
well-being. And never mind having stress, but a stressful life 
also leads to physical problems. And getting your life in order 
takes some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I don't know if many of you have seen the show City Slickers 
where Jack Palance is talking to Billy Crystal. And you 
remember Billy Crystal, what type of a mood he was in and 
why he went on this little venture. But, you know, Jack Palance 
told him it's about one thing, and it's for you to figure out and 
the rest is not important, although he was more descriptive than 
I am right here. But you can see if you watch the show, Billy 
Crystal will go from sadness to when he meets his wife again 
he says, you know, look what I found in Colorado. And he 
shows her a smile on his face. 
 
But unfortunately in real life this process takes much longer. 
And I have seen people go through this transformation and it 
pays huge dividends, Mr. Deputy Speaker, huge dividends — 
not to the treasury of the province, but to society as a whole. 
 
And I would like to share with this Assembly one person's 
story. And I don't think he should mind me telling the story. 
And this person didn't ever feel good. He was no fun to be 
around. He was always sick, he was always tired, he developed 
a severe weight problem, he had some stomach problems. Went 
to see the physician — was tested for ulcers, was tested for 
gallstones. It all came up negative. He was put on medication 
which didn't work and he ended up getting sicker, ended up in 
the Regina General Hospital. The doctors there thought he was 
having a heart attack. 
 
This happened not once, but twice. He underwent five hours of 
tests. They couldn't find anything wrong. They sent him to a 
specialist. The specialist thought he had pleurisy, but put him 

on medication and his stomach reacted. That's not what was 
wrong. But just think of all these tests that he went through, 
and the cost to society and to the taxpayers. And this person 
wasn't functioning well, but one day he discovered something. 
He discovered it was all stress related. 
 
He went on a different diet, exercised, and a lot of mental 
exercise, and read a lot of books. He started to understand 
himself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He lost weight; there was no 
more eating disorder. That knot in the stomach turned to a 
radiant glow in the chest. All these ailments were caused by 
stress. 
 
Why do I discuss this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because it's just 
one aspect of wellness that most people don't understand — 
that mental stress leads to physical illness. And if you ask just 
who is this person — well, when I wake up every morning I see 
him in the mirror. And if you don't believe my story you can 
ask my wife and how this wellness program, how good it 
worked for our family. And I know there are many other people 
out there that would gain substantially from a program like this. 
 
And while talking about my wife, a special thanks to my wife 
Carol, and my children, Tyler and Becky and Jordan, for 
putting up with me while I went through this transformation 
and for putting up with the hard tasks of today in doing this job, 
from being away from home all the time . . . is quite a strain on 
family life, especially for rural members. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
again thanks to my family. 
 
And while we have ventured on this new wellness concept, 
we've empowered the communities to make up their minds 
what they see fit. And many district boards through their needs 
assessments, for example, are going to be spending less money 
on acute care and more money on mental health and related 
programs. But of course, this is as the district board sees fit in 
their community because every community is somewhat 
different. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what wellness is all about. One of 
the books I recently read about this in is called Ageless Body, 
Timeless Mind. It talks about longevity. It talks about the 
mental awareness, you know, of why some people are 65 and 
they feel like they're 30 years old and why some are 30 and 
they feel like they're 65 and how to get around that and how to 
feel better. It also talks about exercise and eating habits, your 
lifestyle and wellness. 
 
It talks about one thing, and it mentions it many times in that 
book. It's called smoking. Smoking — quite harmful to one's 
health. We'd have to wonder why Chrétien would cut that 
tobacco tax and what is the end result going to be. 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

The cancer society and the children are saying more people are 
going to be smoking and there's going to be more cancer — a 
direct contradiction to the wellness approach. I have no idea 
why Mr. Chrétien would do this, but I think most members 
know maybe it has something to do with the coming Liberal 
election in Quebec. 
 
And while we're talking about Chrétien, we should remember 
the first federal deficit. When the Auditor General said the 
federal spending is out of control, it's time to get it under 
control. Who was the Finance minister? Well, none other than 
Mr. Chrétien. 
 
You see, and now the people have brought him back to fix up 
the problem he created. It's a little ironic but none the less it's 
something like getting a kid to fix the window they broke when 
they were playing softball. I guess they can do it and I guess 
it'll teach them a lesson, but just what kind of a job are they 
going to do? Just what kind of a job are they going to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
And since discussing other governments, I'd like to talk about 
Alberta's right-wing government for a minute. The cuts they're 
making to society have no rhyme, no reason, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I have a cousin that resided in Saskatoon between the years of 
'90 and '93 and then moved to Edmonton later in '93 and is 
living there to the present. And he tells me that Alberta just is 
making no sense of their cuts. The people are in turmoil. He 
has shared with me many examples, and what he is saying is 
that these cuts . . . a lot of them took place in Saskatchewan but 
at least Saskatchewan showed compassion. There's just no 
comparison to what happened between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess it's . . . the bottom line is all about 
balancing the budget. But balancing the budget means nothing. 
It means nothing. What one has to be concerned about is how 
does a government balance that budget and what they do after 
they balance that budget. It's about compassion and social 
justice. 
 
One has to wonder why was this debt created in the first place, 
both federally and provincially. Was it, Mr. Speaker, so that the 
governments would then have an out to say we can't afford 
these social programs any more like universal medicare and we 
can cut them out? That's what it seems like to me, Mr. Speaker 
— that the debt was intentional so the governments of the day 
could get rid of the social programs, medicare being one of 
them. Very shameful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about agriculture for some 
short time. As a youngster growing up on a family farm, we 
used to grow three crops. They were wheat, wheat, and wheat. 
And I used to visit my neighbours and I wondered what they 
grew. And they would say the same thing. They used to grow 
wheat, wheat, and some more wheat. 
 
Times have changed. If you look upon the landscape in the 
summer months or visit an elevator any time of the year, you 
will find that there are a variety of crops grown in 
Saskatchewan. There are peas and lentils, canaryseed, sunola, 

flax, canola, linola, and many more just too numerous to 
mention. And I can remember when some of my neighbours for 
the first time were going to grow lentils or peas. All the 
sceptics out there were saying it would never work; they're 
going to go broke; they've got to grow wheat. Wheat is king out 
here. There were many sceptics. I remember the first time I 
grew canola. My neighbours thought I was crazy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, times are changing. Now so are the farmers. 
And today Sask farmers and Saskatchewan manufacturers are 
leading in technology. I take my neighbour, for example, who 
was just grain farming till this winter, has set up a shop in his 
yard and they're producing zero-till knives and packing units 
for air seeders. And they have to produce 500 units; they had 
up to 500 units two months ago. They have more orders but 
they can't fulfil them. And that's Gunnar Nordal and sons from 
Foam Lake are in this venture. 
 
It's just a part of our ongoing soil conservation where our paper 
Ag 2000 is going to help facilitate these changes, and this 
policy is going to increase value-added products. It's going to 
increase on-farm productivity and it's going to end in better 
income for farm families. 
 
I will admit it's been tough out there on the farm. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it is still the best place to live and it is still the best 
place to raise a family. 
 
And I ought to know because I was one of those Saskatchewan 
boys that went to the oil patch of Alberta and came back. And I 
worked in the city, but returned back to Saskatchewan and back 
to farm life, and something I am quite proud of and happy I 
have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Mr. Speaker, times are changing. And sometimes 
it's hard to accept change. Take when I was reeve of the RM 
(rural municipality) of Emerald, was going through some old 
council resolutions. There was a motion in the 1920s which 
was to lobby both levels of senior government to get more 
settlers on the land, on all the vacant land. 
 
And about the 1950s they accomplished that. There was 3,800 
people living in the RM of Emerald, which is a standard RM, a 
nine-township RM — 3,800 people living there. Unfortunately 
today, Mr. Speaker, there's only 720. There's 305 vacant yard 
sites. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it's part of the evolution of agriculture. 
We all want to see more farmers, and I'm hopeful that with a 
book like Ag 2000 and more value-added, more special crops, 
hopefully we will have more farmers out there. 
 
(1600) 
 
And when you talk about less farmers, it had nothing 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

to do with which government was in power because all 
governments were in power and farm population declined. 
Economic times went up and down; farmers declined. But it's 
just a part of the evolution of agriculture. 
 
But times change. Recently I was reading a book, an article, 
and in 1943 the chairman of IBM corporation was talking about 
computers and he said possibly there would be a market for 
five computers worldwide. Could you imagine if IBM 
corporation would have stayed with that philosophy, like five 
computers worldwide? 
 
Times change, Mr. Speaker. Just like in agriculture, the 
changes between tillage and direct seeding, the changes 
between wheat and alternate crops, the changes between 
tractors versus horses, they all had resistance. It's something 
like our changes in health care, like the changes from 
institutional care to wellness. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, times are changing, but everybody's going to 
be better off at the end of the day. 
 
As I start to wrap up my comments, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to talk about the opposition for a while. And it's always easier 
to be in opposition. And as a farmer I know the saying, the 
grass is greener on the other side of the fence. And if any 
member is looking across from that fence, I tell you, watch out 
because you might step in something you didn't know was 
there. 
 
When you talk about the opposition members, you know, what 
would they do? They talk about higher services, lower taxes, 
and we're going to balance the budget while we do that. And 
just how are they going to accomplish that? You know, even 
the Reformers in Ottawa have come out with a package stating 
$20 million in cuts. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Billion. 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Twenty billion. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker — $20 
billion in cuts. Like those cuts are not . . . At least they had the 
political courage to say here is what we would do. Now why 
can't the opposition members in their statements come out with 
some sound proposals, even some of the changes that they 
would have made? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we seek our budget balance projection, which 
is going to happen . . . We will balance the budget. We have a 
real plan, Mr. Speaker. And I know at times it has been tough, 
but I would like to thank the constituents of 
Kelvington-Wadena and all the people of Saskatchewan for 
making the sacrifice so that we can balance the budget. And we 
can do this, not for today but for tomorrow — for our children, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And saying that, Mr. Speaker, when it comes down to the vote 
on the throne speech, I am proud to say I will stand in my place 
and I will support the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

pleasure to enter the debate this afternoon. It has been very 
wide-ranging, as you know, but the Premier last night barely 
even touching on the subject. And that's fine, because I don't 
intend to touch a whole lot on the subject either, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm going to be wide-ranging as well. 
 
First of all, however, I'd like to welcome the new member, the 
member for Regina North West, to the legislature. I understand 
it was a very well run campaign that she organized. And as she 
has taken her place here, we welcome her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk a little bit about what I think the 
view of the government opposite is compared to the view of 
ours in Saskatchewan. Our province is steeped in tradition, Mr. 
Speaker, and Tommy Douglas folklore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it might surprise you to know that some of us in 
the legislature are young enough that we didn't even know 
Tommy Douglas. It might surprise you to know that, Mr. 
Speaker. I didn't even know the man, Mr. Speaker, and he's the 
one that the government is so fond of telling us about. They 
hark back to the '40s to bring up the views of Tommy Douglas. 
 
And that's fine, Mr. Speaker. It makes for interesting discussion 
and it makes for an interesting time here in the legislature for 
those of us that didn't know Tommy Douglas from the next guy 
on the street. To me he holds no special meaning, Mr. Speaker, 
other than the fact that he is a past premier of this province; a 
man who brought in many policies, many initiatives — some, 
in my view, good, and some, in my view, bad. 
 
One thing that is constant, Mr. Speaker, and that is history has 
generally been kind to past premiers, most notably, Tommy 
Douglas. I however have sharp differences in our philosophical 
view of the world, Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to talk about those 
differences here this afternoon — the differences between the 
free enterprise capitalist view of the world and the socialist 
view of the world. 
 
I believe that the socialist view of the world is based on envy, 
jealousy, and fear, Mr. Speaker. For some unexplainable reason 
a philosophy that believes that we in Saskatchewan are 
disadvantaged, that we are not as good as the rest of the world, 
that we don't somehow measure up, that we are inferior — that 
is the socialist view, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think back, Mr. Speaker, to a childhood acquaintance and 
friend. We've known each other our entire life long. We 
debated politics all through our formative and teenage years. 
This man will remain unnamed, but suffice it to say he has had 
a lifelong socialist upbringing, coming from a family that I 
understand were part of the earliest socialist roots in this 
province. For simplicity, I will call him Jimmy 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

Socialist. 
 
Jimmy Socialist, Mr. Speaker, is a fine debater, a man who 
understands the socialist philosophy well, a man to this day I 
still believe will enter politics in Saskatchewan. Jimmy 
Socialist is right up there with the best when recalling the 
Tommy Douglas folklore. A man who can hold his own with 
anyone when it comes to political debate. A man who the 
socialists opposite would be proud of, extremely proud of. He 
is good at promoting the socialist dream, Mr. Speaker — he is 
very good at it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Jimmy Socialist and myself have debated 
for years. He holds a firm belief that only socialism can bring 
about fairness and justice. Up until a few years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, I never thought I would see him make a mistake in 
debate. He debated tirelessly on behalf of his principles. 
 
Then an interesting thing happened one time in a particularly 
heated debate that we were having. He finally said he had had 
enough and he broke down. He broke down and told us in the 
room there that evening why he firmly held his socialist view 
of life so dear. At that particular point I think it was the most 
stressful time of his life, Mr. Speaker, and maybe that would 
explain why he broke down the way he did. 
 
He betrayed the socialists that night, Mr. Speaker, because he 
told us in heated debate what made him the socialist that he 
was and is today. He explained from start to finish the socialist 
philosophy to us. It is the firm belief, he said, that I am 
disadvantaged. Other people have had a head start, other people 
have money, other people have an education, other people are 
lucky, other people have inherited money, other people always 
seem to be in the right place at the right time. Other people 
have more advantages in life than I do, he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this man is poor, he is uneducated. We should 
have pity on him. He did not enjoy the benefits others have 
had, therefore somehow someone has to level the playing-field 
for him, not allow everyone else out there to have what he 
cannot have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly do have pity for him — pity because 
Jimmy Socialist is so mired in his beliefs and fears and envy 
and jealousy that he cannot cope well with the world or the 
people who disagree with him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Jimmy Socialist was raised, Mr. Speaker, in a fine home with 
loving parents. He's had the benefit of a fine inheritance. This 
is not a man who is poor. In fact, Mr. Speaker, most people 
would believe him to be rich. Rich in family life, rich in 
material possessions, rich with the benefit of a university 
education. Rich, Mr. Speaker, in ability. Rich in every way. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is a man who is embittered with envy; 
embittered with jealousy. The cup is always half empty not half 
full. Someone out there is trying to get him. They want to steal 
from him. They have more than he has. Government has to stop 
this before he has nothing left, and must also take from those 
who he believes have and give to those who he believes does 
not have. 
 
Jimmy Socialist is so handicapped by a failed philosophy that 

his every waking moment in his whole life can be defined in 
one short sentence: help me, I'm disadvantaged. And that's 
exactly what he said there that evening: help me, I'm 
disadvantaged. 
 
The very spirit, Mr. Speaker, of Jimmy Socialist has been 
sucked out of him by the philosophy of jealousy and fear. Mr. 
Speaker, we saw that very same thing last night. The envy, the 
jealousy exhibited by the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. He went into a lengthy defence of his throne 
speech, his philosophy, and why the rest of the world must 
have pity on him and his government. 
 
It was pathetic to watch a man so consumed with fear that I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, it's impairing his judgement. Mr. 
Speaker, Jimmy Socialist sits in the chair opposite us, in the 
Premier's chair in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this philosophy I believe is the one . . . Our 
philosophy, Mr. Speaker, I believe is opposite of that. Our 
philosophy is one of hope; one of challenge; one of providing a 
climate for the individual to succeed at whatever challenge that 
they wish to pursue; one where less government is better, to 
allow maximum freedom to create and achieve; that we should 
strive for a society that restrains government and not the 
individual; that the people of Saskatchewan can solve their own 
problems and do not need big government to do it for them; 
that government is in place to promote law and order; that the 
best we can hope for, Mr. Speaker, in an imperfect world, will 
not be achieved by . . . will be achieved by maximizing 
individual freedoms, both economically and politically. 
 
That comparison is not how the government opposite views 
things, Mr. Speaker. They believe that government programs 
like social assistance are the way to treat the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we don't believe that, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 
programs like social assistance are not the measure of how 
compassionate a government is, that society does not owe 
anything to anyone, Mr. Speaker. We believe that people owe it 
to themselves; that society owes its citizens the equality of 
opportunity but cannot guarantee them the equality of outcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my philosophy and the philosophy of the free 
enterprise, capitalist people of the world, I believe, can also be 
defined in one short sentence: yes, I can. Yes, I can. Yes, I can 
build a strong business. Yes, I can build a strong family. Yes, I 
can build a strong farm. Yes, I can be good at my job. Yes, I 
can build a future for myself and my family in Saskatchewan. 
Yes, I can. That's our defining moment, Mr. Speaker. 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that is the difference 
between the socialist's view of the world and the capitalist's 
free enterprise view of the world. Ours is based in hope; theirs 
in despair. Ours in competition; theirs in control. Ours in giving 
people opportunity; theirs in holding people back. Ours in 
individual freedom; theirs in government restriction. Ours in 
less government; theirs in more government. Ours that life can 
be rich and rewarding; theirs that someone out there is trying to 
get them. 
 
It must be terrible, Mr. Speaker, it must terrible to wake up 
each and every day with nothing but a hopeless feeling of 
inadequacy that the members opposite display in this House 
each and every day. It is the socialist's view that has held this 
province back, Mr. Speaker, I believe, for 30 or 40 years of 
socialism compared to provinces like our sister province of 
Alberta where the people out there believe that they have the 
answer to society's problems and not big government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government of Saskatchewan continues on 
that same path and will continue to hold Saskatchewan under 
their thumb as is evidenced in the throne speech that we saw 
last night . . . or earlier last week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the throne speech was very 
inadequate. It didn't talk about a lot of things in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that need to be talked about. It didn't talk 
about government reform. It didn't talk about the initiatives 
such as the one that was introduced this afternoon where people 
— ordinary folks — that sat in the gallery this afternoon, asked 
questions of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and 
he won't even rise in his place and respond to them. It was a 
shame to witness. 
 
And the people in the gallery unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, did 
witness it and I understand they talked to the media this 
afternoon after question period and that's exactly what they told 
them. They were ashamed of the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan — wouldn't even stand in his place and respond 
to the question that was asked of him directly from them, by 
myself. Mr. Speaker, it's shameful that a government should 
find itself in a position where they can't answer questions from 
ordinary taxpayers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech is totally lacking and therefore 
we feel . . . the opposition, the official opposition, feels that 
there are things far more pressing that we should be discussing 
in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. And therefore I move the 
motion: 
 

 That this House do now proceed to Bill No. 3, An Act to 
Create, Encourage and Facilitate Business Opportunities in 
Saskatchewan through the Establishment of the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 

 
So moved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:19 p.m. until 4:20 p.m. 
 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
Swenson Toth 
Neudorf Britton 
Martens D'Autremont 
Boyd Goohsen 
   

Nays 
Thompson Whitmore 
Teichrob Sonntag 
Johnson Flavel 
Kowalsky Roy 
Carson Cline 
Upshall Crofford 
Bradley Kujawa 
Lyons Stanger 
Pringle Kluz 
Murray Knezacek 
Hamilton Harper 
Trew Langford 
Serby t 
   
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the support from my colleagues as they come to 
listen to my address. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, it's with utmost pleasure and honour 
that I stand in my place as the representative from the Saltcoats 
constituency and enter debate on behalf of my constituents in 
support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Before I begin my debate, I want to take a few moments to 
congratulate the member from Regina Lake Centre, the mover 
of the Speech from the Throne, for her thought-provoking and 
analytical presentation. And also to the member from Biggar, 
the seconder of the motion, for his positive vision and 
optimistic comments about Saskatchewan's future. Both these 
members are very hard-working individuals and dedicated to 
serving their constituents and the people of the province 
_- colleagues whom I'm proud to call my friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to join my colleagues in welcoming to 
the legislature the member from Regina North West. I'm sure 
she will find the experience of serving the public as an MLA 
rewarding but quite different than the campaign through which 
she just recently came. No doubt she will find her new role as 
someone on the inside looking out in sharp contrast to someone 
on the outside looking in. I wish her the best in meeting the 
needs and desires of her constituents. 
 
And now I turn to you, Mr. Speaker, to recognize your work, 
your contributions, and your accomplishments as Speaker of 
the House. You are certainly in an 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

enviable position, being able to preside over an Assembly that 
presents no problems, always displays perfect decorum, and 
never causes you to pull your hair. You need to be 
congratulated on maintaining the excellent tradition of fine 
Speakers in this Assembly, or if you wish to turn that around, 
maintain the fine tradition of excellent Speakers in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to renew my commitment to you to work 
with you within the framework of the rules which bind this 
Assembly. I will support you and I will endeavour to cooperate 
with you while serving the needs and wishes of the constituents 
I represent. 
 
My final opening remarks are directed to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, you and your cabinet have served the legislature and 
the province honourably and with distinction since taking 
office in late October of 1991. 
 
Under your leadership, this government established a new 
direction early in its mandate, a direction which is 
characterized by openness, honesty, and integrity, a sharp 
contrast to what Saskatchewan people experienced under the 
previous administration. This government, under your 
guidance, is participatory, consultative, cooperative, and above 
all, community minded. You are to be commended for your 
guiding principle of government by consensus as opposed to 
government by confrontation. 
 
It is with this principle as the basis for our government, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have been able to accomplish so much in just 
over two years. Much has been accomplished but much more 
has to be done as we continue on our journey of renewal in 
1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's make no mistake about it, the number one 
reason for the successes and accomplishments that we have 
experienced within the last two years is directly the result of the 
sacrifice, perseverance, and cooperative spirit of the people of 
this province. 
 
This then leads me to my first topic of debate which I've 
entitled: people. Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to 
recognize a special group of people in our province, a group 
that often gets overlooked but yet to whom we owe so much. 
Of course the people I refer to are the thousands of volunteers 
in our communities across the province that in many ways 
enable our towns, villages, and communities to survive. 
 
We often look to people to seek out the individuals who would 
best serve as community leaders because of their leadership 
abilities, and when we find them we pour out our accolades on 
them when in actuality their accomplishments are only 
achievable because of the strong support provided by the 
volunteers in those various communities. In a time of stress and 
economic difficulty, it is important for us to remember the good 
and the positive in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province blessed with 
incredible talent and a diversity of experience among its 
people, thus making it a unique home for us all. I believe that 
one of the main goals for all of us should be a caring, sharing 
community, a place where individuals can develop their talents 

and be fulfilled in their personal lives. Volunteers play a key 
role in making this happen. 
 
I probably don't need to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that 
volunteers are the ones who visit the shut-ins, deliver Meals on 
Wheels, sponsor youth activities and sports events. A prime 
example of this is the Saskatchewan Winter Games currently 
taking place in Kindersley, as the member from Kindersley 
alluded to in his address. And not too long ago, as my bench 
mate and the member from Kelvington-Wadena described, the 
Scott Tournament of Hearts being held in Wadena, also 
involving a lot of volunteers to make that project do well. 
 
Volunteers help seniors lead independent lives. They animate 
cultural groups, write local histories, raise funds for worthy 
causes, and carry on the work of churches. They are active in 
hospitals, the Red Cross, St. John Ambulance, and the veterans' 
organizations and in women's groups. 
 
They work tirelessly on school and library boards and 
municipal government, in aboriginal and multicultural 
activities. And yes, Mr. Speaker, they even work for political 
parties and in election campaigns. Dedicated volunteers bring 
adult education to our individual communities to provide an 
opportunity for us to benefit from their availability. 
 
(1630) 
 
They are a dedicated, diligent group of people who appear in 
large numbers across this province and in every community, 
large and small. They are the backbone and the spirit of our 
prairie society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone once said, we make a living by what we 
get, but we make a life by what we give. And our volunteers 
give a lot. We can take pride in the fact that Saskatchewan has 
the highest rate of volunteerism in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate each and every volunteer in 
my constituency and indeed every volunteer across this 
province for all their hard work, dedication, and personal 
sacrifice. 
 
Volunteers, I want to thank you for your contribution in making 
this province a better place for all of us to live and work and to 
raise our families. I can't think of any place I'd rather be than 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to focus my next remarks to my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. The constituency of Saltcoats is an important area of 
the province. And it's a vital piston in the engine of our 
provincial economy. The 17 communities within the riding are 
separated by fertile farm land and several creeks and valleys, 
making it an ideal mixed farming area, including beef, hog, 
dairy, and poultry production, as well as the production of grain 
and oilseeds. 
 
It is also a scenic tourist area, Mr. Speaker. 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

The strength and determination of the people of Saltcoats have 
resulted in the development of many attractions and facilities 
such as Gopherville, the Kaposvar historic site, and several 
regional parks. 
 
The people I'm talking about are farmers, labourers, 
professionals, small-business people, men and women, seniors 
and youth, all rallying around a cause in their own community. 
As a result we see many recreational and cultural facilities, 
health care facilities, churches, and educational facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these facilities were nurtured by the 
volunteers of the many organizations that thrive in these 
communities. You can readily see, Mr. Speaker, that Saltcoats 
is a busy community where lots is happening. 
 
The economy of this area is not only reliant on agriculture but 
also on industry based on potash development by IMC Canada 
(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) 
Ltd.). 
 
Saltcoats is the melting pot of ethnic culture and traditions. 
This is reflected in the many museums and historic points of 
interest that are established across the constituency. 
 
Truly, Mr. Speaker, Saltcoats is a vibrant community that looks 
to us for leadership. Speaking on behalf of my constituents, I 
know that Saltcoats will be there to do its share to get 
Saskatchewan back on its feet again as we embark on this 
journey of renewal together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quickly want to touch on three areas as they 
pertain to the Saltcoats constituency. First, agriculture. I 
commend the RM of Langenburg for taking the initiative to 
bring forth a new format to its annual meeting, keeping the 
realities of agriculture in mind. The RM took a slightly 
different slant to the traditional spring ratepayers' banquet. 
What they sponsored and held on February 7 was a rural 
entrepreneur day which replaced their annual meeting. Farm 
families, which are currently operating alternate businesses 
from their farms, were asked to set up displays outlining their 
operations. As well, guest speakers talked about rural 
businesses and opportunities during the noon luncheon. 
 
Secondly, in health, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that 
both the East Central and North Valley district health boards 
are very busy beginning to conduct needs assessments in 
communities across the constituency in order to carry out the 
second phase of health care reform. Members of both boards 
need to be congratulated on their commitment to reform and on 
their quality of work. 
 
Apart from the work of the district boards but in keeping with 
the wellness model, Esterhazy, under the leadership of 
personnel from IMC in partnership with representation from 
the district health board and educators in the area, are planning 
to sponsor a hands-on, health, wellness, fitness, awareness fair 
on April 15 and 16. More details on this initiative will be 
forthcoming at a later date. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I want to again draw your attention 
to the fine work volunteers undertook in the Esterhazy area, as 
witnessed by a benefit dance which I attended last weekend for 

Brian Bass, a 26-year-old resident of Esterhazy who become a 
quadriplegic as a result of a trampoline accident he suffered last 
May. 
 
Brian had his spinal cord stretched but not severed in the 
accident. Brian spent six weeks at the Plains hospital and in 
June moved to the Wascana institute. There he received therapy 
in preparation for his move home. 
 
The friends of Brian Bass along with the local Lions Club 
sponsored the benefit to help Brian meet some of the major 
expenses he will incur settling back into his home. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, an excellent example of people helping people. 
 
For the next few moments I want to focus on the theme of 
families and youth. Mr. Speaker, this year is being marked by 
the United Nations as the International Year of the Family. It is 
therefore very fitting that our government has taken the 
initiative to show leadership and focus on the needs of children 
and families with the introduction of the action plan for 
children. We have a number of projects in place which address 
problems with respect to child hunger, family violence, and 
illiteracy. These projects are a direct result of the involvement 
of community agencies and schools as they attempt to meet the 
challenging needs of children and families in today's society. 
 
Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services, 
the member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain, announced that 
grants totalling $1 million are being provided to communities 
around the province for the 1993-94 child nutrition and 
development program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these grants support the efforts of schools, 
community agencies, and churches in responding to the needs 
of hungry children. They are used to provide food, education, 
and support services to lessen the impact of poverty. They are 
also used to support the development of community-minded 
approaches to meeting the needs of these children and their 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of these nutrition projects, children will 
be more settled in their schools and communities, thus making 
it easier for them to concentrate on their learning and are more 
likely to stay in school and develop their skills and education 
which they need for the future. 
 
In these difficult economic times, Mr. Speaker, it is important 
that we protect the most vulnerable members of our 
communities. We realize the causes of poverty are complex. It 
is therefore imperative that all levels of government and 
communities work together in partnership to find effective 
long-term solutions. 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

In the mean time, Mr. Speaker, our government needs to target 
support to meet the immediate need of our province's children. 
This indicates that we are a caring, sharing government in 
pursuit of our goal to eventually eliminate food banks, hunger, 
and poverty. But we can't move any faster because of the hand 
that we've been dealt by the former administration which opted 
to pour money into unsuccessful megaprojects rather than to 
invest it in people's basic needs. 
 
Other initiatives that we will be undertaking in this session, Mr. 
Speaker, include amendments to The Ombudsman's Act to 
establish a children's advocate within the Ombudsman's office. 
Legislation will be introduced to accommodate the expansion 
of the Unified Family Court on a province-wide basis. The 
victims of domestic violence Act will provide remedies to 
address situations to immediate danger and minimize the 
disruption to victims' lives. 
 
And finally in this area, Mr. Speaker, amendments to The 
Labour Standards Act and to The Trade Union Act will be 
introduced which will respond to the need of balancing work 
and family responsibilities, something that hasn't been 
considered for many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just yesterday afternoon the Associate Minister of 
Health, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, announced a 
planned new initiative of interest to all Saskatchewan youth, 
families, and communities. 
 
Later this month, Mr. Speaker, we will begin an extensive 
process of consultation with Saskatchewan's young people to 
seek out their view on public health issues. Their opinions and 
ideas will be sought to help find solutions to problems dealing 
with smoking, and drinking and driving. Their input will be 
considered before any legislation dealing with changes to The 
Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle Administration Act, the 
driver licensing regulations and The Minors Tobacco Act are 
tabled in the House. 
 
To conclude my thoughts and remarks in relationship to the 
topic of families and youth, I think it is only fair and 
appropriate that at this time I express my thanks to the 
members of my family for their cooperation, support, and 
understanding, and for the personal sacrifice that they have had 
to make in their lives as I go about the task of serving the needs 
of my constituents and the residents of this province. 
 
Just a few general comments before I conclude, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that sound fiscal management 
has been a priority for our government. And less than a year 
ago our astute Minister of Finance, the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount, presented this Assembly with a four-year plan to 
balance the budget in 1996-97. 
 
There are many other initiatives that our government has 
undertaken in the areas of education, economic development 
and job creation, agriculture, and the environment, just to name 
a few. Time does not allow me to deal adequately with all these 
very important issues. However my colleagues have and will 
discuss these topics thoroughly in their address in reply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look forward to 1994, it is important to 
recognize that this year will mark two important events in our 

history. One, being the 50th anniversary of the D-Day invasion 
which launched the deciding battle of World War II and with it 
the victory for the western world. 
 
And I want to pay a special tribute to the many men and 
women who had sacrificed their lives fighting for what they 
believed was right. To them and to our veterans we owe a debt 
of gratitude for the preservation of democracy, in order that we 
and generations of the future can live as free men and women, 
if we so desire. As government we will join veterans' 
organizations across Saskatchewan and Canada to mark this 
important anniversary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year also marks the 50th anniversary of the election of the 
first social democratic government in North America under the 
leadership of Tommy Douglas. As together we embark on this 
continued journey of renewal, we are writing the history of the 
beginning of the next 50 years of social democratic government 
in this province and the benefits it brings to the people. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my constituents I am 
committed to this journey of renewal and I place my full 
support behind the Speech from the Throne as read so 
eloquently by Her Honour, Sylvia Fedoruk, Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I'd like 
to say thank you for the way that you have been chairing and 
handling the House. It's been providing an entertaining and 
very different Speech from the Throne and the discussion going 
on than what took place over the past two years. 
 
The first thing, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to do is to comment on 
some of the remarks made by previous speakers in the debate. 
I'd like to congratulate the mover, the member from Regina 
Lake Centre, for her remarks on the motion, and the seconder, 
the member from Biggar, in following the mover's motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular debate that follows the presentation 
of the throne speech is a debate that allows members to move 
in a number of different directions, but there are usually some 
things that one would find in the speeches made by non-cabinet 
ministers. 
 
And I'd like to take a little while to comment on the speech 
made by the member from Kindersley. It was a very 
entertaining speech. It discussed a number of items that an 
individual . . . that he put forward and 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard February 15, 1994 

described and what this person felt and where he met him, etc. 
But the member may not have understood what he was really 
doing in speaking in this debate and not coming up with a 
single issue that affected the government, neither pro nor con. 
And since he is a member of the opposition, I believe that we 
can look at that, after having a government in place for two 
years, as a very high recommendation to this government for its 
actions over the past two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Because, Mr. Speaker, in a debate, in this 
particular debate, where one can be very wide-ranging in 
discussion, not to have a single item that you are contrary to 
what the government has done, and in opposition, indicates that 
that government had to have been doing some very excellent 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take a little time and 
comment on some of the remarks that the member for Regina 
North West said in this debate. And although the Hansard is 
not working or is not available to me at this time, I believe that 
her remarks went something like this, that the government hid 
from the media the information regarding MA (ministerial 
assistant) employment regulations. I'm not able to quote 
verbatim what she said, Mr. Speaker, but I'm sure that you and 
others will be able to look it up at a later date. 
 
Now the member made these remarks in this Assembly, and 
she is a member of a party that is the only party in this 
Assembly to have over 50 per cent female representatives as 
their members. And that is the Liberal Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's down from 100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — That's down from 100 per cent, yes. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I want you to keep this in mind because what her 
remarks were in regards to the MA salaries, that she said that 
they'd been hidden, indicates to me that she doesn't do her own 
research, that she was simply taking notes from the member 
who sits in front of her. And as everyone will understand, his 
research into items is not necessarily the very best. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, I hold in my hand a copy of the Saskatchewan 
Gazette dated November 26, 1993, part II, revised regulations 
of Saskatchewan. The Public Service Act, section 46, order in 
council 830, dated November 17, 1993 and it says: the 
regulations for ministerial assistants employment regulations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Gazette was published on the 
November 26 and the member from Regina North West said 
that this government had hid from the media information 
regarding MA's salaries. An interesting thing — hid from the 
media, meaning to say that we are attempting to keep the public 
uninformed and I have here eight pages that detail for anyone's 
interest exactly what was said. 
 
But it indicates that the member is not interested in doing the 
kind of research that would allow her to back up her 
statements. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the material I have here 
from the Saskatchewan Gazette will indicate that of the 
individuals that they were talking about, 16 of them are from 

Executive Council and only two were clerical staff in the 
Ministers' offices. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is even more interesting about that and 
the reason that I had indicated earlier that the member from 
Regina North West was a member of a party that has over 50 
per cent women as members in this House, is that all of these 
individuals, all 18 individuals are women. And what took place 
in putting forward the revised regulations basically says that 
everybody gets paid according to the category that they're in, 
not according to the sex that they are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I see in this is that the members of the 
Liberal Party in this Assembly are prepared . . . are not 
prepared to put forth items and to support those things that 
would support women in our society. And it's not something 
that you would . . . It's not something that just happens with this 
newest member. It also is something that the leader of the party 
has done previously. And you can look at, say in November 
1992, after the government raised the minimum wage, 
Haverstock said: I'm convinced that ultimately jobs will be lost 
as a result of this decision. Never one to support those at the 
bottom end of the pay scale. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to indicate one of things that has 
occurred recently in the Turtleford constituency. I recently 
attended the opening of Ski Timber Ridge, a new ski hill just 
south of Big River. The event was a send-off for an Olympic 
team representing Saskatchewan at the Winter Olympics in 
Lillehammer. The members of this team are Kim Ennis, Lloyd 
Pinay and Laurie Afseth and they will be participating in a 
snow sculpturing competition that will be held at the games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — I had the opportunity to discuss the 
sculpturing of snow with Kim. And although I'm not an artist or 
a sculptor myself, I found it very interesting and I thought 
maybe the members of the Assembly would also find it 
interesting. 
 
Snow sculpturing is an art with some very unique qualities. The 
medium is soft, it is fragile, and great care must be taken to 
maintain the structural integrity of the sculpture. Nevertheless, 
the finished sculpture can be a creation of fantastic detail. The 
fact that the creation is not permanent only enhances the beauty 
of it. This art celebrates the immediacy of life. 
 
There is also a problem with light in snow sculpturing because 
sculptures are really a creation of shadows, and snow plays 
games with light. Snow is a trickster, sometimes absorbing the 
light, sometimes reflecting it in seemingly a haphazard manner. 
Snow actually 



February 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

appears at some times to emit a glow. The artist must play with 
this trickster to exaggerate or understate different parts of the 
physical sculpture in order to create a perfect visual sculpture 
for the individual observing it. 
 
I ask this Assembly to support, along with myself, to support 
this team in Lillehammer while they sculpture a 15-foot eagle 
whose overspread wings protect a child reaching out for an egg 
— an image, Mr. Speaker, an image of renewal that I believe is 
appropriate for presentation from Saskatchewan for today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the time. I will be supporting the 
resolution when the vote comes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I was not able to hear the last words of the 
speaker. I'm not sure whether he adjourned debate or not. Did 
the member ask . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He did. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 
 


