




















































Hansard: March 10, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 785 

 March 10, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Legislative Assembly 

today, a couple of gentlemen from my area of the province, Mr. 

Brian Kiss, a councillor of the RM (rural municipality) of Bone 

Creek -- he lives in the Morse constituency -- and Mr. Darrell 

Bellefeuille of Shaunavon, a businessman in that community.  

And welcome them, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 

Assembly, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, right at the top 

corner up in there, two gentlemen, Bill Stewart and Dave 

Lockyer of Merit Contractors Association. 

 

Merit represents a number of Saskatchewan contractors who do 

primarily commercial and industrial work in Saskatchewan.  

They provide work for people in Saskatchewan and benefits 

and training opportunities for the member companies.  And as 

such, Merit represents a fine example of an association that is 

working to ensure Saskatchewan companies and Saskatchewan 

workers can compete and win in today's rapidly changing 

market-places. 

 

I congratulate Merit Contractors on the terrific work that they 

do and ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 

here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 11 students 

from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology).  These students, who are seated in your gallery, 

are taking English as a second language program here in 

Regina, and I want to welcome them here today and let you 

know we'll be meeting with you shortly after question period. 

 

I'm sure all members will want to join with me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to introduce this gentleman to the Assembly.  

The headline says this: "Illerbrun now top man in 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation."  And just incidentally, he's 

probably a very close neighbour . . . or the family used to live 

down where Brian Kiss lives. 

 

And I want to say that Greg Illerbrun has been an outstanding 

citizen of this province and now is the top man in the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation.  Illerbrun is a community in 

the south-west corner of my constituency and was named after 

that family quite a while back.  And I want to say that it's a 

pleasure for me to acknowledge the work that Mr. Illerbrun has 

been doing in the south-west part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Greg has been an active member of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation.  He's been involved in developments in the 

south-west.  He's been actively involved in providing habitat 

for the wildlife, both upland game and big game.  And I just 

want to say that Greg has initiated a lot of these and has done a 

lot of that himself. 

 

As a part of that, I just want to say that he is the 

second-youngest person to ever have been the president of the 

Wildlife Federation in Saskatchewan, and I want to 

acknowledge his work here as a part of the community that he 

represents and as a part of the community in my constituency 

that he represents as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, other members this week have 

spoken on Education Week and I want to report some specific 

activities that have taken place in the Turtleford constituency, 

activities which fit the statement, Home-School: Making the 

Connection. 

 

Many schools have opened their doors to the public for 

participation in a variety of organized activities.  For example, 

the Spiritwood High School with representatives from the 

alcohol and abuse branch of the Department of Health have 

organized a workshop for teens and parents. 

 

Other schools in the constituency from K to 12 have a number 

of classroom displays and activities which highlight all 

segments of education: science, art, culture, physical education.  

All of these activities, Mr. Speaker, emphasize the importance 

of good communication between the home and the school.  And 

I congratulate all of those who are making this Education Week 

a successful and relevant week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan seniors 

have asked MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) why 

chelation treatments are not available in Saskatchewan.  People 

have spent thousands travelling out of province for the 

treatment.  Many make positive claims for the treatment, but 

the overwhelming scientific information available at the 

moment is not supportive. 

 

Neither MLAs nor the Department of Health promote any 

medical treatment that is not sanctioned by the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons.  This restriction 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

must remain ironclad.  At the moment, chelation treatment for 

heart-related conditions is not included in the schedule of any 

publicly funded health plan in Canada. 

 

In my personal opinion, Mr. Speaker, the only way this or any 

treatment can be validated is through scientific study accepted 

by the accepted medical authorities. 

 

But in response to the interest expressed by the public, 

qualified doctors in Saskatchewan have indicated to me their 

willingness to consider a two-year study if funding were 

available and if the ethics committee of the College of 

Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, sanctions such a study. 

 

I have mentioned this to Mr. Dan Stewart of the chelation 

association of Saskatchewan, suggesting that they undertake a 

fund-raising drive in the private sector for this purpose.  This 

collaborative approach will, I hope, achieve the scientific 

validation necessary for the use of, or for the dismissal of, this 

treatment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to make 

everyone in the Assembly aware that March 7, Monday of this 

week, was Heritage Languages Recognition Day.  I would like 

to extend my good wishes to the schools, community 

organizations, volunteers, students, teachers, and parents who 

are involved in the teaching and learning of languages. 

 

I would also like to recognize the work carried out by the 

Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage Languages and its 

member organizations throughout the province, in promoting 

this day to recognize the linguistic skills of many Saskatchewan 

young people. 

 

In an increasingly competitive international market-place, 

knowing another language and culture is an asset and can 

provide an advantage in our trading partnerships.  This is also 

important today because as we are aware, this is Education 

Week.  We need to encourage our students to learn languages 

and cultures.  Heritage Languages Recognition Day is one way 

of promoting language learning. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I wish today to bring attention to an event that 

happened in my home town last weekend.  Last weekend my 

home town of Lintlaw and the Lintlaw Recreation Centre 

sponsored this Lintlaw 75 poker derby snowmobile ride.  It is 

so called because the snowmobile trail is 75 miles long, which I 

believe is slightly longer than what the member from Nipawin 

reported the other day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were 664 snowmobiles entered, which a 

Canadian record for a poker derby.  One came from Red Deer, 

Alberta, probably fleeing Ralph Klein.  Several were here from 

Manitoba, and riders came from all over Saskatchewan.  The 

scenic trail through the Porcupine Forest Reserve goes through 

Big Valley and Cougar Canyon.  As well there was a parade, 

dance, and a polar bear roping contest.  A great time was had 

by all. 

 

And the event also raised $42,600 for the Lintlaw community 

hall building fund.  The new hall is practically finished and 

much closer to being paid for now.  Although it is already 

being used, the official opening will be some time this spring or 

summer. 

 

I want to congratulate my home community of Lintlaw.  I know 

everyone in the community worked with this.  And as they say, 

hard work pays off.  Mr. Speaker, this event and the new hall 

are testaments to the enduring spirit and strength of the 

Saskatchewan way, and I am proud today to be from Lintlaw, 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like 

to inform the members of the Assembly today of the upcoming 

winter festival this weekend in Meadow Lake.  The reason I 

raise it here today, Mr. Speaker, is because this year is special.  

It's our 25th annual winter festival. 

 

The week-long event is a time when our community puts 

together a fantastic celebration in which all people can enjoy.  

The festival lets people experience the fun of the many great 

outdoor activities that we have.  A brief overview of the much 

anticipated events includes snowmobile races, chuck-sled 

races, king and queen of the woods contests, and curling 

bonspiels.  There are as well many indoor activities such as an 

arts and crafts show, a chili bake-off, a pancake breakfast, and 

performances put on daily by the high school drama club. 

 

In addition to these events there will be activities aimed at the 

seniors.  On Saturday night at the dance, the queen of the 

festival will be crowned.  The winter festival president, Barry 

Lewis, is confident that this year's event will be even more 

successful than previous ones.  One reason for this prediction is 

that new events have been added this year with the main 

purpose of getting youth involved. 

 

The winter festival in Meadow Lake is a success because of the 

cooperation and dedication of the fine people of Meadow Lake 

and surrounding communities and the numerous organizations 

and workers who help the operation run smoothly.  I urge all 

people of Saskatchewan to come to Meadow Lake and join 

with us in enjoying our 25th winter festival. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like the 

Assembly to join me in congratulating the Wadena Composite 

senior mixed curling team for winning the north-east 

Saskatchewan senior amateur curling  



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

competition in Nipawin and going on to place a very 

respectable fourth in the provincial final. 

 

This is the third consecutive year that the Wadena team has 

won the NESSAC district and gone on to represent their area in 

the provincial final.  The team of Glorian Humenny, coach; 

Jodie Kucheran; Andrea Wallster; Kevin Leitch; and Kristal 

Anderson displayed confidence and maturity throughout the 

tournament.  This year's trip to the provincials, held in 

Rosetown, proved to be a worthy task as the Wadena team held 

strong and played extremely well. 

 

Placing fourth overall in the Saskatchewan provincials is a 

great achievement for any team.  As we all know, the greatest 

curlers in the world come from this fair province.  I would also 

like to point out the fact that this curling team is an example of 

the benefits a mix of athletics and education can produce. 

 

This being Education Week in Saskatchewan, it is also 

important to recognize these athletes are very devoted students.  

Through positive programs such as this, a student gets a 

well-rounded education both mentally and physically.  Again, I 

would like to congratulate the Wadena Composite School 

mixed curling team on their success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Melfort Pipeline Project 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for Sask Water and the 

Melfort pipeline débâcle.  Mr. Minister, this morning I received 

a report from Merit Contractors Association about the mess 

your government has made of the pipeline project in Melfort.  

This is a very comprehensive study and the most 

comprehensive one I've seen, Mr. Minister, and it comes with 

three irrefutable conclusions. 

 

One, that the project is millions of dollars over budget already 

and that the final costs will not be known until next spring 

when the portion of the project that Sask Water has been 

supervising finally is completed.  Two, the project is at least six 

months behind schedule because the pipeline is incapable of 

transmitting pressurized water from Codette to Melfort.  And 

three, that it is now clear that your union-only contracting 

experiment has been a catastrophic failure at the taxpayers' 

expense. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now admit that your government's 

handling of this project has been an abject failure and that your 

government should abandon its union-only tendering policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the . . 

. 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite.  The Melfort pipeline -- we don't know if it is over 

budget at this point.  You have to understand that the Melfort 

pipeline had two contracts and then Sask Water did a portion.  

The contracts, of course, are paid out according to the contract.  

It's a $21 million project and it has been delayed because of 

weather.  I know some of the members opposite are farmers 

and I know that they had problems in completing their harvest 

this year.  Construction of this sort, it's the same as farming.  

There's problems in construction, so it is behind schedule.  

There are leaks on the pipeline.  The pipeline has not been 

tested in completion yet.  As the weather warms up we will 

continue to test the pipeline and the good people of Melfort 

region will have water very soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I know 

that your government has made every effort to cover up the 

facts regarding this pipeline.  In fact, it's become your 

government's version of Sask Water-gate, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, let's look at the difference between the portion of the 

pipeline built by Miazga Construction and the union portion 

that Sask Water has been supervising. 

 

Miazga operated with two crews and approximately 18 people; 

Sask Water employed double the number of crews and four 

times the number of employees, and the labour costs that the 

unionized portion of the pipeline from Codette to Melfort . . . 

were about $5.3 million -- almost two and a half times the 

original budgeted amount of 2.2 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you confirm that the labour costs on the 

portion of the pipeline built and supervised by Sask Water are 

already more than $3 million over budget and a section of the 

pipeline has yet to be completed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- As I mentioned to the member earlier, 

Mr. Speaker, we are not completed the project and so I can't 

give him those figures if indeed we are over budget on the Sask 

Water portion of the line. 

 

What I want to say though, Mr. Speaker, is unlike Rafferty, 

where the cost was to be $120 million or the expected cost, and 

it ended up $2.2 million, Mr. Speaker, this is not going to 

happen on the water line at Melfort. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, let's look 

at the job that was done with the extra $3 million spent on 

labour.  The section of the pipeline that was built by Miazga 

was completed in November, pressure testing was done, a few 

minor leaks were found and they were repaired almost 

immediately. 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

The Sask Water portion of the pipeline was tested with 

unpressurized water at about the same time and over 50 leaks 

were reported, Mr. Minister.  That's not a pipeline, Mr. 

Minister, that's a sprinkler system. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have spoken to people who believe that the 

leaky portion of the pipeline, it may even be unfixable, that 

Sask Water may have to just abandon it completely and build a 

complete new pipeline, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that a real possibility?  And how many more 

dollars will be wasted on your Sask Water-gate sprinkler 

project before it is finally completed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  I want to tell the member again that the line is not 

complete, the testing has not been completed on neither the 

Miazga side or the Sask Water side. 

 

When we closed down the testing of the pipeline, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the extremely cold weather, there was 11 leaks that 

had to be repaired.  And the member knows that it's far more 

expensive to repair a leak in the wintertime when the ground is 

frozen than in the summertime.  And we intend to start the 

testing as soon as the weather is warm enough, and that should 

be in the next few weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I wonder why the party over there likes to play politics on 

the backs of the people in the Melfort region and make light of 

the 82 jobs that this project created and the amount of people 

that are going to receive good quality and quantity of water. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, this is really a shining example of how well your 

union-only tendering policy is working.  We have on one half 

of the project built by private enterprise  

_- it's completed, it's on budget, and it doesn't leak.  We have 

on the other half where Sask Water oversaw construction -- it's 

not finished, it's millions of dollars over budget, and it's 

irrigating the farm land instead of delivering water from 

Codette to Melfort. 

 

Mr. Minister, I haven't seen a more glaring example of the 

differences between privately run and state run enterprises 

since the Berlin wall came down.  Mr. Minister, it's my 

understanding that a complete review of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Will the members on 

both sides please settle down.  There's just too much 

interference when the answers are given and there's too much 

interference when the question is asked.  This is supposed to be 

question and answer and I wish members would abide by the 

rules.  Would the member put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's my 

understanding that a complete review of the entire project is 

now under way to tell you what you should do next.  Mr. 

Minister, will you release the results of that review or are we 

going to have to wait for the information to leak out like the 

water out of the pipeline? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- To the member opposite, there is no 

review.  To the member opposite, we intend to continue with 

the testing of the pipeline as soon as the weather allows us.  A 

project with union workers and non-union workers side by side 

to give a rural community better quality of water, and the 

people over there are arguing about that and are fighting about 

that -- 82 jobs, 9,000 households affected.  And these people 

say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effects of Gaming Expansion 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, today we learned that the Saskatoon chief of police, 

Owen Maguire, has expressed real concern over the likely 

increase in crime as a result of the provincial government's 

unilateral decision to implement casino gambling. 

 

A study conducted by the city of Windsor, Ontario, has shown 

that traffic congestion, vehicle break-ins, prostitution, 

racketeering, and child neglect have all increased as a result of 

introduction of casino gambling in the major cities of North 

America, Mr. Speaker.  Chief Maguire sees this as a potential 

problem for Saskatoon.  It's disturbing to say the least that these 

kinds of activities will increase, but it's also ironic in the Year 

of the Family and the government opposite just having 

introduced a Bill to address the problems we already have with 

the victims of violent crime. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible 

for Gaming.  Mr. Minister, can you tell us whether your 

government had anticipated this increase in crime?  And can 

you tell us what your government has planned to mitigate this 

real and distressing concern? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In answer 

to the member's question let me first say to him that he may or 

may not be aware but the fact is that the Windsor casino is not 

open at this point.  We are told by the people in Manitoba that 

there is no appreciable increase in the type of crime that is 

referred to in this particular article. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Speaker.  We will do . . . and treat this 

not unlike we would treat other issues that are brought before 

the Department of Justice.  If there's an increase in automobile 

accidents that put an increased pressure on the law enforcement 

agencies, that is dealt with in this budgetary process.  If there is 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

an increase in terms of inner-city crime, that too is dealt with 

within the budgetary process of the Department of Justice. 

 

And I would suggest that through this process, any problems 

that would arise or may arise from any situation, whether it be 

the impact from casino development or other issues, it will be 

dealt with in an appropriate and in a proper fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you can poke fun at Mr. Maguire if you want, and you do that 

at your own risk.  This year Saskatoon Police Service 

information booklet contains an item that outlines their 

concerns over this issue.  It says, and I quote: "(there are) . . . a 

number of associated problems that must be addressed and 

dealt with by police", and those are: 

 

 1. Increase in street crime activity; 

 

 2. Crimes committed by casino patrons; and 

 

 3. Organized crime activity. 

 

The Saskatoon report says that every division, section, unit, and 

detail of the Saskatoon Police Service will be affected, not just 

the patrol section. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe the chief is concerned for the people of 

Saskatoon and I believe that he is concerned for the men and 

women who are responsible for the protection of those people. 

 

It is my understanding, Mr. Minister, that you will be meeting 

with the Saskatoon Police Service on Monday.  What will your 

position be, Mr. Minister, with their request to have part of the 

profits of gambling to go towards protecting Saskatchewan 

citizens?  Will you consider their solution to a problem that 

your government is about to create? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, to answer the 

member's question, let me first say this.  He is correct in that 

we have been and will continue to meet with law enforcement 

officials throughout this province.  We think that it's important 

that we work together to create an environment that 

Saskatchewan people would be . . . feel secure and be proud to 

live in. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Speaker.  Part of our casino 

policy -- and I want to reconfirm this with the members 

opposite, all of them, both the Liberals and the 

Conservatives -- is that we will be expanding casino 

development to keep Saskatchewan dollars in Saskatchewan 

and to create employment opportunities for people who right 

now are unemployed, those, our first nations and our aboriginal 

people. 

 

So I say to the member from Rosthern, we will be diligent in 

ensuring that our residents are protected.  And I want to know 

and I ask you, do you stand with the member from Greystone in 

opposition to the aboriginal jobs in this province, or do you 

support the aboriginal people of Saskatchewan as this 

government does? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that the 

concerns that the chief of police of Saskatoon has are also 

echoed by the chief of police in Regina and, I might add, the 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) as well, who are also 

concerned about this issue. 

 

It's a question of protection, Mr. Minister.  The last thing the 

people in Saskatchewan want is an increase in crime to go 

along with their increase in taxes.  And at a time when there 

appears to be a need for more policing, your offloading and 

your revenue grabs have put a severe strain on the city police 

budget. 

 

Alberta and Manitoba have set up special forces to watch over 

gambling in their provinces, Mr. Minister.  Chief Maguire says 

that these forces are run off their feet.  Now that's a sobering 

thought, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, if you do not support the 

concept of gambling booty being used for protection and crime 

prevention, how do you intend to address these problems and 

what have you got planned?  Answer that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would want to 

say to the member opposite that it's pretty clear his position 

with respect to the jobs that this industry will create is that he 

opposes them as does the member from Greystone.  But that's 

not inconsistent, Mr. Speaker, with Liberals and Tories because 

they generally sit on the same fence and they generally fall off 

on the same side. 

 

Let me say this, Mr. Speaker: I've indicated that we have met 

and will continue to meet with the RCMP and other police 

services in Saskatchewan.  We will deal with problems as we 

have done.  The budgetary process will deal in an adequate way 

with delivering the amount of financial remuneration that is 

necessary to deal with problems that arise. 

 

I say to the member opposite that the meetings that we will 

have in the future will deal with these issues in a very 

appropriate and a proper fashion.  But I say to you, do you 

support the jobs, or do you support the out-migration of 

Saskatchewan dollars to Winnipeg, to the Conservative 

government in Winnipeg, for them to deal with social issues in 

their province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The population 

knows where I stand on this issue and the opposition stand on 

this issue.  We want to know where your people stand.  And I 

direct my question to the Premier now.  Mr. Premier, your 

counterpart in 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

B.C. (British Columbia), NDP (New Democratic Party) 

Premier Mike Harcourt, has announced that he is strongly 

considering holding a referendum on casino gambling.  Now 

that's a novel idea, Mr. Premier -- letting the public vote on 

matters that affect them. 

 

Mr. Premier, we all know what you do with plebiscites in this 

province -- you simply ignore them.  So I would say that there's 

no chance that you're going to consider this ultimate form of 

consultation, Mr. Premier, as B.C. is doing. 

 

However, we are still hopeful that you will at least allow 

MLAs, most of them who are members of your own party, to 

hold a free vote on a matter which is going to have such a 

profound effect on this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, given that B.C. is considering going so far as to 

consider holding a referendum, will you at least hold a free 

vote in this legislature so that all of the MLAs in here have the 

right to express the wishes of their constituents.  Will you do 

that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, to answer the 

member's question, let me begin by saying this. That the people 

of Saskatchewan had the opportunity to vote on the actions of 

the Conservative government from 1986 to 1991 when they 

squandered tens and hundreds of millions of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers' dollars.  I would suggest that it may be appropriate 

for that member to stand in his place and to talk about free 

votes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are voting by virtue of 

the fact that 86 per cent of them involve themselves in gaming 

activities.  What we are trying to do is stem the flow and the 

out-migration of taxpayers' dollars from this province, create 

job opportunities for first nations and Metis people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That's the position of this government, Mr. Speaker, and I say 

that the member's questions have little credibility coming . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I think members know full well we can't have 

three or four people on their feet at the same time. 

 

Government Contracting Policy 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We in the 

Liberal Party are gratified by the public's interest in direct input 

into question period.  Today I have a few questions to ask the 

Minister of Labour. 

 

I'll ask them on behalf of Mr. Gary Richardson of Richardson's 

Plumbing & Heating and Gary is sitting in the gallery today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The member I think 

should be experienced enough to know that he cannot refer to 

people in the galleries when he's asking his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Richardson runs a 

unionized shop in Regina.  In 1992 the government allowed 

double-breasting . . . disallowed double-breasting which means 

contractors can't run both union and non-union shops.  Instead 

there is a union-only policy for publicly funded contracts over a 

certain dollar amount. 

 

The question from Mr. Richardson is, and I quote:  my 

company has recently lost $10 million worth of tenders to 

non-union contractors on publicly funded work.  When is your 

government going to make good on its promise and use 

unionized contractors on these projects?  And would you please 

clearly define the rules. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, unlike members 

opposite -- it's becoming awfully difficult to tell the difference 

over there -- unlike members opposite, we have sought not to 

divide and conquer but to achieve a degree of harmony within 

the industry.  We have sought to divide in some fair and even 

fashion the contracts between union and non-union. 

 

And I may say to the members opposite who seem to share a 

similar view on these matters, that we have achieved some 

degree of balance with respect to the dollar amounts.  We've 

achieved I think a lesser degree of a balance when one takes the 

number of contracts.  But when you take the number of dollars 

spent we have achieved a reasonable degree of satisfaction, a 

reasonable degree of balance. 

 

So I say to members opposite who are continually attempting to 

set union as against non-union while we are trying to build a 

degree of harmony in the industry, that we've achieved I think a 

reasonable degree of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the 

government's inconsistencies in its labour policies are creating 

havoc with the province's contractors, both union and 

non-union. 

 

You make allowances for an out-of-province unionized 

company to lay water pipeline near Melfort, which cost a local 

non-union contractor the job and taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

$187,000.  Then the contractor goes belly-up and leaves 

Melfort businesses holding the bag. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Richardson says the following: I've been 

forced into a corner by your laws.  When my company doesn't 

land contracts, my unionized employees are allowed to find 

work with non-union contractors which I'm bidding against.  

On the other hand, when I bid these jobs I must bid using the 

higher salaries of union workers.  This has put the viability of 

my company, along with many others, at risk. 

 

He asks: will you allow union companies the 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

opportunity to run their companies in a fashion which allows 

them to compete on level ground? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I might say, if 

the hon. member decides to move yet again to the right to get a 

new caucus, it won't be a very far jump.  Because these 

questions are starting to sound a great deal alike. 

 

Members opposite, members opposite set union against 

non-union.  It was their policy to divide and conquer in 

government, as in opposition, apparently.  One of the reasons 

perhaps why you've achieved such astounding success in recent 

elections is you haven't learned very much in opposition. 

 

I say to members opposite, the problem in the construction 

industry is that there isn't nearly enough work to go around.  

This is an industry operating at a way below full capacity.  We 

have sought to divide the work evenly between the two of 

them, unlike members opposite who seek to divide and 

conquer.  That's not the policy of this government.  And it is 

interesting to see the statement from members opposite, which 

sound a great deal like the members to your right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, it isn't a case of divide and 

conquer.  We have a man who is asking questions and he wants 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster please come to order.  She can't just simply 

interfere when the member is trying to ask his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Richardson's 

letter, which all members did receive a copy of, goes on to say: 

 

 It is becoming more obvious with each passing day that we 

may have to go to non-union ourselves in order to survive.  

This has been made almost impossible, however, by changes 

to the pertinent legislation introduced by the current 

government. 

 

 Please understand this is not an anti-union position (he 

stresses).  It is merely a statement of the facts as they exist in 

the industry today, facts which we feel the government is not 

fully aware of. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Richardson wants to be treated fairly.  He 

may be forced to shut his . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Order.  Will the member please put his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, will you provide, in writing, 

to Mr. Richardson and the public, a copy of your policy 

regarding union and non-union contractors, in order to clear up 

this confusion? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, my office answers all of 

the correspondence which comes to my office.  And if Mr. 

Richardson has written me -- and I believe I have received a 

copy of his letter -- he will have received a detailed and proper 

response, as happens with everybody that corresponds with my 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Brand Inspection Fees 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do have 

a reason for being on my feet.  I want to answer a question that 

the Minister of Highways took notice on, on my behalf some 

time ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question was by the member from Morse 

regarding the duplication of brand inspection fees on 

Saskatchewan cattle going into Alberta.  Mr. Speaker, there 

currently exists at seven Alberta livestock markets along the 

border, agreements where Saskatchewan producers can market 

their livestock without duplicate payment of brand inspection 

fees.  At these locations Saskatchewan has agreed to forgo the 

marketing deduction check-off and Alberta has agreed to 

collect them, and return the horn penalty, and a portion of the 

inspection fee, and all of the Saskatchewan livestock manifests. 

 

Saskatchewan is taking a lead role to expand the agreement to 

allow Saskatchewan livestock to be marketed directly to 

Alberta packing plants without being subjected to the brand 

inspection fees of both provinces.  Saskatchewan is prepared to 

forgo the collection of brand inspection fees in order to 

eliminate an interprovincial agriculture trade barrier in the 

movement of cattle. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Environmental Assessment Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm 

announcing this government's commitment to introduce a new 

environmental assessment Act during this session, and a public 

consultation process to finalize the regulations which are vital 

to the proper functioning of this legislation.  The legislation and 

regulations together will implement the first major reform of 

Saskatchewan's environmental assessment process since the 

government of Allan Blakeney introduced Saskatchewan's 

Environmental Assessment Act, 14 years ago. 

 

The fundamental principle of environmental assessment is the 

public's right to know and its right to comment on proposed 

developments which impact on our environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the first environmental impact  



792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

assessment legislation was introduced to this House and passed 

in 1980, it was among the strongest and most progressive in 

Canada.  In the ensuing years the lack of regulations and an 

inconsistency in the administration of the Act have given rise to 

legal challenges and public concern.  It is time to reform the 

environmental assessment process. 

 

This reformed environmental assessment process will provide 

increased opportunity for people to participate in environmental 

decision making.  Increased public accountability is the main 

feature of these reforms.  The new Act and accompanying 

regulations will also ensure consistency in the application of 

environmental assessment to projects, facilitate public 

involvement, and improve monitoring and enforcement of 

compliance. 

 

Today I am releasing a document which describes the 

important reforms we plan to make to the environmental 

assessment process.  Later in this session, I will introduce a 

new Act to implement these reforms.  At the same time, an 

outline of proposed regulations will be released for public 

consultation. 

 

The key aspects of the environmental assessment reform 

proposals are: increased public notification and 

involvement -- this will ensure the public is made aware of 

proposed developments in their area at an early stage, that they 

have an opportunity to provide their input into the assessment 

before decisions are made -- clearer definitions and procedures 

for the review of all environmentally-significant projects 

proposed in Saskatchewan; a more objective and publicly 

visible approach is proposed.  Lists set in regulations will 

identify projects likely to have an impact on the environment.  

Such lists will ensure these projects do not bypass the system. 

 

A government-based assessment process.  These reforms will 

ensure that the principles of openness and accountability are 

reflected in their administration by the government.  The Act 

continues to allow for the creation of independent panels.  The 

government is committed to appointing independent panels 

where large-scale, controversial projects warrant it. 

 

Cabinet will review government policies and programs for 

environmental implication.  Improved intergovernmental 

cooperation on assessments -- the proposals include the ability 

to improve cooperation and harmonization with federal and 

provincial governments; reasonable time lines for activities and 

decisions.  Time lines will allow proponents to plan for 

important milestones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sound processes for environmental impact 

assessment are an essential component of this government's 

commitment to environmental protection and sustainable 

development.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

we look forward to this new legislation because I think it's 

going to be an interesting experience for the people of 

Saskatchewan to view how this particular government views 

the environment.  One of the items that has come forward, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the government has put into place the Standing 

Committee on the Environment.  This legislature initiated that 

committee two years ago.  But, Mr. Speaker, nowhere does the 

government, in this piece of legislation that they intend to 

introduce, have a place for the Standing Committee on the 

Environment to play a role. 

 

They talk about public consultations, Mr. Minister, which are 

not being done by an independent body but rather are being 

done by the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would put forward the contention that while the 

government is going to go out and consult, the government is 

not going to hear and not going to listen to what the people 

have to say; rather they are going to give the impression that 

there is consultation when in fact, Mr. Speaker, there is none 

whatsoever. 

 

At the news conference that the minister held earlier today, the 

minister talked about stating the old Act allowed too much 

government discretion.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that 

there is going to be any significant changes in this legislation to 

take away the government's discretion.  In fact, it gives more 

power to the minister.  It makes the minister's decisions 

infallible.  The minister will be omnipotent; the people will be 

unable to question his decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are some good things that could come forward in this 

legislation and consultation is one of those things that need to 

be done, but the government must listen as well as visit with 

the people.  Mr. Speaker, we look forward to this piece of 

legislation.  I think it will be of great interest to the people of 

this province.  Thank you. 

 

(1415) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  We 

too, as would the people of Saskatchewan, welcome much 

clearer guidelines as far as environmental assessment are 

concerned, but one of the things that we would most welcome 

would be the opportunity for public input.  We see that as 

crucial and I think that the people do know their communities 

and their regions best. 

 

A case in point -- the ranchers in the south-west part of the 

province.  Intergenerationally they have protected their lands 

for well over a hundred years, some families have, and could 

indeed educate some of the people for the Department of the 

Environment who would come to give them advice. 

 

Similarly, we are finding that some of the policies from the 

Department of the Environment are really putting people out of 

business in rural Saskatchewan and I don't think that there was 

any understanding of the implications of some of the policies 

that were taken and how strongly this would affect people 

being able 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

to stay in business and pay taxes and even sell some of their 

businesses, if possible.  And that has really had a lot of people 

being very concerned. 

 

I think that we not only need to have greater input from people, 

but there needs to be far more interdepartmental work done, 

and that your department should be included, and each and 

every other department, particularly as far as the Department of 

Economic Diversification is concerned, and others. 

 

And finally, we too would like to say that we look forward to 

looking at the fine details of what you will be bringing forward. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to establish the Tourism Authority 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you, 

and to members, on being able to give second reading to a Bill 

to establish The Tourism Authority Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is historic legislation; a turning point in the 

whole concept of tourism development in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I'd like to start out by outlining how tourism is 

a key component to the total economic picture and not just for 

the obvious and long-time accepted reasons. 

 

Tourism is one of the six strategic sectors within our economic 

development strategy.  It is a sector which can make a 

substantial contribution to the Partnership for Renewal 

economic strategy and the goals which include:  one, restoring 

employment growth and adding a total of 30,000 new jobs to 

the economy by the year 2000; closing the gap between 

average income for farm families and average income for other 

Saskatchewan families by the year 2000; third, balancing the 

provincial budget by 1996; fourth, returning the economy to a 

period of sustained real growth; and fifth, decreasing our 

reliance on traditional products and services that Saskatchewan 

has known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tourism is making significant impact on each and 

every one of those goals.  The industry already accounts for 

over 4 per cent of our province's GDP (gross domestic product) 

and is our sixth-largest export after grains, oils, total 

manufactured goods, potash, and uranium. 

 

Total tourism receipts in 1992 were estimated to total over 

$850 million with an industry employing more than 38,000 

people full and part time.  Mr. Speaker, over 8 per cent of 

Saskatchewan's employed labour force is employed in tourism 

in one way or another.  And it's truly a provincial-wide 

industry.  Every area of our province has tourism potential and 

every area can benefit from developing that potential.  There 

are 4,700 tourism-related businesses in the province not 

including major service suppliers such as restaurants, fuel 

outlets and taxis.  You'll find them creating jobs and economic 

opportunities in small communities and large communities and 

rural, in northern Saskatchewan and in every corner of our 

province. 

 

Tourism is part of the fastest growing, high value added sectors 

in the province.  It has great potential for even more growth and 

more job creation.  The tourism industry is service oriented and 

thus is a key component to the successful renewal of the 

economy of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tourism also contributes to Saskatchewan's 

attractiveness as a place to live and to do business, by 

providing most of the amenities that add to the quality of living 

in our province.  It is often tourism attractions that are seen as 

benefits to living here.  The creation of cultural facilities, the 

attraction events that are part of tourism, add to the 

attractiveness of our communities and assist them in attracting 

business as well as tourism. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people who manage and staff those 

facilities, attractions, and events have the potential to play a big 

role as ambassadors in promoting our province to visitors by 

telling them about our many competitive advantages. 

 

An additional plus is that tourism is a relatively 

environmentally friendly industry, and has the potential for 

sustainable growth without negative impact sometimes 

experienced in other industrial sectors. 

 

As a government, Mr. Speaker, we would like to see the 

tourism industry grow from its current level.  That is why one 

of the 31 initiatives in the Partnership for Renewal strategy is 

to expand tourism marketing and development through new 

partnerships.  And that is why we established the task force on 

tourism partnership in April of 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hotels and campgrounds come readily to mind 

when people think of tourism, but tourism is much broader than 

that.  Tourism dollars go into many areas including 

accommodation, transportation, food and beverage, retail, 

recreation, and entertainment. 

 

It is important that each of these groups -- that they receive 

benefits from tourism expenditures -- participate in the 

decision-making process.  It is for that reason that the task 

force included representatives, not only from those businesses 

and organizations traditionally considered to be part of the 

tourism industry, but from other equally important partners 

who haven't traditionally been included such as arts, culture 

and aboriginal groups. 

 

Since partners contribute to the investment in tourism, the 

establishment of a structure within industry will be important to 

make decisions in tourism in the future.  The establishment of 

an Authority with the ability to earn, to retain, and direct 

revenues back to tourism to 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

build on the public sector investment will allow Saskatchewan 

to more effectively compete with the rest of Canada and with 

the rest of the North American tourism industry. 

 

Fiscal realities indicate that there will not be funding increases 

from the public sector.  And in order for the tourism industry to 

reach its potential growth and expand, we must find other 

alternatives for increasing the level of tourism activities. 

 

Tourism is part of the recognized solution to economic 

renewal.  The industry's growth will be restricted without joint 

investment.  We must combine our resources in the best 

possible way through a partnership process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first, tourism is a very competitive industry and 

not just within the provincial and national boundaries, but 

within the scope of the global economy.  Secondly, although 

this province has limited fiscal resources to stack up against our 

competitors with larger budgets, we must strive to be 

competitive in our own marketing efforts.  And third, we have 

reason to be proud of the quality products and services we 

provide and the effective marketing we have undertaken.  In 

order to be competitive and expand the new markets, industry 

partners are recognizing that they must share in that 

investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a primary focus of the task force was to determine 

new approaches to financing industry-marketing and 

development efforts.  The second focus of the task force was to 

examine appropriate functions for both industry and 

government.  Finally, once funding mechanisms and functions 

of partners were determined, the task force members had to 

recommend a structure that best suited this province. 

 

Other models from other jurisdictions were examined by the 

task force.  And I'm pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that after 

careful consideration they have arrived at a 

made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to point this out, that thanks to all of 

the task force work and the working-group members who have 

dedicated their time and energy, we have come forward with a 

proposal for a Tourism Authority.  The members of the task 

force are very busy business people and community leaders 

who are giving freely of their time and expertise for the 

well-being of Saskatchewan.  I want to commend them and 

thank them for the tremendous commitment they have made in 

this process and that they will be making to the process in the 

future. 

 

The Tourism Authority Act is the result of their 

recommendation, based on an industry input through a 

consultation process and the task force-considered judgement 

on what will be best for the tourism industry in the balance of 

the 1990s and beyond. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to list out what the major 

recommendations of the task force are.  First, that a 

Saskatchewan Tourism Authority be established at arm's length 

from the government through its own Act of the legislature. 

 

Secondly, that the Authority be governed by a large, 

representative council with designated representatives and a 

small board of directors whose seats would also be designated. 

 

Third, that the Authority be accountable to both the 

government and the industry, with the industry selecting the 

representatives for the majority of the seats on both the council 

and the board.  The intent for the council is also to allow for the 

broadest possible representation from the tourism industry to be 

involved and a smaller, efficient, and effective board. 

 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, that the Tourism Authority be accountable 

for (a) tourism marketing; (b) for visitor information and 

services; (c) education and training; (d) support for the tourism 

public awareness; and (e) tourism research and policy.  As 

well, they will be responsible for tourism destination area 

planning and development, and finally, tourism grant funding 

program administration except where capital funding projects 

are involved. 

 

Fifth, Mr. Speaker, that the resources be retained within the 

executive government to deal with capital projects, as I 

mentioned, public policy matters affecting tourism, and 

interdepartmental and interjurisdictional liaison. 

 

Sixth, that the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority be financed by 

government in partnership with the industry. 

 

Seven, that in recognition of the principle of building on 

existing strengths, the task force acknowledges the contribution 

of the tourism division staff and the tourism industry staff and 

the effort that has been taken by the Authority to ensure 

continuity and the excellence in the delivery of tourism 

programs. 

 

Eight, that the creation of the Authority occur in a staged and 

orderly fashion with legislation introduced in the spring of 

1994 and with the authority becoming operational no later than 

October of this year. 

 

Those recommendations are the basis of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

as members will see when they go through the clause-by-clause 

examination. 

 

It's with these comments in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I am proud 

to announce today and move second reading of The Tourism 

Authority Act, and I'm sure that members will want to give this 

Bill speedy consideration and passage so that the benefits can 

come into effect.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

was listening to the minister making his comments regarding 

the establishment of The Tourism Authority Act and the 

implementation of the Act.  There's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that 

tourism has become a major economic engine in our economy.  

And certainly the government of the '80s recognized that fact 

and a lot of endeavours were done and entered into at that time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to enhance the role of tourism and to try 

and draw . . . encourage people not just to fly through our 

province or fly over our province or drive straight through, but 

to indeed take the time to stop and look at all the activities and 

the opportunities and the heritage that we as a province enjoy. 

 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly can see throughout our 

province how many individuals have picked up on that note 

and have established ways and means of trying to attract men 

and women and families who happen to be travelling through 

our province; encouraging them to stop and take advantage of 

the heritage we have, and certainly the resource sector -- our 

parks and renewable resources, Mr. Speaker.  There's so much 

that we can offer. 

 

I think of people in my constituency and people around the 

province who have opened up their homes, built bed and 

breakfast sites.  And I've talked to a few people that have been 

passing through the Moosomin area who have taken the time to 

stop and were actually really impressed and really thrilled with 

the service they received, the hospitality of the individuals, and 

took the time not just to spend just a night at a bed and 

breakfast site, but even as they stopped at one location and then 

drove a little bit and looked at the communities, maybe went 

out to a part which was not necessarily right on the main drag 

and which they would have missed if they wouldn't have 

happened to stop, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1430) 

 

So it's certainly important that we take a serious look at 

designing ways in which we can encourage Saskatchewan 

residents and individuals to become a part of our tourism 

industry. 

 

And if we're going to attract people to stop, Mr. Speaker, 

whether they stop for a bite to eat, whether they stop at a hotel, 

one of the most important components is to show some real 

hospitality -- real, genuine Saskatchewan hospitality. 

 

And I think another area as we've seen in the Moosomin area, 

offer them a piece of saskatoon berry pie.  And certainly when 

someone who hasn't been in the province has a piece of pie and 

coffee as the Gateway RDC (rural development corporation) 

did, you certainly hear a lot of people commenting about the 

fact.  And they were glad they stopped and just took a moment 

to find out what, in this case, Moosomin had to offer and what 

there was in the area.  And I think any other MLA from this 

province could certainly talk about their area and the 

advantages that we have and offer in tourism. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister talked about a number of 

initiatives:  the establishment of a Tourism Authority be 

represented by a large council responsible to government and 

the industry. And I think these are all excellent. 

 

I think it's very important that we include businesses and 

resources from the tourism industry on this council so that we 

have as broad a perspective that we can attain and achieve, 

indeed so that we're all working together to sell our province 

and to build upon tourism which happens to be one of the 

growing industries in this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to allow us to take a more 

in-depth review of the Bill, I therefore at this time move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting Victims of Domestic 

Violence 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my 

remarks this afternoon, I'll be moving second reading of An 

Act respecting Victims of Domestic Violence. 

 

Some members of the House will know that for a year and a 

half of my life I was involved in the land claim of the Inuit 

people of the central and eastern Arctic.  And in connection 

with that claim I spent several months in the Arctic, living 

among the Inuit people and discussing with them their land 

claim which had a very large and significant cultural 

component. 

 

One of the things I came to respect about the Inuit people was 

the legends that they passed orally from generation to 

generation; legends going back hundreds, even thousands of 

years.  And one that I listened to while I was in the Arctic and 

which I have found in a publication, is "The Legend of Thunder 

and Lightning". 

 

And I want to relate that legend to you, Mr. Speaker, and 

through you to members of the Legislative Assembly, to 

provide a context in which to discuss the contents of the Bill 

that is before the House this afternoon. 

 

 There were two sisters and they were tired of being abused.  

They wanted to get away from their father and husbands so 

they walked northwards. They walked a long way towards 

the mountains.  They killed a caribou by drowning it in a 

lake.  They found a dead whale on a beach and were able to 

eat it and use the fat for their lamps.  They built fox traps out 

of stones . . . They were able to survive very well but they 

kept on walking further away.  The younger sister kept asking 

her older sister, "Sister, sister, what should we become?  

Should we become caribou?" 

 

 "No", said the older sister. "We would still be scared if we 

were caribou." 

 

 "Sister, sister, should we become seals?" 

 

 "No. A seal is afraid of people too." 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

 "Sister, sister, should we become walrus?" 

 

 "No. We would be hunted and we would be scared again." 

 

 "Sister, sister, should we become polar bears?" 

 

 "No. Polar bears are killed too." 

 

 The sisters continued to talk in this way until there was a 

terrible storm, and then the younger sister asked, "Sister, 

sister, can we become thunder and lightning?" 

 

 "Yes!" said the sister. "Thunder and lightning are not afraid 

of people." 

 

 And so the older sister dragged a dried seal skin over the 

ground and made the sound of rumbling thunder.  She struck 

two flint stones together and made lights.  The spirits of the 

sisters rose and joined the thunder and lightning in the sky.  

Everywhere Inuit go they are in fear of thunder and 

lightning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is "The Legend of Thunder and Lightning" as 

told by the Inuit people to their children and to their 

grandchildren over countless centuries. 

 

One can easily see from that legend the terror, the total terror of 

the two sisters as they ran from an abusive husband and an 

abusive father.  They ran, Mr. Speaker, in very, very difficult 

and very risky circumstances that you encounter in the Arctic.  

And they found food where they could from the land. And all 

the time they kept running, and they kept running in terror. 

 

And their problem was how to feel safe.  Their problem was 

how to feel safe. And they decided they couldn't be safe 

becoming a caribou, and they couldn't be safe becoming a seal.  

They couldn't even be safe becoming a walrus which has very 

few natural enemies; indeed they couldn't even be safe 

becoming a polar bear which has no natural enemies.  The only 

safety they could see was to become thunder and lightning.  

Now Inuit women knew that, hundreds, even thousands of 

years ago. 

 

In our society we have come very slowly and much, much later 

to that same recognition.  To the recognition that there are 

women living in our society who live in fear, who can't find 

safety, who can't find security, who cry out for help to make 

them safe and secure, and we have been so slow in 

responding -- to our great shame.  Now we are making 

progress, Mr. Speaker.  Our culture with its male orientation, 

and its male understanding of problems, have slowly been 

coming to the recognition that there is a serious problem here 

around domestic abuse, particularly the abuse of women and 

children, and it is time that we did something about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now some people will argue with some 

validity that we have been doing things about it and those 

things have been significant.  I just mention them in passing.  

We have been focusing on the offender.  We have come to the 

clear understanding, first of all, that domestic abuse is a crime.  

It's not something that happens within families that is kind of 

okay, and we can kind of ignore it, and kind of turn our back to 

it, and really they'll work it out between them.  It's not a 

problem between a husband and a wife.  It's not a problem 

between parents and children.  It is a problem for society, a 

kind of behaviour which not only offends the victim but which 

offends society to the point where the state says: that is a crime 

and people who commit that crime must answer for it. 

 

That we have done for a long time in the words of the law, and 

for a relatively short time in terms of enforcing the law, but it is 

something we're doing.  And that's an important thing to do. 

 

We have also been providing an increasingly wide range of 

services to support the family and to support families in stress 

and family members at risk.  And we know what those are, Mr. 

Speaker -- the transition houses, the various crises services, the 

various social support services that are available in our society.  

And we have been doing better and better at that, and that is to 

our credit. 

 

But we're a long way short of thunder and lightning.  We're a 

long way short even of being a polar bear.  We are a long way 

short of providing the kind of support that women and children 

need when they're faced with the threat of physical violence.  

We're a long way short of providing them the security and the 

safety that they need in order to live decent lives. 

 

This Bill is an attempt to move beyond to a new stage in this 

country, a new stage in our progress towards a safe and secure 

future for members of families in our society.  I'm going to be 

describing the particulars of this Bill in just a few moments, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I do that, I just want to set the current stage by referring 

the House to a number of statistics that we have gathered in our 

research in the preparation of this Bill. 

 

Let me cite some of them, Mr. Speaker, and if you haven't 

heard them before then be prepared to be horrified.  Over 

one-half of all adult women in Canada have experienced 

violence since the age of 16.  Over one-half of all adult 

women -- at least 5 million adult women -- have experienced 

violence.  One in ten women have been assaulted within the 

last year.  That's more than one million women in Canada have 

been assaulted within the last year. 

 

One in four women have experienced violence in a marital 

relationship.  More than one in ten women who reported 

violence in their current marital relationship have at some point 

felt their life was in danger -- one in ten. Almost one 

-half of all women have experienced violence by men they 

know --  



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

boyfriends, spouses, friends, and family.  And almost 40 per 

cent of women in violent marriages reported that their children 

witnessed the violence against them.  Their children were 

witnesses to the violence. 

 

Those, Mr. Speaker, are horrifying statistics by any measure 

and our society has much to feel badly about, guilty about 

when they look at those statistics and realize that they are a fact 

of life for women in this country. 

 

I have in my hand, Mr. Speaker, the final report of the 

Canadian Panel on Violence Against Women.  It is entitled 

Changing the Landscape, Ending Violence, Achieving Equality.  

And at page 3, right at the beginning of that report is a 

paragraph which I think puts the situation in very plain, simple, 

and dramatic terms.  And I quote: 

 

 Every day in this country women are maligned, humiliated, 

shunned, screamed at, pushed, kicked, punched, assaulted, 

beaten, raped, physically disfigured, tortured, threatened 

with weapons and murdered.  Some women are indeed more 

vulnerable than others, but all women, simply by virtue of 

their gender, are potential victims of violence.  Moreover, 

the violence is often directed at them by those whom they 

have been encouraged to trust, those whom they are taught to 

respect, those whom they love.  Violence against women 

cuts across all racial, social, cultural, economic, political and 

religious spectrums.  While there is no question that violence 

may be conditioned by these factors, that fact remains that all 

women are at risk. 

 

(1445) 

 

It is against that backdrop, Mr. Speaker, that this government, 

indeed this legislature turns to the problem of domestic 

violence.  And our response for this time in this place is this 

Bill.  Our response is not thunder and lightning.  But our 

response is a significant step along the way to the achievement 

of safety and security for our women. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been using the term women as 

though the Bill were concerned only with them. And I have to 

say at once as I begin to discuss the contents of the Bill, that 

we're talking about all victims of domestic violence. 

 

It happens to be, as a matter of reality, that most of them are 

women and many of them are children. But they also include 

spouses, that is occasionally husbands, cohabitants, elderly 

parents, disabled members of the family, and people who 

generally are residing together in a family, a spousal or an 

intimate relationship. 

 

So I wanted to make that clear that the Act cuts more broadly 

than women, than wives.  But I make no apologies to the House 

for having used wives as the example because they are the 

overwhelming majority of victims in these horrible statistics 

that I have related to the House. 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we are moving the focus from 

one of punishing the offender to one of actively caring for the 

victim.  And that is a move which I believe all members of the 

House and all persons with an interest in these matters will 

welcome.  It is a question of protecting the victims of domestic 

violence. 

 

Now I say to the House immediately, it is not a thunder and 

lightening proposition, because there is no way that society can 

put a police officer into every home.  That's impossible.  But 

there are things we can do, and the things that we can do are 

contained in this Bill.  And I now want to move to a brief 

description of the kinds of protections that are included in this 

Act. 

 

The most important, in my view, is the power to make an 

emergency intervention order.  Now let me tell the House what 

that means, Mr. Speaker.  In the present state of the law, as I 

speak, where a family violence situation is taking place, let's 

say where a husband is beating his wife and beating or 

threatening his children, the wife will reach a point in many 

such relationships where she simply can't take it any more and 

she has to do something about it. 

 

In practical terms, what we require of her now is that she leave.  

She packs up the children and she goes.  Not the offender who 

goes, but the victim who goes. 

 

Our research tells us that this happened; that a women will go 

to the authorities and start to make an issue of her situation 

after the 30th occasion of violence.  The 30th time that she is 

beat upon she will, on average, call the police for the first time.  

Now that is a horrifying statistic.  When I learned of that 

statistic, I could scarcely believe it -- 30 times, on the average. 

 

Now I suppose that there are psychological factors -- I know 

there are -- that go into those kind of delays.  They think the 

situation will get better; they think when the man is no longer 

under so much stress, he'll behave differently; they'll think after 

he gets over his head cold he won't do it any more; they think 

it's their fault because they've somehow provoked him. On and 

on and on.  The literature is full of explanations as to why a 

women will accept any degree of violence.  And we know from 

our research that she will on average accept 30 acts of violence 

before turning to the authority. 

 

Anyway back to my explanation, Mr. Speaker.  What this Bill 

says to the woman who is being beaten on at 2 o'clock in the 

morning, she doesn't have to pack up her two little kids; she 

doesn't have to throw a few changes of clothes and toys into a 

suitcase and head out to catch a taxi hoping that there'll be 

somebody at the transition house or there'll be room for her; or 

hoping that there'll be somebody home at her sister's where she 

might stay overnight; or God knows where she will find a place 

to live that night. But she knows she has to leave. 

 

That's what we require of her in practical terms under 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

 the existing law.  We want to change that.  And we propose to 

do it in this Bill by providing that the woman may get an 

immediate order from the justice of the peace, from a justice of 

the peace which will require the abuser, the perpetrator of the 

crime to leave the house. 

 

Now that is a dramatic change in the approach to these kind of 

situations.  That order may be obtained over the telephone, Mr. 

Speaker.  It may be obtained by the victim directly or it may be 

obtained by a police officer who may have been called in to 

help in the situation. 

 

But in any event, the call will be made to a justice of the peace.  

That justice of the peace will have received special training in 

the administration of this Act and will know how to deal with 

that kind of a complaint -- know what questions to ask, what 

information to put together, what kind of an order it is possible 

to make. 

 

And the Bill describes in some detail the factors that should be 

taken into account by the JP (justice of the peace) as well as the 

kind of orders that can be made. 

 

But those orders include the following, Mr. Speaker: granting 

the victim exclusive occupation of the residence; directing a 

peace officer to remove the offending party; directing the peace 

office to accompany, in my example, the wife, back to the 

house to remove personal belongings in cases where she has 

left the house; restraining the husband from communicating 

with the wife, or harassing her, or stalking her, or any of those 

things that we know take place. 

 

Now I want to observe in passing that these orders made by 

justices of the peace are immediately forwarded to the Court of 

Queen's Bench where they are reviewed by a judge of the court 

within three working days of receiving the order, to ensure that 

the order is properly made and is within the powers of the JP 

under the statute. 

 

Further, there is provision here for the husband, in my example, 

to take the matter before the court for a review of the order, and 

if necessary, for a rehearing of the case.  That would happen in 

the event that the husband felt that the order wasn't fair, or that 

the information was wrong, or that the JP had been lied to, or 

something like that.  So there are provisions in the Bill that 

protect the abuser in the event that the information before the 

JP was totally wrong. 

 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, is moving towards thunder and 

lightning.  That's getting beyond the stage of the mere polar 

bear in the legend -- the polar bear with no natural enemies, 

who none the less is afraid of being killed. 

 

The other part of the Bill that I want to draw to the attention of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, are the victims' assistance orders 

provided by section 7.  I won't take the time today to deal with 

it in detail, but these are orders that cover some of the ground 

of the intervention orders.  And I won't go into detail at this 

stage because we'll have an opportunity to do that at a later 

stage. 

 

And finally there is a provision that deals with, in section 11, 

giving the justice of the peace the power to order an actual 

entry into a place where someone believes that someone may 

be the subject of abuse. 

 

Now this is, I suggest to the House, a timely step.  In light of all 

that we know about domestic violence and in light of all that 

we know about the terrible plight of the victims of violence, it 

is time -- it is past time that we moved in the direction that this 

Bill lays out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to conclude with that, Mr. 

Speaker.  And in order to do that, I want to quote to the House 

from a statement made by Rosemary Brown, who is a British 

Columbia politician and feminist, addressing a Vancouver 

conference on family violence two years ago.  And Miss Brown 

said the following: 

 

 "So long as men are at war against women, peace for all of 

humankind cannot exist, and there is no safe place on earth 

for any of us."  Peace has to begin in the home, in the family.  

If, as a civilization, we are committed to the survival of the 

family as the basis of our society, then (we) with (our) 

knowledge and education, with our experience and skills, can 

surely do much to ensure that the family is a place within 

which all of its members can dwell safe and equal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act respecting 

Victims of Domestic Violence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take the 

time of the House just to acknowledge the work of the minister 

in dealing with this Bill.  I noticed that he felt very strongly 

about it and he encouraged the Assembly by his address here 

this afternoon to have us consider the seriousness and the 

capacity with which he felt.  And I want to thank him for it.  I 

know that it is a subject that is probably very close to him and 

his family. 

 

I also want to say that it extends beyond the mere . . . or it 

extends beyond the incidents that could occur between spouses. 

It occurs in seniors; it occurs in children. And I think we have 

to think about that.  And I noted that the minister dwelt on that 

to some extent. 

 

I want to say that the critic for the Bill is going to have a few 

more things to say on it later on. 

 

I just wanted to say that this impacted in our home to some 

extent last fall when my wife was involved in helping a woman 

who had had a problem with her child being abducted from a 

crisis centre.  And my wife was involved in helping this young 

woman with three children deal with that issue.  And so it 

became a 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

very strategic kind of a concern of ours.  This child was found 

in the United States and brought back to Canada. 

 

So there are some very extreme examples of how violence can 

be against women, violence can be against children, violence 

can be against senior citizens. And so we have to take that as a 

serious consideration. 

 

I want to also say that this establishes the law that these people 

will have to abide by.  But somewhere, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

our society we have to teach people.  We have to teach people 

that violence is not good.  And that is the extremely difficult 

part.  We can establish law, we can establish a standard by 

which these people have to conduct themselves, but in the long 

run it's an inward look at yourself that you have to take to 

establish whether you want to be a violent person or not a 

violent person.  And I think we need to have society become 

more aware of this. 

 

(1500) 

 

The very fact that the minister is introducing the Bill 

establishes some of that as a standard, as I said, but also as a 

milestone where we say, this is the standard that is set; now we 

have to live up to it as a society.  And that is also good.  So as 

we take a look at it we'll be asking significant questions in 

relation to the Bill. 

 

I am going to ask the Assembly to adjourn debate until the 

critic for the Bill has a chance to review the statements made 

by the minister.  And with that I move adjournment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 14 -- An Act 

to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Act to amend 

The Fuel Tax Act is the business before the Assembly today, 

and I just want to make a couple of points. 

 

It has been brought to our attention, because we communicated 

with some of the agencies and organizations that were impacted 

by this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we contacted the truckers' 

association of the province and they believe that this is a step in 

the right direction.  They believe that this is an agreement that 

puts them on a better level playing field with other 

jurisdictions, and that is a part of what we believe in. 

 

It's part of the whole deregulation focus that needs to take place 

in this country to establish a level playing field so that 

provinces and other jurisdictions don't have a competitive 

advantage over us.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason 

why this Bill is there, and we say that it is going to be a step in 

the right direction. 

 

I want to say that the government is to be complimented on this 

initiative, and we will be supporting it.  We will also, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, be asking some questions.  The trucking 

association has also included some observations that I believe 

we must address as well, and those will be addressed at a later 

point. 

 

But they have some serious problems with insurance policies 

that they have to carry and others don't have to, and that's 

another part of the trucking association's agenda that deals with 

insurance. 

 

But this is important for them, and I believe that we have some 

questions that we will be asking in Committee of the Whole.  

And I will just at this point, Mr. Speaker, allow this from my 

perspective to go to Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 16 -- An Act 

to amend The Revenue and Financial Services Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and to the minister, we generally don't have any 

problems with this Bill.  I do have a number of questions that 

I'm going to be raising as a part of my discussions with other 

organizations, and I'm going to be looking into that. 

 

We understand this is a technical improvement on the 

province's ability to collect taxes, and I notice that in the Bill it 

has a number of areas that it deals with.  It deals with the 

education and health Act, the liquor consumption Act, The 

Litter Control Act, The Tobacco Tax Act, The Fuel Tax Act, 

The Horse Racing Regulation Act. 

 

And in each of these, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that there has 

to be a streamlining and a sense of efficiency within the 

Department of Finance and it is, I believe, a step in the right 

direction.  This Act simply ensures that the tax collected by the 

businesses in the governments are steadily remitting their taxes 

and that's a good thing.  Similar legislation is in force in other 

jurisdictions and thus does not represent any kind of 

competitive disadvantage for Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

The provisions for former directors to prove due diligence in 

remitting the tax ensures that individuals are not unduly 

penalized without recourse.  I will be asking some questions 

about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of the wording that it 

has in the Bill 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

 that there will be some liability on the part of directors.  And I 

want to know from the minister, to what extent that will happen 

and to what extent that she will make that the responsibility of 

directors, even if the directors no longer are a part of that 

business. 

 

We appreciate that this Bill will help the government in its 

financial management by allowing it to collect more fully taxes 

that have already been assessed and which are properly due to 

it. 

 

And I noticed, and I will be asking these questions too, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that there will be a lot of the agencies like 

E&H (education and health) tax which collect on a regular 

basis, they have a regular way of audit, but there are many 

others that are having significant difficulties.  And I would say 

that the liquor tax is going to be one with significant problems.  

And I'll be asking the minister to identify those that have the 

greatest amount of demand and will be impacted the greatest by 

this Bill. 

 

I noticed that the minister made note of the liability of the 

corporation in a bankruptcy, that the corporation will become 

liable and some of the proceedings of the liquidation will also 

be a part of the Bill or of the ability to collect the tax, and I 

think that that's a reasonably good item to have.  I wouldn't be 

able to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- and I'll be asking this 

question -- how much they would expect to get out of these 

proceedings.  But I think that they need to put themselves in a 

position where taxes collected should be sent to those agencies 

to which they belong. 

 

Also we're going to be asking questions about the fines and 

how much they are and how much they are anticipating that 

they will be.  I will also be asking questions about the role or 

the responsibility of collecting these taxes when there has been 

a bankruptcy and when these fines are going to be attached to 

the bankruptcy on top of that.  I think consideration is going to 

have to be given, and I will be asking how many dollars they 

anticipate coming from those kinds of audits. 

 

And I believe that in general though it deals with streamlining 

some of the audit principles that need to go into good financial 

management, and we will be looking forward to the minister 

answering some of the questions that we have in detail; going 

through it in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

So I'm going to allow this one also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

move to committee and we will proceed on that basis as the 

government brings the Bill before the House. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

very pleased to be able to rise and make a few remarks in 

support of this Bill.  This Bill essentially allows and gives the 

government a few tools to collect some taxes which previously 

went uncollected.  And I think it forms a very important part of 

the total strategy of the government in its attempt to recover 

financially and to put the books of the province into financial 

order again. 

 

I take a special note and I'm very pleased to take note of the 

support offered to this Bill by the member opposite, the 

member from Morse.  And I think it's very important that when 

it comes to recovering financially, as we all agree is something 

that we have to work towards, that we get good, positive 

criticism -- tough criticism, but good, positive criticism -- and 

also good support when it is needed.  Because it is through 

such methods and such an example that . . . it is that type of an 

example that the people of Saskatchewan are looking for and 

are willing to back in order to fulfil their desire to see this 

province once again become a have province and not a 

have-not province. 

 

I want to make a few remarks, Mr. Speaker, about how this Bill 

fits into the general overall strategy of recovery and the 

position that has been taken by the Minister of Finance in 

developing a five-year recovery plan. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance started out 

with facing a projected deficit of $1.2 billion.  That was 

reduced to some 800-and-some million in the first year of 

office, followed by two more deficit budgets, one which was a . 

. . after the 870 million deficit was reduced to 595 million, I 

believe the year following, and the year that we are just in the 

process of completing, the deficit was reduced to 295.  And the 

budget that we are going into, Mr. Speaker, will have a deficit 

of only 188 million. 

 

Now that figure of "only", the word "only", may seem to be 

trivializing it.  I don't mean to trivialize it.  But when you look 

at 188 million of deficit compared to the 1.2 billion some three 

years ago, it really shows a remarkable turnaround, Mr. 

Speaker, a billion-dollar turnaround. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- And I'm just so pleased.  This Bill will help, 

Mr. Speaker, it will help with the fiscal strategy which includes 

not only the raising of taxes, but also has included moves like 

freezing expenditures; in some cases actually asking people in 

the public service and the third parties to take a reduced amount 

of money and provide the services that they have been doing in 

the past in this same manner, but just trying to do it more 

efficiently. 

 

There has also been very determined effort on the part of this 

government to renegotiate some of the previous deals.  And one 

of the most publicized ones, Mr. Speaker, was the deal with the 

Federated Co-op regarding the NewGrade upgrader.  Although 

the NewGrade upgrader is by no means out making a profit yet; 

there is still some debt that they are incurring on a monthly 

basis. 

 

But according to what I understand, Mr. Speaker, there still is a 

situation, there still is a situation where we have had 

remarkable cooperation from a major agency in the province of 

Saskatchewan to help with this tremendous load that we are 

carrying, that is to get 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

rid of the deficit, the annual deficit. 

 

There is one other comment I want to make with respect to this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill is an attempt to collect taxes which 

were felt were leaking out of the province. And by doing so, 

we're able to make the statement that if these measures 

succeed, we will not have to raise any other taxes.  That's very 

significant to those who may be considering opening a business 

or expanding their business now in Saskatchewan and also it is 

very significant in our ability to attract businesses to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1515) 

 

If we should get into a situation where we will eventually have 

to succumb for example, to the lowering of the cigarette tax as 

has been done, as was forced on Ontario, if we should ever 

have to succumb to that, then we may be in a position where 

we would have to increase the taxes, and measures such as 

those taken by this Bill would not be enough. 

 

I was rather disappointed, Mr. Speaker, to say the least, when I 

heard the deal struck by the Liberal Prime Minister with his 

Quebec counterparts to reduce the tobacco tax. I was very 

appalled by that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the same time I'm very pleased that the western 

provinces have decided to take measures, cooperatively, to 

prevent smuggling into Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 

B.C. so that we can retain the tax structure.  Not only because 

the province needs the money, but to go backwards on this 

whole concept of discouraging people to smoke and 

discouraging the young population in particular of taking up 

smoking, will just end up in increased use of tax dollars in the 

long run. 

 

So I was very, very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, when that 

measure came about in the House of Commons.  And it seemed 

to me that the only reason it was done was for political reasons, 

to be able to secure a Liberal victory in a Quebec by 

_election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will close my remarks. I believe there are 

members that may wish to speak on this Bill.  Once again, 

restating my support for the Bill and also acknowledging the 

support of the members opposite for support of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm very 

pleased to be able to rise and address the House very briefly on 

Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act. 

 

The member who spoke before me did comment on the 

cooperation of the members opposite and their general positive 

remarks with respect to Bill 16.  I also would like to commend 

them for the very thoughtful, forward-looking, and fiscally 

responsible approach they are now taking in this House. 

 

I would have wished, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a new MLA, that 

they would have been able to take that thoughtful, far-ranging, 

and fiscally responsible approach during the '80s and not 

simply leave it up to us in the '90s to come in and clean up the 

mess of the profligacy of their two terms.  Unfortunately, 

sometimes enlightenment strikes people a little late, but I am 

very pleased that at last they do feel that they have been 

enlightened. 

 

Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act is part of one -- but a major part -- one small 

building block in our whole general plan to bring fiscal 

responsibility back into this province.  When we were elected 

in 1991 it was fairly clear that the voters of Saskatchewan were 

saying that what they wanted was to stop the excesses of 

individual and indeed of government greed of the '80s.  What 

they were looking for was a government that would be 

effective, efficient, and thrifty. 

 

In that sense, since we have formed government we have now 

brought in three budgets, each time being able to reduce the 

deficit.  I'm very pleased that this last budget brought a further 

decline in the amount of the total operating deficit that this 

province has, and I'm very pleased that we will eventually be 

able to move towards a zero deficit within a year or two. 

 

It's been a struggle but it's been a struggle that the people of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan have 

undertaken willingly because they recognize that you have to 

have your own financial affairs in order if you are going to be 

master or mistress in your own home. 

 

Bill No. 16 will introduce streamlining and efficiency and will 

improve tax enforcement in this province.  It is unfortunately 

true that the former rules provided an incentive for taxpayers to 

delay remitting their tax until they were actually audited.  Now 

Saskatchewan is one of the last provinces but will join all the 

other provinces in now applying interest on unpaid taxes from 

the date those taxes were due, rather than from the date of the 

audit period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- It is important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the tax 

laws of this province be applied equally to everyone and that 

we have an effective enforcement policy.  Bill 16, the Act to 

amend The Revenue and Financial Services Act, will do just 

that.  And I am very pleased that our government has brought 

in such a Bill. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I'll ask the minister to reintroduce his 

officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have with me 

again Marv Hendrickson, who is the deputy minister at the 

secretariat, and Mr. John Reid, who is one of the senior 

members of the secretariat. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

other evening when we had an opportunity to start our 

discussions on Indian and native affairs, we took some time 

discussing the issue of treaty land entitlement. 

 

And over the past couple of days you're well aware of the fact 

that Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities have 

gathered in Regina for their annual convention.  And 

unfortunately I wasn't able to get in on most of the discussion 

yesterday, as they were discussing the issue.  But yesterday 

afternoon, when I was able to make it over to the convention, 

there seemed to be a feeling of a lot of uncertainty, I think.  

And the feeling I gathered from a lot of the delegates was 

where SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) was going, where they anticipated or where 

they understood the government going, what the association 

was trying to get as far as affirmation from their delegates as to 

how they should be approaching government. 

 

The concerns that continue to arise is what's going to happen to 

the rural municipalities as more and more land is purchased by 

natives, either on a private basis or falls into reserve status.  

Now I think we do have some agreement in place under the 

treaty land entitlement Act that allows for offset and some 

payment of taxes. 

 

But the concern that came, and I gathered from most of the 

delegates, that a lot of them just felt they haven't or don't have 

enough information to sit down and really try to determine how 

they should be approaching this whole question.  And I 

wonder, Mr. Minister, if maybe you could take a minute just to 

bring us up to date on some of the discussions that you had and 

some of the questions that have come across your desk relating 

to this whole issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I want to thank the member 

for that question, which is probably the most important 

question that can be raised in the context of the present 

situation surrounding both the treaty land entitlement and the 

specific claims. 

 

First of all, I want to say to the member and to the Assembly 

that we have worked as closely as we possibly can with the 

association, with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, as did the previous government, when treaty 

land entitlement was being negotiated.  And throughout the 

government has maintained the position of making certain that 

SARM had full information and that they were fully involved 

in all aspects of the negotiation that touched upon 

municipalities, rural municipalities. 

 

And there were some very, very large and very difficult issues. 

 

The largest of them, and this is where the member's question 

was going, I think, involved the viability of the municipalities 

where there had been significant land transactions to Indian 

bands within the boundaries of their RM (rural municipality). 

 

The member knows -- and I know from his question that he 

knows -- the tax provisions that are included in the Treaty Land 

Entitlement Framework Agreement, and they were negotiated 

and accepted and signed off on by SARM as including a fund 

that would be available to replace taxes that would be lost to 

the RM as a result of land achieving reserve status.  And that 

was a significant accomplishment in the treaty land entitlement 

process.  Indeed I think it was so important that without that 

provision, the whole deal just wouldn't have flown, wouldn't 

have been acceptable to Saskatchewan at all.  So that was a 

very important provision and it's embedded right into the 

framework agreement. 

 

Now as those discussions went along, everyone was aware that 

there's another kind of claim that isn't a matter of the treaty 

entitlement but is a matter of bands who are short acreage as a 

result of some fraudulent act on the part of some official in 

years gone by.  Typically it would have been a dishonest 

agent -- Indian agents, they used to be called -- selling the land, 

selling it out from under the Indians and pocketing the 

proceeds. 

 

(1530) 

 

There are a number of such claims around.  And it was obvious 

to everybody as negotiations went along that as those claims 

were satisfied, as those specific claims were satisfied, that 

would result in land being purchased in satisfaction of those 

claims and that would raise exactly the same kind of viability 

question as under TLE (treaty land entitlement). 

 

Now what to do about it.  During the TLE negotiations, right at 

the end, the subject was raised.  And my officials were in the 

room and heard the discussion -- didn't participate in it because 

the province is not involved in specific claims -- but heard it 

and heard the federal government say that the same provisions 

would apply to specific claims as under TLE. 

 

Well somewhere since then that agreement has vanished.  Who 

do you blame for that?  I know who I blame, and I've said so 

publicly, so I'll say so again -- I blame the department. 

 

But in any event, somebody decided that that commitment 

respecting tax compensation provisions in specific claim 

situations has gone away, vanished. 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

It was a big issue between the SARM and the federal minister 

under the previous government, the Mulroney government.  It 

was Tom Siddon and then Pauline Browes, and they kicked and 

fought and scratched about this issue trying to take the position 

that there never had been an agreement. 

 

But then in the very last days of the administration of the 

former government, Ms. Browse wrote to the SARM and said, 

okay, we will do it; you will have a fund and it will be 

modelled on the TLE fund.  I think it's 25 times assessed value 

as a fund.  And so that ought to have been the end of it. 

 

Now we're not so certain whether it's the end of it or not.  

Again you've got an unwilling department, you've got a new 

minister who seems to be quite sympathetic to the whole 

situation, and yet a decision has not been made that the new 

government will follow through on the specific claims with the 

kind of tax fund that is necessary in order to make that process 

acceptable. 

 

So we're very worried about it.  We're working as closely as we 

can with the SARM to ensure that this fund is established and 

that it is available.  Because again, without that fund we're 

afraid the process is not going to work.  Rural municipalities 

are just not going to see their land base, their assessment base, 

vanish because it'll do terrible things to them -- in some cases, 

threatens their viability.  And wherever it happens, it will cause 

damage to them as a result of losing that assessment base. 

 

So it was a very good question.  I hope I've answered it to the 

member's satisfaction.  There are other issues around, but that 

is by far the most important one. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what basically I understand 

you're saying then is in the treaty land entitlement we're talking 

of new land claims and land settlement agreements under a 

specific agreement. When you talk about specific claims, you're 

talking of reserves where they possibly didn't receive, or like as 

you indicated, they possibly lost land because of maybe some 

fraudulent activities. 

 

If I hear you right, what you're saying then is that in this 

situation they don't really fall under the treaty land entitlement 

Act, we're just trying to bring them up to par. And due to that 

fact then they fall out of that circle and that agreement.  If I 

hear you correctly, I think that's what I'm hearing what's 

happening. 

 

So I guess what I should ask is, how much land is falling under 

the specific claims?  And I may have asked that question the 

other day.  I know we asked a portion of how much land in 

total, but I wonder about the specific claims portion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm advised that the total land that could 

be involved in the specific claims process is up to 400,000 

acres. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I can understand why rural municipalities have a 

major concern out there.  It may not seem large in the overall 

scheme, but certainly 400,000 acres is still a substantial portion 

of land to become part of reserves where municipalities used to 

derive taxes at one time to provide the infrastructure that they 

offer to their ratepayers. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we talk about taxes . . . and one of the RMs 

in my area happens to border on a piece of land that was known 

as the old Circle T ranch and it's been purchased by one of the 

native bands in the area, and now they're looking at some land 

just south of that. 

 

And under this land, actually I believe it's TransCanada 

Pipelines happens to run right through that.  And you're quite 

well . . . you may be well aware of the fact that any RM that 

happens to have pipelines running through their RMs or oil 

wells and pumps operating in the RM, there's a substantial tax 

base that is there.  And in this case, this one RM, actually I 

think about 45 per cent of their taxes is derived from tax 

received through the pipelines for an agreement to cross that 

property. 

 

And what I'm wondering, when we talk about the allocation of 

funding or funding to offset the loss of these taxes, are we 

talking of strictly just on the land base or are we covering all 

forms of taxation that were in place prior to land becoming part 

of . . . or receiving reserve status? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Our understanding of the way in which 

TLE will operate is that that flow of money that the member 

speaks of will continue to go to the RM.  In practice, the Indian 

band is required to negotiate an agreement with the RM to 

ensure that that flow of money continues.  Now that's not 

within the tax compensation fund; it is a different provision.  

But there should be no decrease in revenue to the RM that 

you're talking about. 

 

Now that's with respect to TLE.  In specific claims, who 

knows?  I mean it's just out there for negotiation and we don't 

know where that's going to end up. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, thank you.  You also indicated that 

on the specific claims it was the understanding of your officials 

that there was an understanding of the federal government, at 

least previous to the last election, that there was a process, that 

they had a process in place that were basically bringing into 

agreements an understanding based on the treaty land 

entitlement Act.  And I'm not sure if you indicated that you've 

had a letter indicating that they were willing to make that 

move, except for the fact an election came into play and now 

you're dealing with the new government. 

 

I understand as well that SARM has . . . and I'm not exactly 

sure if they passed a resolution, but I understand they brought 

forward a resolution to go to court on this issue.  And I'm just 

wondering if you'd have any comments or if you're aware of 

that fact. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The letter in question from the Hon. 

Pauline Browes was addressed to the SARM and 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

we have a copy of it so we know what she agreed to.  It was 

substantially the same as had been agreed to in the negotiating 

room when TLE was at its late stages. 

 

And I have myself met with three federal ministers now to 

press the point that specific claims should have the same kind 

of a tax compensation fund -- with Tom Siddon, with Pauline 

Browes, and now with the Hon. Ron Irwin to make exactly the 

same representation. 

 

And I think the member's understanding that this could go to 

court unless there is a settlement is correct.  I've had the same 

indication from SARM officials myself. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I guess as opposition 

members, and I'm certainly certain that a number of your own 

caucus, possibly in caucus, have been raising this concern -- I'd 

be disappointed if they weren't -- would be bringing forward 

the issue.  It would seem to me we would encourage you and 

your officials to continue to negotiate as strenuously and as 

hard as you can to have the federal government realize what the 

potential disaster may be if we don't arrive at an agreement.  

Because from what I've been catching and hearing, even just 

around SARM, certainly some of the comments weren't all that 

pleasant. 

 

And when this gets to be a fairly touchy and heated subject 

maybe . . . I'm just thinking, maybe one thing that you could 

have suggested to the new Minister of Finance is he should 

have taken a serious look at what Mr. Mazankowski had 

projected for a deficit in the upcoming year.  And I'm not 

exactly sure -- I haven't seen the federal books -- whether he 

transferred some funds from Crown entities to show a larger 

loss. But if he could have left the . . . if the actual deficit would 

have come close to where Mr. Mazankowski was, he would 

have had a fair bit of breathing room to sit down and come up 

and honour with, and maybe allow the new Minister of Indian 

and Native Affairs the ability to look at the negotiations that 

have taken place, and to take a serious look and come up with 

maybe a firmer response to date. 

 

So I guess at this time we can certainly encourage your office, 

and you as minister responsible in the province, to be as firm as 

possible with the federal government.  And I think there is 

room for bargaining because I'm sure that the federal 

government at this time is going to be looking towards the 

provincial government for some help in some of their programs 

as they bring them forward as well. 

 

And I don't think I have to suggest the fact that there's 

negotiations and wheelings and dealings, and well, if you 

scratch my back a little bit I'll scratch your back a little bit, and 

let's try and work to bring our policies that would benefit all of 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Because one of the things . . . you introduced an Act today 

regarding domestic violence, and certainly you've talked about 

the Inuit people.  And I think violence isn't something just 

happens one specific group of people.  And I'm sure the native 

community of our province are quite well aware of that fact as 

well. 

And we need to look at ways in which we can address many of 

these issues, not only amongst, say, the white community, or 

the native community, or any other community.  The fact that 

we must work together to . . . and I guess maybe one of the 

things is to educate people and encourage people to have a 

broader outlook and a broader acceptance of other individuals 

and other nationalities. 

 

Mr. Minister, another area of major concern when it comes to 

land entitlement I guess is regarding community pasture land 

and the effect that land claims will have on these properties.  

And I wonder if you could please outline what happens in this 

regard and what happens to producers who lease these pastures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- One of the problems with this land 

entitlement process is that there is not enough unoccupied 

Crown land around.  The member knows that under the Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement and the Act with respect to that 

agreement, the provincial government's got ownership of 

natural resources, and one of the things that we committed 

ourself to in return for that transfer was to provide unoccupied 

Crown land in respect of unsatisfied Indian land entitlements. 

 

And we're being called upon of course now, under both the 

treaty land entitlement process and the specific claims process 

to ante up the land.  Not the specific claims process, but the 

treaty process. We are contractually and legislatively bound to 

ante up that land, and there isn't enough land.  To all the Crown 

land in the province I think it would take care of about 25 per 

cent of the total land claim. And a lot of that, of course, is 

community pasture type land where we're actually running the 

pasture or we're leasing it to PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration). 

 

(1545) 

 

A lot of that land has been claimed, or parts of it have been 

claimed, the parts that show some signs of being economical.  

And it presents a very touchy problem because there's a lot of 

people who had been using that pasture land for years as part of 

their own farming operation.  And we trod our way very 

carefully through that, as did your seat mate, the now Leader of 

the Opposition, when he was responsible, because it's no easy 

matter. 

 

The way in which it was resolved was that in order for that land 

to be turned over, to be transferred, requires the agreement of 

75 per cent of the patrons of that pasture of the people who had 

been using it.  And so in one way or another their opinions are 

canvassed, and they have to be in very substantial agreement 

before that happens. 

 

I think that's a workable approach to it.  There are two or three 

problems in the province, and I met with one of them just 

yesterday, where they are having 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

particular problems.  And when that happens, my secretariat, 

Mr. Hendrickson and his officials, are out there, not trying to 

force any conclusion but trying to improve the communication 

and assist the discussions to try and encourage the people to 

come to an agreement. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I just also 

wanted to reiterate the fact that I think when we talk about 

community pastures, I just want to acknowledge the fact that 

there are pastures also out there that are run under a cooperative 

basis that really don't fall under the community pasture 

jurisdiction. 

 

And I guess one thing we want to make sure is, are these 

pastures included as well, or is it strictly just Crown land that 

we're looking at, government land and these co-op pastures.  

My colleague indicates these are Crown land as well.  So is 

there a difference, or are all pastures, whether it's a cooperative 

group of individuals forming a pasture corporation or the 

community pastures, run by PFRA? 

 

From what you've told us so far, it would seem to me that 

you're saying all pasture land is up and accessible, or may fall 

under the terms of the agreement.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- All unoccupied Crown land in the 

province is of course subject to claim.  Whether it in fact is 

transferred depends upon the circumstances.  So therefore all of 

the pasture land is in that category. 

 

With respect to the co-ops, we're not absolutely certain that we 

know the answer to the member's question, Mr. Chair.  But you 

would have in effect then a lease to a cooperative and it would 

require the consent of the cooperative, however they get that 

consent among their own members.  I think that's how it would 

work, although we have not yet encountered the situation so 

we're not just certain how it works. 

 

Of course the Department of Agriculture and Food have a 

substantial interest in those pastures also.  But it's our 

understanding that with the co-op leasing it, it is legally one 

person leasing it and they would have to make their decision 

internally and either consent or not consent to the transfer. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, to your 

knowledge they would be . . . because they are Crown land, 

they actually would -- but you're not totally sure on it -- but as 

far as you know, they would fall under the same criteria, that 

they would be land that would be available to form some of this 

treaty land entitlement. 

 

The one thing I guess, and that's . . . I guess it's based upon 75 

per cent of the current producers who are utilizing the pasture 

agreeing to the transfer to reserve status. 

 

I guess the other question I would raise, Mr. Minister, and I 

raise it because down in the Moose Mountain area, the White 

Bear Reserve, at one time PFRA had gone in and designed and 

developed a fairly extensive pasture area.  And then of 

course -- I'm not exactly sure of all the details, whether it was 

on reserve land at the time or whether it was taken in 

afterwards -- but there were a lot of producers who were 

allowed into and taken into that pasture and had access to the 

pasture.  And then about six years later, all of a sudden the 

doors were closed and there were a number of producers just 

had nowhere to go with their livestock. 

 

And the question I guess I'm getting to, Mr. Minister, is has 

there been any discussion with the Indian, the native 

community, in these negotiations, and government, as to 

whether there would be some form of compensation or 

continued access to that land for pasturing purposes?  And I'm 

wondering if you could bring us up to date as to the purpose 

you might . . . or the discussions that have taken place.  And 

also whether or not the native community are willing to take a 

long-term look at this and continue to provide access to grazing 

in these pastures. 

 

Because for producers to, say have two or three years and all of 

a sudden find that they've lost that pasture, it's not that easy to 

then just find another area to pasture your livestock, especially 

if you're building up a herd.  So I'd like to know what 

discussions have taken place to date, whether or not any 

discussions have taken place regarding the access to pasture 

land.  It would seem to me that I would think most reserves and 

most native communities would want to look at an economic . . 

. (inaudible) . . . as a way of deriving some economic spin-off 

to benefit the people on their reserve, the people that they are 

trying to provide for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Sorry to the member.  I took some time 

because it was a complex question; three questions in one, I 

think. 

 

With respect to the White Bear situation first of all, that was a 

specific claim negotiated in order to take care of a shortfall that 

. . . and we were not involved in it, that was a federal band 

arrangement.  We've been involved in it because you just can't 

escape being involved as you try and work out some of these 

problems that the member has referred to, but there's not a lot 

that you can do as a kind of volunteer in the situation. 

 

We have been urging the federal government for a long time to 

establish . . . I want the member to hear the answer, Mr. Chair, 

because he asked the question. 

 

We've been urging the federal government for a long time to 

adopt some hard-edged, clear policies with respect to specific 

claims so that everybody knows what's going on and everybody 

knows what the rules are, like in the case of TLE.  And at least 

with TLE, huge and complex as it is, everybody knows the 

rules because it's right there in the framework agreement and 

agreements negotiated under the federal agreement, and 

everybody knows their responsibilities, what they have to do, 

and it is clear.  That is not the case with specific claims. 

 

Now the federal government say to us: that's none of your 

business, get off my back.  So you know that's not 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

the answer we hope to get but it's an answer we understand.  

But we keep at it because it's so important and the member's 

question indicates how important it is. 

 

The approach has to get closer to the TLE approach or the kind 

of approach that our secretariat takes to these kind of 

problems -- get people together, get them in the same room, 

facilitate the communication, try and work it out, make sure 

everybody's got all the information so they can begin to start to 

trust each other and work out the trade-offs, and the 

compromises, and the understandings, and the agreements that 

have to go along with these kind of situations.  And in the final 

analysis, nail down formal agreements incorporating all these 

policies and approaches in a TLE kind of approach that would 

make it clear how specific claims should be handled. 

 

Speaking generally, our work with the Indian bands, both the 

entitlement bands and the specific claim bands, indicates to us 

that the bands are very anxious to arrange long-term 

agreements with people like the third parties, like the patrons at 

community pastures and the other people who have been using 

the land and deriving benefit from it, so that they'll continue to 

use it and so that the economic advantage will continue to flow 

to the band or will flow to the band, that used to go to the 

provincial government or PFRA. 

 

And in the majority of cases, I think the way it'll work out is 

that the patrons will not be . . . they're not threatened, they're 

not going to lose their grazing privileges; they'll be able to 

bring their cattle there to continue to build up their herds, to 

continue to operate along the lines that they previously did. 

 

Now it's not smooth and not easy and it'll have some glitches in 

it as it goes along.  But the end that the leadership on the Indian 

side visualize is a good, smooth-operating pasture, full of 

cattle, full of happy customers, good cash flow to the band as a 

result of it, and everybody just feeling satisfied about it. 

 

Now we're going to do our best to help get them there, but it's a 

lot easier under TLE than it is under specific claims, for the 

reasons that I've just indicated. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, I 

would certainly encourage that you just firm up your spine and 

let the federal members know that they may live in Ottawa and 

be making decisions far removed from here, but certainly the 

problems, be they federal in nature, are issues that we have to 

deal with on a daily basis, and whether it be SARM, whether it 

be SUMA, or the provincial government. 

 

(1600) 

 

I think, as you've indicated, we just can't necessarily wash our 

hands clean of the issue because it's something that's the 

responsibility of the federal government.  And I guess one of 

the concerns I have is the fact that I believe it's . . . was it the 

Akwesasne Reserve that has basically laid claim even to the 

airspace over their reserve?  And that was a question that was 

raised the other day at SARM.  And I'm not exactly sure if 

someone made that comment, but I think we need to continue 

to have a good, ongoing working agreement and arrangement 

with our native community.  And I commend you for the work 

that has taken place to date, along with what has taken place 

even prior to your involvement.  And we trust that even the 

new minister, the new federal minister, will realize the 

significance and the importance of coming to amiable and 

workable agreements regarding native land entitlement. 

 

Mr. Minister, another question that arises is, is it possible that 

land would be purchased outside of the treaty land entitlement 

Act?  Would natives have the ability to -- native reserves or 

natives on a personal basis -- be allowed or have that ability to 

purchase land outside of the treaty land entitlements?  And in 

that case, is that land taxable?  If it isn't, then how is it treated 

or is that something that . . . is that a hurdle that we're still 

working to try and get over? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With respect to the first part of the 

member's statement, I want to tell the member that I'm just like 

a rock here, like a piece of iron.  There are issues here that are 

so important, and if they're not dealt with correctly, it's going to 

poison the whole process.  So I've got my teeth dug right in 

there and I'm not letting go, like a bull-terrier, just right on.  I 

want to tell the member that.  And I do appreciate the support 

that we have had from the opposition on these issues as we 

tried to provide support during the time of the previous 

government on these issues.  They transcend politics that are 

too fundamental to the future of this province to make the 

subject of partisan debate.  And I do appreciate that. 

 

With respect to the second part of the statement, that is the 

purchase of land outside TLE, first of all, the TLE funds are 

extended within the framework of the TLE agreement.  But the 

member was talking about other money.  If the band purchased 

other land, separate and apart from the treaty land entitlement 

process, they of course are entitled to do that if they want to.  

They're just like any other person or organization in our 

society. 

 

The federal government has a policy about additions to 

reserves, and it is possible that that land could be given reserve 

status.  But the policy has a process of consents in it and that 

involves the consent of the municipality in which the land is 

located so that it could not achieve reserve status without the 

consent of the municipality . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 

and that consent process involves dealing with the question of 

taxes and dealing with the question of the applicability of 

by-laws in particular.  So that has to be resolved before the 

federal government will give the land reserve status. 

 

Now just to complete my answer: if the land does not have 

reserve status, then the band pays taxes on it as does any 

landowner. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So what you've 

indicated then, if a band purchases land outside of the  



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

TLE, then that land is still taxable until it receives the process 

that is in place to give it reserve status.  And at that time, then it 

falls under the treaty land entitlement which would give 

revenue to the RMs to cover the cost of maintenance of roads 

and what have you. 

 

At this time, Mr. Minister, what is the process when it comes to 

road maintenance through reserves or in rural municipalities?  

And what's taking place, certainly in our area, there is a 

purchase of land, it's not specifically in a block -- if it was in a 

block it would be a lot easier to address, but you've got a parcel 

here and a parcel there -- and some RMs are affected in much 

more difficulty . . . in difficult ways than other RMs. 

 

And what is the process to date?  Do the bands themselves help 

with some of the maintenance?  Do they pay for some of the 

maintenance we've got?  If it's a reserve status, if that area has 

reserve status, then of course they're getting compensated for 

the tax loss; but if there's land that's in between parcels of land 

and you've got say a section of land and two sections over here 

and then you've got a mile of road then to the reserve, who's 

responsible for that?  Or is it just workable agreements between 

RMs and the current bands? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Again, Mr. Chair, I took some time 

because it is quite a technical part of the TLE process. 

 

The framework agreement contemplates that the RM and the 

Indian band will negotiate an agreement with respect to the 

maintenance of roads in the circumstances that are outlined by 

the member.  That agreement will provide the money that will 

be paid by the Indian band for the maintenance of the roads.  It 

would normally involve some kind of a negotiated fee for 

maintaining the roads to the reserve and the roads within the 

reserve. 

 

Or it may be that the band itself will, under the agreement, 

provide that road maintenance and there would be some detail 

about the amount of maintenance that would be provided, 

including both grading and snow control during the wintertime. 

 

It is a fact that the federal government has not for some time 

funded the bands sufficiently to actually do a lot of 

maintenance or to pay for a lot of maintenance.  So this is a 

sensitive area but it's sort of working and we are quite hopeful 

that it will develop in a satisfactory way.  The bands want it to 

work, the municipalities want it to work, and I think in those 

circumstances they'll find a way to make it work. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, due to the fact that these concerns 

are out there and RMs have major concerns -- I think you 

indicated earlier that certainly SARM and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) have had 

some input or have been involved in the process of 

negotiations, I'm not exactly sure at what level, possibly with 

your department and officials as you then negotiate at the 

federal level -- but I think it's very important that we raise the 

issues and certainly raise it with the native community and not 

just on the basis of maintaining access. 

 

But an instance came up this winter in one of the reserves close 

to our area where unfortunately the . . . I'm not sure if the 

reserve in effect was opening its own roads or had an 

agreement, but basically the one operator was told that he really 

wasn't to open this road to one couple and they were basically 

isolated for three months and I think that's something that's of 

major concern to us.  And we don't really have the ability to go 

and force that issue.  I think it's something though that we have 

to continue to raise, that we all have a responsibility and the 

native community have a responsibility to care for their own as 

well because we certainly are providing or attempting to 

provide the funding for them to take care and to provide 

services and access for their own community.  So I think as I've 

indicated, those are some of the areas we must continue to 

bring forward as suggestions to the federal government as they 

continue these negotiations. 

 

What about zoning?  What responsibility or what say do RMs 

have regarding zoning by-laws?  As we start looking at the case 

of reserves and the areas they may encompass, especially when 

it comes to municipalities that are close to large centres, when 

you have in some cases like the Fort Qu'Appelle area where 

you've got . . . like say the reserve has asked for a zoning status, 

a reserve right part of that community?  And I can see even in 

the area of Saskatoon I'm sure that there may be some 

requirements or demands or . . . I shouldn't say demands, use 

the word demands, but requests from reserves to . . . for land 

fairly close to some of our large communities, and as they 

branch out of the large urban centres, because of the fact that 

cost of land in the urban centres is higher than land in the rural 

areas, it may create a problem for some of our rural 

municipalities or larger urbanized municipalities such as the 

RM of Corman Park. 

 

What process is there for RMs to be involved in regarding the 

zoning that might take place?  Do they have any say or any 

involvement?  Are they included in the discussions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, we don't 

foresee any insoluble problems there.  Again, as in so much of 

TLE, it has to be negotiated out.  Both in the case of urban and 

rural land, which is a candidate for reserve status, it is required 

that a service agreement be negotiated.  And one of the matters 

that is expected to be covered by the service agreements are the 

zoning, the applicability of the zoning laws of the municipality 

or how the land will be used, and that will be taken care of 

therein.  The same agreement that talks about the delivery of 

municipal services -- sewer and water services and policing 

services and by-law applicability -- zoning is taken care of at 

the same time. 

 

(1615) 

 

I might also just mention before I sit down that I want 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

to acknowledge the very satisfactory working relationship 

between SARM and the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations) on these issues.  They really are working very 

closely together and with a high degree of mutual 

understanding and respect.  And the same thing applies to 

SUMA.  And we really admire all of them for the kind of work 

that they're doing.  And we would of course assist them, and we 

do in every way that we can. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I think maybe 

some of the frustrations some of the delegates at SARM were 

facing yesterday was trying to . . . for the SARM, their head 

body as far as their directors and what have you, the difficulty 

they have is when you're in negotiations, is how much you can 

lay out as to what you're doing.  And the best they can do is 

listen to the delegates and the concerns they're having, and then 

try to put it in a framework that they can go and continue to 

negotiate with the FSIN, and I'm certain, with the new 

leadership in SARM, the good mutual workable arrangements 

or agreements will continue. 

 

What I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you give us an overview of 

what has been done to address questions regarding the selection 

of potential land, third-party rights, and rights involving access 

and easements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I just 

want to briefly go through the process.  The band selects the 

land and the band notifies the federal government. The federal 

government notifies the secretariat and requests information 

about the third-party interests and other information.  We then 

spread the word across the government as to the land in 

question and we learn all the information that is available 

within the provincial government. 

 

That would include easements and outfitters and all kinds of 

third-party claims of which the government has notice, as well 

as water bodies and that sort of thing.  And we then respond 

within a limited time as to the situation, as to these other 

interests and information.  We respond within 45 days with 

respect to Crown assets and within 90 days with respect to 

private assets of which the provincial government has 

notice -- like an outfitters' camp or something like that. 

 

The band then must seek formal approval to obtain the land and 

go through whatever processes they have to go through under 

TLE to do that.  And then if it's approved, the band must 

purchase the land within 15 months. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We've been talking 

about the treaty land entitlement Act. Is there a specific lump 

sum of money that's involved here?  I've heard the number of 

$50 million being used for tax loss compensation of 

municipalities and school boards.  And what I'm wondering is, 

is this just a specific number?  Is there a point where that sum 

of money may run out?  And if it does, then where does the 

shortfall come down the road as far as reimbursement to a 

municipality for loss of revenue through taxation? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The $50 million the member refers to 

are actually two funds -- one for municipal taxes of about $25 

million and then a second for school taxes of the equivalent 

amount.  And it is the estimate of the provincial government, 

the federal government, and the FSIN that that is sufficient to 

cover . . . and yes, my officials say, and SARM, that that is a 

sufficient amount of money to last, to handle the tax situation 

in the future. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well what you're saying, this 50 million, as it 

goes through the years, should last for a substantial amount of 

time in relation to the amount of taxes that you already perceive 

that would be a loss to certain RMs.  And that includes school 

boards as well, if I'm not mistaken, you've indicated . . . great. 

 

I guess there's one other question before one of my colleagues 

jumps in and has some questions -- another area of concern or 

that could arise, and this may get into another major topic, but 

regarding hunting rights, hunting privileges, and the whole 

process. 

 

As land takes on reserve status it would seem to me -- I'm not 

exactly sure what all the details are -- but that land then would 

probably not be accessible to hunters outside of the native 

community.  And one of the major concerns we do have, and in 

our area continues to be a concern, is hunting and certainly 

even night hunting that takes place.  And it's one area that 

the -- night hunting -- that the Department of Natural Resources 

is very concerned about, and Wildlife Federation is concerned 

about, and we've been trying to address that over the years. 

 

And I guess, like I say, this I think could be another major 

portion of discussion.  I wonder if you have any comments on 

that regard, Mr. Minister, and then I'm going to hand it over to 

one of my colleagues for some questions that they have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I 

recognize that this is an area of sensitivity, of great sensitivity, 

and has been the matter of some controversy in the past, and I 

won't dwell on that in my answer.  I will say that so far as the 

secretariat is concerned, these issues are on a good path. 

 

The Wildlife Act, the position of the provincial government for 

decades has been that The Wildlife Act applies.  Whether or 

not that was a correct constitutional position I won't argue 

today. But that has been the approach. 

 

In recent years a different approach has emerged and is 

emerging up to the present.  And that is a co-management 

approach where Indian representatives and government 

representatives work together to provide for the management of 

wildlife resources in an area.  And we're developing these and 

they're being received with enthusiasm by all sides.  And the 

Wildlife Federation is involved in these and I think that is a 

good path.  That's what I mean by a good path. 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

The second aspect of the path that I regard as good is the way 

in which the FSIN and the All Chiefs conferences have handled 

this issue.  They have, for example, and with specific reference 

to the member's question, said no to night hunting.  Night 

hunting does not have their approval.  Their Assembly has also 

focused on the question of hunting safety, and they are fully 

involved in the hunting safety programs that exist in the 

province. 

 

And they will continue to do that as we move into . . . try and 

accommodate the federal government's new legislation with 

respect to gun control.  The Indian people will be involved in 

that also and will be cooperating with the new regime. 

 

They have also passed a wildlife Act in their Assembly that is 

very progressive and very tough, I think I could say, with 

respect to the husbanding of wildlife resources. 

 

Now as to the question about accessibility of reserve land to 

outside hunters, I suppose it is the same as accessibility to the 

member's land.  If you want to invite someone on to your land 

to hunt, or if you have no objections if they come on to hunt, 

then they could come on to hunt.  But if you don't want them 

on to hunt it is your right to say, no, you can't come here.  And 

I think the same thing applies with respect to Indian reserves. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  I'd like to ask a few questions about the situation 

with White Bear and the casino.  I believe that two of the 

people who were initially charged were . . . the courts threw out 

those charges.  I believe one other one, the charge was dropped, 

and on the fourth one the charge was stayed -- if I'm correct on 

those; I'm not positive.  But I know the one was stayed. 

 

I'm just wondering where in the system now, dealing with the 

reserve at White Bear, the court case is in the situation dealing 

with the jurisdictional issues. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm sorry to have to tell the member, Mr. 

Chair, that I haven't got the material along and I don't have a 

clear recollection of the disposition of the charges or the stage 

that the jurisdictional question is at.  It's my best recollection 

that the matter has not yet been argued in the court, but it is 

scheduled for argument in the court.  But I must confess again 

that I'm not recently briefed on it and I can't answer the 

member's question with precision. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's an 

important issue in our area considering the fact that the 

government is talking of issuing licences for casinos in Regina 

and Saskatoon.  We have an area that was prepared to go ahead 

to finance their own casino and yet they're being held up in the 

court system now.  It's been a year, and yet there seems to be 

no resolution coming and the people in the area would like to 

see some resolution to this problem. 

 

There's also a concern that someone may decide to push the 

issue and again will have some conflict within the court system.  

I think it's important that the jurisdictional issue be settled in 

this particular case, Mr. Minister, because it affects not only 

that particular reserve but also all the others around the 

province. 

 

Now I realize that the FSIN is involved with negotiations 

dealing with casinos in Regina and Saskatoon, but there's other 

interests also involved in this.  And the White Bear Band are 

one of those groups that are particularly involved.  And there's 

a number of other bands that are also interested in this 

particular issue. 

 

While sometimes our court system takes an awful long time, 

Mr. Minister, to make decisions when the government is 

making decisions which relate indirectly to the court situation 

that is taking place, I think it's imperative that the system be 

moved through as quickly as possible.  And as the 

representative dealing with Indian and Metis Affairs in this 

province, I would think that it's incumbent on you to try and 

move that forward in their interest as quickly as possible. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you would look into that in 

your capacity as minister in charge of Indian and Metis Affairs 

on this particular issue, because it is important in the area.  It 

would be a major economic development for the reserve and 

for those people that are there. 

 

The casino is operating today dealing cards only, basically -- no 

slots.  And if you go in there and visit with those people, 

they're proud of what they're doing.  They're pleased to be able 

to work, to provide their own employment, and it has 

significantly improved the morale of the people living on the 

reserve.  So I think it serves as well socially for those people to 

have that type of employment, to have that type of control on 

their lives. 

 

There are other social ills which come from that, from the 

casinos themselves, but from the aspect of the morale on the 

reserve, the dignity and the pride it has provided those people, I 

think it's an important social aspect that needs to be considered 

when decisions are being made, particularly with the decision 

of putting the casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

I believe that there are other areas within this province that that 

type of economic development could have served as well, if not 

better, than placing it in Regina and Saskatoon.  Certainly 

Regina and Saskatoon are major population centres but maybe 

that economic impact and that social well-being could have 

generated better results in an area outside of the major centres 

rather than inside of the major centre, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if 

you'd mind commenting on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I agree with the member that 

this jurisdictional question should be cleared up as quickly as 

possible.  It is an important question and until it's been resolved 

we're kind of 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

stymied.  I haven't followed up on the case for some time in my 

capacity as the Justice minister and I think I should do that, and 

I'm spurred on to do so quickly by the member's question. 

 

The member remembers quite clearly, I know, the situation we 

were in at the time of the developments in White Bear, being 

responsible for the administration of the Criminal Code 

provisions and trying to deal with those in an appropriate way.  

And it has led to this jurisdictional issue and it is one that just 

has to be cleared up and cleared up very quickly. 

 

In the meantime the world moves on, and Chief Crowe in his 

consultations with the chiefs at the FSIN, the All Chiefs 

Assembly, had a very broad basis of support for participation in 

the present provincial policy, but I think clearly left open the 

question of on-reserve developments in the event that 

jurisdictional questions should be resolved in favour of the 

White Bear Band.  So I will follow up on that and ensure that 

we're not the hold-up. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I look forward 

to your responses after you've had a chance to look at this.  I 

will now take my place and allow my Liberal colleagues to ask 

a few questions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess I'll take over 

and converse with the minister.  I think we've been having a 

good discussion, seeing as we don't have anyone else to ask 

questions at this time. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday I caught on the news -- and I didn't 

really catch the full impact -- but it seemed to me the federal 

minister was in discussion . . . made an announcement 

regarding self-government.  I believe it was in the province of 

Manitoba. 

 

I'm wondering if you have any knowledge or if there was any 

interaction with the department here -- with your department, 

your officials -- regarding this announcement, and if you know 

exactly what they mean by the process?  Maybe you're like we 

are; we're still trying to understand what they're exactly 

referring to when they talk about self-government.  But 

certainly, if I'm not mistaken, the minister called it a real 

breakthrough.  And I just wonder if could you comment on 

that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 

announcement by Mr. Irwin took us by surprise.  We didn't 

know that that was a part of their plan.  Our understanding had 

been that Mr. Irwin was going to go through a consultation 

process till some time in July, at the end of which time he 

would have arrived at a process, at a way in which the 

questions of self-government could be negotiated out.  And we 

expect to be involved in that. 

 

Those self-government negotiations would in due course lead 

to an abolition or a . . . yes, an abolition of the Indian Affairs 

department.  But we had imagined this to be sometime down 

the road.  The announcement that he made concerning 

Manitoba took us by surprise.  We're not opposed to it because 

if there is any way that we can nuke the Indian Affairs 

department in this country, I think that would be some 

progress. 

 

So it is an intriguing prospect.  Now how you can eliminate the 

department in Manitoba and leave it continuing to operate in 

Saskatchewan is a little bit difficult to understand, but we'll 

have to wait and see events unfold. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I wonder if you could explain to me what your 

jurisdiction would be with on-reserve things such as welfare or 

home care.  Do you have any jurisdiction there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, we don't have any jurisdiction with 

respect to welfare on reserve nor home care on reserve. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How about if 

there are situations where there may be harassment or abuse.  

Would you have jurisdiction there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll deal with the question of protection 

of children, child welfare.  It's a complex situation, but the 

provincial government is involved in these questions on 

reserve.  We have agreements emerging with tribal councils for 

the provision of child protection services on reserve.  And we 

in effect . . . these agreements in effect make band employees 

officers of the provincial government for the purpose of 

providing these services, and the services are delivered in the 

name of the provincial government.  I'm grossly simplifying, 

and I don't have a copy of the agreement in front of me, but I'll 

be glad to make one available to the member. 

 

There's one with the Touchwood-File Hills band was one . . . or 

Tribal Council rather, and we're negotiating one with the 

Meadow Lake Band.  And we expect that in due course we'll 

have one with every -- I say band, I mean tribal council -- we'll 

have one with every tribal council. 

 

Those agreements apply up to the point where the situation is 

so serious that you're talking about actively intervening and 

taking the children into custody and taking them away.  We 

don't do that under that agreement; we do that under the 

provincial statute.  So that apprehension and the care of the 

children after they're apprehended is done in the same way on 

Indian reserves as in any other community in the province. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  These 

agreements, you would have to sign them with the tribal 

councils.  Does that make every band that belongs to that tribal 

council also part of that agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, it's binding on all the bands. 



March 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The reason I 

brought the question up was not specifically children, but rather 

elders.  I have received some calls with concerns about elder 

abuse on some of the reserves.  Do you have any agreements 

that would cover them also? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Our position is that elder abuse would 

fall in the same legal regime as elder abuse off reserve in any 

community.  The RCMP would be expected to respond to 

complaints.  If we pass the Bill that we were debating earlier 

this afternoon, the provisions of that Bill will be available to 

people living on reserve.  And that includes elders who are the 

subject of domestic violence, for example.  So the same rules 

apply. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I look 

forward to being able to work with you on these particular 

issues and I'll talk to you about the circumstances that I am 

thinking of and I would like to thank you for that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm not 

exactly sure if I had asked you the last time we met about Metis 

land claims.  Is this a separate issue regarding the Metis 

question out there versus the native land claims, and how are 

we dealing with that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the Metis land situation is 

entirely outside the treaty land entitlement question.  The treaty 

land entitlement applies to Indians and the treaties that were 

negotiated with Indians a hundred-and-more years ago.  The 

Metis people have never had a treaty with Canada or with any 

of the provinces, at least the province of Saskatchewan, and so 

their claim is on a different footing. 

 

The acquisition of a land base has been a priority of Metis in 

Saskatchewan as it has in other provinces for some long time, 

and they have been discussing that with successive provincial 

governments over many, many years.  We knew of course, in 

recent years, that they continue to maintain that position and 

the Metis Society has, over many presentations to us, made it 

clear that they expect to negotiate a land base, the acquisition 

of a land base with the Government of Saskatchewan and with 

the Government of Canada. 

 

Just a couple of weeks ago they commenced a legal action to 

that end.  We were aware that this action was forming up and 

had been specifically notified of that some two months prior to 

the action having been started, when at a meeting in my office 

the leadership of the Metis Society and their solicitors told us 

that this action was coming.  So it was not a surprise to us. 

 

I've read the claim and it's a very complex claim, very detailed, 

very interesting.  And it will require a good deal of work within 

the government, within the departments of Justice and the 

secretariat and other departments, in order to evaluate it.  But 

we are going to have to respond to it. 

 

The Metis nation is moving across Canada in the direction of 

self-government, and that's logical because they're recognized 

as an aboriginal people under section 35 of the constitution.  So 

it is their right.  And the recognition of the inherent right that 

I've spoken about so often applies to Metis as it does to Inuit 

and Indian peoples. 

 

Inevitably, part of the discussions around self-government 

issues will also, I think, involve a land base.  I don't know that 

but I . . . all my experience tells me that that will be part of that 

package too.  So these two processes, the legal action on the 

one hand and self-government negotiations on the other, are 

going to overlap, I think, on the question of land.  And we have 

a lot of work to do obviously and a lot of decisions to make as 

we move along on both of those tracks. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Would there be any idea of how much land the 

Metis community are possibly looking at?  Have they given an 

indication of how much land that they would be . . . anticipate 

requesting under a land agreement, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I just don't know.  If you look at the 

statement of claim, it's an incredibly large tract of land, going 

from approximately Green Lake to the northern boundary of 

the province.  But you know, it is only a statement of claim and 

they're not going to err on the low side, obviously, in making 

the claim. 

 

But as to the amount of the entitlement, I couldn't even 

speculate.  And as to the amount they might achieve through 

negotiation, if any, I couldn't speculate on that either.  All of 

that lies in our future. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, recently the government had 

announced that they were looking at preparing to hand over for 

native self-government -- I'm not sure; maybe, possibly you're 

into some discussion -- some $550 million for native 

self-government and especially dealing with some of the social 

aspects, social programs.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if 

you could fill us in as to where we are on this right now. 

 

Maybe this is another whole new debate that's out there to take 

place.  I'm not exactly sure if it falls right here in our 

jurisdiction, talking about Indian and Native Affairs or if we're 

getting into another department.  But maybe you could just 

bring us up to date on that, if you wouldn't mind, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I want to say to the member 

and I want to say this as emphatically as I can.  We are not, not, 

not, not, not planning to turn over $550 million or anything like 

that amount to any aboriginal organizations.  Period, but not 

full stop; I want to go on.  I want to say that we have 

committed, as has every other government in this country, 

committed to the notion of self-government, to the recognition 

of the inherent right, and will inevitably lead to negotiations on 

the question of what that means. 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1994 

I don't know what it means, the member doesn't know what it 

means, the aboriginal peoples do not know what it means 

precisely, but through a process of discussion and negotiation 

we will put flesh on that as time goes on.  That will inevitably 

involve the assumption by aboriginal people of responsibility 

for some of the programs now being delivered by the federal 

government and by the provincial governments. 

 

With those negotiations for the assumption of those program 

responsibilities will go some agreements with respect to 

money, the financing.  And it will have financial implications 

and those have yet to be worked out. 

 

Where the $550 million figure comes from -- and I want to 

make very certain that the member understands that -- it is an 

estimate of how much of the provincial expenditures are now 

going to, or being spent for the benefit of, aboriginal peoples . . 

. give us some idea of the maximum ball park here that is 

involved in -- not in transferring, not in self-government -- but 

in respect of our Indian and Metis populations in this province. 

 

So I know the media report on this was flawed right at the 

beginning and we must correct ourself in this House on this 

point.  There is absolutely no plan whatever for this 

government to turn over $550 million to aboriginal 

organizations.  We won't do it.  We couldn't do it if we wanted 

to.  We don't have that kind of money to hand over to anybody.  

But we are prepared to honour the inherent right of aboriginal 

people to govern themselves and that will lead to negotiations 

and that will no doubt lead to financial arrangements.  Am I 

clear? 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


