




















































Hansard: March 15, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 899 

 March 15, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 

Acting Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Thompson, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Members' Bills, presents the sixth report 

of the said committee, which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 

has agreed to report the same without amendment:  Bill 

No. 01, An Act Respecting The Saskatoon Foundation; 

Bill No. 02, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Full 

Gospel Bible Institute. 

 

Your committee recommends, under the provisions of rule 

no. 61, that fees be remitted, less the cost of printing, with 

respect to Bills No. 01 and 02. 

 

Fred Thompson, chair. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member for Shellbrook-Torch River: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

through you and to you and to members of the legislature today, 

a group of 21 grade 8 students from Davin School, which is in 

the very heart of Regina Lake Centre and in fact may be the 

heart of Regina Lake Centre.  I'm going to meet with them at 

2:20 for pictures, and in room 218 following our photo for 

drinks and discussion. 

 

They're accompanied by their teachers, Steve Hicks and Lea 

Johnson.  And I'd like the members to join me in welcoming 

them to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you two friends from Prince Albert, Tom Bell and 

Roger Bell, who are seated in the west gallery.  Both are 

community activists, Mr. Speaker.  They have always kept in 

touch with what's happening in politics and are here to observe 

today firsthand.  I ask all members to welcome Tom and Roger 

Bell. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you I'd like to introduce to this Assembly a young 

gentleman seated in your gallery, Mr. Dave Kurtz from 

Saskatoon.  Him and his wife have started a new business, and 

we'd like to wish them well.  And I'd like the members to join 

me in welcoming him to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to introduce to you and to all members of the 

legislature, two guests sitting in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Our first guest is Julia Abbott.  Julia Abbott is a first nations 

woman from Chitek Lake, a graduate of the University of 

Saskatchewan, College of Education.  She graduated with 

outstanding marks.  She is presently working on her master's 

degree at the University of Saskatchewan, and she is the 

post-secondary coordinator at Montreal Lake.  Julia is an 

example of what first nations women are doing in this 

province -- they are becoming educated and they are going on to 

be leaders in their community. 

 

So I want to ask Julia to stand and be welcomed by all members 

of the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Sitting beside Julia is Randy.  And I 

didn't get Randy's last name, but Randy works for the Peter 

Ballantyne Band.  He also is involved in first nations' education 

and community development.  I also want to welcome him to the 

legislature this afternoon, as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Redberry Pelican Project 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Fellow members of this Assembly, please join with 

me in congratulating the Redberry Pelican Project in my 

constituency, which recently was awarded a Tourism for 

Tomorrow Award.  These highly honoured awards are set up by 

the British Airways in association with the British Tourism 

Authority and Tour Operators' Study Group.  The award in part 

is to raise environmental awareness.  This highly commended 

prize was received at the London awards banquet. 

 

The Redberry Pelican Project, which operates the Redberry Lake 

Interpretive Centre near Hafford, is a very unique and precious 

area of Saskatchewan.  It is designed to allow interested people 

to enjoy and study pelicans in their natural and undisturbed 

surroundings.  It is an environmental entity that is not only 

unique to Saskatchewan but to all of Canada. 

 

The Redberry Pelican Project is the success that it is today 

because of the great cooperation and 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

dedication between the Saskatchewan Watchable Wildlife 

Association, the RM (Rural Municipality) of Redberry, the 

Canadian Wildlife Service, the town of Hafford, and several 

dedicated local individuals. 

 

Upon word of the award, there was a reception held at Redberry 

Lake Interpretive Centre.  During this gathering a new display 

for the centre was unveiled, an artistic interpretation of the 

world's seven pelican species by Eileen Laviolette.  It should be 

also noted that the Redberry Pelican Project received the 

Governor General's Conservation Award two years ago. 

 

I again would like to congratulate the fine people of the 

Redberry Pelican Project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Queen's Baton Relay 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm pleased 

to announce that SaskPower will be joining with electric utilities 

in each province to sponsor the Queen's baton relay which began 

yesterday at Buckingham Palace. 

 

The Queen's baton relay is a tradition of the Commonwealth 

Games which are being held in Victoria, B.C. (British 

Columbia) August 18 to 28, 1994.  The sterling silver baton 

which carries a personal message of greetings from the Queen 

will travel to eight Commonwealth nations before arriving in our 

nation's capital on April 11. 

 

From there the baton will travel west to Saskatchewan where the 

relay will be greeted by the Lieutenant Governor at a ceremony 

in Regina on May 9 and in Saskatoon on May 10.  SaskPower 

will host events both in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

We are proud to be a sponsor of the Queen's baton relay and of 

the role we can play in this proud international athletic event.  It 

is a time when the 50 members of the Commonwealth can 

cooperate and engage in friendly competition at the same time.  

It is also a unique chance for SaskPower to be part of an event 

which promotes opportunities for human development that 

celebrates cross-cultural understanding, the tradition of good 

sportsmanship, and the triumph of personal achievements.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Conservation at the Legislative Building 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We often go pretty far 

afield looking for good news and miss what is happening right 

under our own noses.  Such is the case with our Legislative 

Building.  We all know that it is one of the most impressive 

legislative buildings in Canada.  And we also know that one of 

the privileges of serving the people of Saskatchewan is having a 

workplace of such grandeur. 

 

But the workers of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) are also making this building a model of 

conservation and occupational health and safety, and I believe 

their efforts should be noted.  For instance, a project is under 

way to remove all fluorescent lighting in the interior of the 

dome.  When this is completed, maintenance will be safer and 

there will be a more even distribution of light.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, there will be an energy savings of over $1,300 a year.  

Also, the lights will be put on a timer to reduce the number of 

hours the lights are on and this will save over $700.  Overall, 

changes to the lighting in this building is resulting in savings of 

about $4,700 a year.  Perhaps these are small numbers, but they 

are only a part of what is happening just in this building. 

 

The statement the member from Weyburn made yesterday would 

not have been possible if departments throughout government 

had not made similar decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Steve Bata and his staff in our 

building who are leading us by example in the ways of 

conservation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TRLabs 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

importance of advanced technology in today's societies is 

impossible to overstate.  In Partnership for Renewal we identify 

information technology and telecommunications as one of the 

six strategic sectors that offer Saskatchewan a distinct 

advantage. 

 

As well, a main concern of Saskatchewan people these days is 

that of jobs -- jobs which will come as we build on the economic 

recovery in this province.  This morning the Government of 

Saskatchewan recommitted itself to be an active part of the 

Canadian-Saskatchewan partnership in communications 

technology, to the TRLabs consortium.  Working together, 

TRLabs and the University of Regina will link the university 

with the growing western Canadian network of laboratories and 

researchers in the telecommunications field.  Ten jobs will be 

created initially, focusing on research staff and student 

employment. 

 

Congratulations go out to TRLabs, the University of Regina, 

ISM (Information Systems Management Corporation) 

Saskatchewan, and others, for your hard work which has 

resulted in the welcome addition to the advanced technology 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hemophiliacs' Compensation Deadline 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

my question this afternoon is for the Minister of Health.  Mr. 

Speaker, there is a well-known line from Julius Caesar that 

warns: "Beware the ides of March."  Two very important 

deadlines fall on March 15 and 16, deadlines that the provincial 

government opposite is treating with very inconsistent and 

self-serving motives. 

 

Today, Saskatchewan hemophiliacs are faced with a decision 

whether or not to accept the government's compensation offer 

for receiving the AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) 

virus from tainted blood supply. 

 

On this, the government opposite says that they are standing 

firm.  When it comes to financial aid for those who need it most, 

there is no flexibility, no extension, says the Minister of Health. 

 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is mandated by 

his own legislation to comply with the binding decision of a 

tribunal he set up to determine judges' salaries.  Despite the 

requirements of his own . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Order.  I want the member to put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of Justice 

is not too concerned, he says, about missing a 90-day legal 

deadline.  Madam Minister of Health, would you be so 

nonchalant about your deadline as the Minister of Justice is 

about his?  Would you consider allowing an extension of the 

requirement to the Saskatchewan hemophiliacs to sign away 

their right to further redress in the court? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  If the 

member opposite had been listening and watching the news over 

the last few weeks he would realize that if the government were 

to extend the deadline unilaterally in Saskatchewan, we run the 

risk of losing the compensation package because one of the 

preconditions by the third-party insurers was that there be a 

deadline.  And I think if he understood that, he wouldn't be so 

urging for this to be extended.  He also has to realize that 28 out 

of 29 of the victims have already signed up on the package. 

 

Now I want to say that I know all members of this House and 

certainly our government has a great deal of compassion for 

people who find themselves in this situation, and our objective 

in negotiating a general package that can be given to everyone as 

opposed to making people go to legal action was because we 

were attempting to meet their needs immediately in a 

compassionate manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister.  I am 

aware that there are 28 of 29 that have accepted the offer, 

Madam Minister, but they didn't feel they had a choice -- that's 

why. 

 

There are still court cases to be heard, Madam Minister, and a 

royal commission is ongoing.  It would seem that giving these 

people a financial package which was worked out and allowing 

the possibility for further redress in court might be the way to 

go, Madam Minister.  By offering the package with a clause 

which prohibits further litigation is like giving them the option 

to throw a quarter you gave them into one of your slot machines 

you have installed around the province.  Take the money or lose 

it and take your chances.  Only the consequences are much more 

serious, Madam Minister, and they have precious little time to 

decide. 

 

Madam Minister, why not give them the package that was 

offered now?  And if further litigation determines that there is a 

need for further compensation, then provide it.  If it is 

determined that none should be given in the first place, then 

arrange for a long-term payback plan.  Madam Minister, have 

you considered that as an option? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  With 

respect to the judgement that came down yesterday, obviously 

the government is going to want to take a very close look at that 

judgement.  And that refers to people who are not included in 

this particular compassionate package because it refers to people 

who are indirectly infected from someone who was directly 

infected by tainted blood. 

 

I do want to say this, however, to people in Canada who are 

considering whether or not to accept this package that, as was 

pointed out by the president of AIDS in Saskatoon, Mr. Frank 

Coburn, the compensation package that Saskatchewan helped to 

negotiate across this country provides people who have found 

themselves in this situation with roughly the same amount of 

money as was awarded in that particular case.  And they don't 

have to go through the very long and arduous litigation that Mrs. 

Pittman had to and I think that's very important. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker -- and this is an important point -- I want to 

ask the member opposite, whether he has contacted the federal 

government that is responsible for monitoring and regulating the 

blood supply, to ask them whether they will extend their 

deadline. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges' Salaries Recommendation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Minister of Justice.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, it 

appears, is standing firm on a deadline which seems arbitrary, 

unfair, and heartless.  Yet the Minister of Justice appears to be 

unconcerned about tomorrow's deadline to comply with a 

binding decision of his own tribunal which determines judges' 

salaries.  And we find that completely ironic, Mr. Speaker. 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

To be sure, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition believes that a 

$20,000 raise at this time is not something the taxpayers would 

like to see and we certainly find that kind of remuneration to be 

far too excessive.  Mr. Minister, this is a responsibility of your 

government.  You set up the system, you put the lawyers in 

place who determine the salaries of people they must deal with 

in court -- lawyers who may aspire to be judges someday. 

 

Mr. Minister, when do you intend to comply with this ruling, 

and would you not admit that putting lawyers, or putting an 

all-lawyer committee in charge of determining judges salaries, to 

be less than wise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, 

the process for naming the commission was set out in the Act.  It 

involved the government naming a representative, the judges 

naming a representative, and those two working together in 

consultation with their principals, to agree upon a chair. 

 

It happened, as it turned out, that they were all people with law 

degrees.  Two of them are practising lawyers and the other hasn't 

practised for some years, the other being the city commissioner 

or the city manager from the city of Saskatoon, so he was not a 

member of the practising bar. 

 

But in any event, the fact that they all turned out to be lawyers is 

purely coincidental.  As to the government's position . . . my 

friends opposite are amused, but it was a coincidence because of 

course we had no control over the judges' nominee, nor did we 

have control over the occupation of the third person in the chair.  

Matter of fact that name was brought forward by the judges and 

we agreed to it. 

 

As to the position of the government, we will be making an 

announcement probably tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated that 

certainly the tribunal was made up of three judges, namely . . . or 

three lawyers, pardon me, namely Marty Irwin, Allisen Rothery 

from the Premier's former law firm, and Gerry 

Allbright -- hardly independent, I would say, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, in whatever decision your government makes with 

respect to judges' salaries, and you've indicated that these were 

the terms laid out in the legislation, will you pledge, Mr. 

Minister, to amend your process such that those who determine 

salaries in the future will have no direct connections with the 

subject matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say in answer 

to my friend's question is that we'll be making an announcement 

with respect to the position of the government, most likely 

tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming and Law Enforcement 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

minister responsible for most of the gambling in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that you were to meet yesterday with 

the Saskatoon City Police to discuss the additional problems and 

additional costs that the Saskatoon police force will be forced to 

deal with as a result, a direct result, of your government opening 

a casino in that city. 

 

Can you tell us today, Mr. Minister, the results of that meeting?  

What additional resources will you be providing to the 

Saskatoon City Police to help combat the additional crime 

problems that your new casino is going to create? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member is correct.  I did meet with a number of law 

enforcement officials yesterday.  We met with the 

representatives from the city of Regina, from the city of 

Saskatoon, and from the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police). 

 

I want to say to the member, it's part of the ongoing series of 

meetings that we've been having with law enforcement officials 

dealing with gaming and dealing with other issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a presentation from these enforcement 

agencies. We think it's most helpful in terms of determining 

government policy and determining direction.  We spoke, Mr. 

Speaker, of the existing gaming operations and we spoke as well 

of future enhancement of gaming in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I think that it was a very helpful 

meeting to both the officials from the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority, as it was to myself.  With respect to funding, that will 

be dealt with in the same budgetary fashion that law 

enforcement is dealt with at the present time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  From that, Mr. 

Minister, I assume that no commitment was made on your part. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Saskatoon police have released a 

comprehensive report done by the Windsor police, which comes 

to the indisputable conclusion that crime and other demands on 

police have substantially increased in every North American city 

where a casino was established. 

 

And when I raised this point with you the other day you said, 

well it hadn't opened yet.  Well that's true.  It's going to open up 

in April.  But the important thing 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

to note is that as a result of this report, the Windsor police were 

able to negotiate the acquisition of 25 additional officers and all 

of the equipment associated with those officers. 

 

And that's the difference, Mr. Minister. In Windsor they're 

dealing with the problem before it becomes a problem. And 

shouldn't you be doing the same, I ask you, Mr. Minister?  

Shouldn't some portion of your government's gambling revenues 

be going to address the increased crime problems that you are 

creating? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that he is right, there has been no casino 

opened in Windsor, as there have been no expanded casinos 

open in Saskatchewan. 

 

We spoke with the law enforcement officials with respect to the 

consultations that we had done with other enforcement agencies 

in other provinces.  We spoke of the logistics of enforcing a 

solid and a above-board gaming operation in expanded casino 

locations.  They made us aware of some of the pitfalls that other 

enforcement agencies have seen with respect to gamblers who 

may choose to break the rules and we shared information as to 

how we may handle that. 

 

I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the course of putting 

together the casino proposals, it is quite clearly a responsibility 

of the operators of casinos to ensure that the regulations of 

casinos are followed, and I would assume that the regulations 

that are dealt with within the casino walls will be funded as part 

of their management costs.  I think that's a reasonable position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's 

becoming increasingly obvious that you do not understand the 

gravity of the situation.  Windsor was able to negotiate all of 

those in anticipation of a casino opening because they 

recognized the problems that they were to experience. 

 

There will be increased demands on special investigations, 

victim services, the 911 centre, traffic branch.  There will be 

increased demands for computer services, court services, 

prisoner handlings.  Police will have to respond to more calls.  

The criminal investigations branch can expect an increase in 

vehicle thefts, break and enters, robberies, assaults, 

pickpocketing, extortion, credit card related offences, money 

laundering, drug trafficking, prostitution. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you telling us that you've blindly gone so far as 

you have without doing more than just a superfluous study of the 

situation?  What studies have you done to measure the increased 

demands that the Saskatoon and indeed the Regina city police 

forces are going to be experiencing as a result of your venture 

into gambling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Rosthern who stands up in his bright, new, shiny 

leadership suit that we have in fact done due diligence and as he 

has indicated, we met with the enforcement officials yesterday.  

And why does he think we met?  Does he think this was a social 

call?  Does he think the police chief from Saskatoon and Regina 

have nothing better to do and the head of the RCMP in 

Saskatchewan have nothing better to do than do a social call on 

the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming? 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is part of the consultations 

and part of the preparedness that we are putting ourselves in to 

deal with any problems that may arise out of increased crime as 

a result of expansion of gaming.  But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have indicated we will do everything that we can, and I 

want to say that we will do due diligence, with respect to any 

ventures that we may embark upon, not only in gaming but in 

economic issues as well.  Mr. Speaker, unlike the former 

administration who embark on spending hundreds of millions of 

dollars at Rafferty and Alameda, we will do due diligence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think it's a sad commentary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, that that is the type of answer that you can come up 

with on a serious, serious issue that's going to have just 

tremendous implications upon the people of this province, Mr. 

Minister.  And I don't think that you've really given serious 

consideration to the issues that I've raised. 

 

Your government, your entire government, has just simply 

become engrossed with gambling fever.  You've got dollar signs 

in your eyes as they glaze over with anticipation.  You're trying 

to get as much of the gambling loot as you possibly can and 

you're not prepared to take care of the consequences of those 

types of actions. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think we saw your true feelings on this matter 

yesterday when you said that the problem with horse-racing is 

that people are not wagering enough.  You said we've got to get 

them to wager more, to come to the track more often.  In other 

words, Mr. Minister, what is next?  Are you going to promote 

liquor through your Liquor Board, so you're going to make more 

money on that aspect as well? 

 

Mr. Minister, you're on the wrong course, and I want you to 

confirm that you indeed are encouraging people to wager more 

of their hard-earned money, and especially when you're 

unwilling to address the problems that are going to be associated 

with your political manoeuvring of the gambling situation in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure if there 

was a question in there, but let me say this, that we will do much 

more with respect to due diligence than was done by the 

administration that he was part of.  As he was part of the 

expansion to bingo gambling in this province from some $4 

million to $104 million, they did nothing to regulate and control, 

and we're cleaning that mess up now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the changes, in terms 

of amalgamation of the horse-racing, their administration did . . . 

I would have to admit, they worked hard on making some 

changes to horse-racing at the time they were government.  The 

former member, one of his former colleagues, Mr. Harry Baker, 

is one of the people who know horse-racing better than anyone 

in this province, and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the information 

that he brought to you from the racetrack was part and parcel of 

how you amended horse-racing when you were in charge of this 

province, when you were governing this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be doing due diligence.  We will be putting 

together a well-regulated industry.  And I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, unlike the former administration, we'll be monitoring, 

regulating, and we'll be doing it in a proper fashion with 

controls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Protection for Horse-Racing Industry 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, since I'm sure that you're going to 

bring it up, I did have the pleasure of owning a small share of a 

racehorse in one season of 1992.  And I think I owned a part of 

its tail because my full investment was around $150.  Now he 

wasn't much of a horse, Mr. Minister, but the experience served 

to acquaint me with the people, the potential, and the problems 

of the horse-racing industry.  And I saw the effort that was put 

forward by horsemen and racetrack operators to pursue sponsors 

to keep their industry alive. 

 

Yesterday, you, Mr. Minister, announced the amalgamation of 

the Racing Commission with Liquor and Gaming.  And you 

indicated that the racing industry would have to pursue corporate 

sponsorship as a means of survival. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Rainbow of Roses, the Saskatchewan Derby, 

and dozens of stake races and daily features are generally 

sponsored by corporate sponsors, including Sask Lottery, 

including SaskTel, both corporations for which you are 

responsible.  Is the minister unaware that both Saskatchewan 

racetracks have had full-time employees for years to market 

corporate sponsorships? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this.  

Quite clearly the member from Greystone is well aware of the 

racing industry, having not only been part of the proceeds of it 

but a part owner.  And I would have to say to the member 

opposite that her involvement doesn't surprise me, just because 

of duplicity and the way she's been handling her questions in 

here. 

 

It seems to me and it seemed to me, Mr. Speaker, that there was 

good gambling and there was bad gambling.  The VLTs (video 

lottery terminal) of course is on the side of bad gambling.  The 

bingos, well not so bad but sometimes good, sometimes not so 

good. 

 

She badgered in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, on an ongoing 

basis in estimates last year, she was telling us to go ahead; 

you've got to expand the video lottery terminal program.  This 

year she tells us to stop. 

 

I want to say to the member from Greystone that we are going to 

do whatever we can to protect the jobs in the horse-racing 

industry.  Whether jobs or employees of hers or someone else's, 

we will protect those jobs in whatever way we can. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have been working with 

people involved in this industry over the past months.  We put 

out a discussion paper, and based on those discussion papers we 

made the decision to amalgamate the Saskatchewan Horse 

Racing Commission with the Liquor and Gaming Authority.  It 

will save some costs in terms of administration.  We believe 

we'll be able to maintain a strong regulation of it, and that's what 

we . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, last year I was at the Rainbow 

of Roses Thoroughbred horse sale when you took the podium 

and encouraged people to open their wallets and bid on 

yearlings, because your government would support the industry 

and would not allow it to die.  They responded to your 

commitment.  In fact the average price per horse went up by 

almost 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday you said that the way to keep racing 

viable was to get sponsors and to get people out to bet at the 

racetracks.  Aside from setting up in competition next door to 

horse-racing with your expanded casinos, what are you prepared 

to do to keep the promise that you made that your government 

will not stand by and watch the horse-racing industry die in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this.  

Quite clearly, the member sees good gambling and she sees bad 

gambling.  And I understand her initiative to protect the 

horse-racing industry.  That's what we intend to do. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, who is she representing?  Is she 

representing the industry or has she some other motives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, there are a lot of 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

people working in the Standardbred and Thoroughbred and 

quarter horse racing and breeding industries, many of whom are 

aboriginal employees that you keep claiming you want to 

provide with jobs.  The people who depend upon it -- the 

grooms, the jockeys, the trainers, the employees of the 

racetracks, and pari mutual operators -- those are the people who 

simply want to know whether you're trying to put them out of 

work. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you going to pull the plug on horse-racing?  Or 

do you indeed have a commitment you promised at the annual 

Thoroughbred horse sale, the commitment that this government 

would not see horse-racing die in the province?  And you can 

explain to us exactly what that commitment is today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, maybe the member 

from Greystone can explain to us what she supports -- public 

funds, or does she support private gain from horse-racing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, Queensbury 

Downs is located in the same building as the casino, and 

Marquis Downs in Saskatoon is across from the parking lot from 

the casino, neither of which has VLTs so far.  Today on CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), Larry Huber, racing 

secretary at Queensbury Downs, said that racing has suffered 

since VLTs have been operating in Saskatchewan, and they 

aren't even there yet. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much of the $75 million in VLT profits will 

your government be dedicating directly to the support of the 

horse-racing industry and the hundreds of peoples who rely on it 

for their employment as jockeys, as grooms, as trainers, as 

pari-mutuel staff and racetrack employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it becomes 

clearer and clearer, the member sees that there are good forms of 

gambling and that there are bad forms of gambling.  There are 

some that interest her more than others.  Quite clearly she's 

interested in horse-racing where she has vested interest, in my 

opinion, as she admitted here.  Quite clearly she supports her 

campaign manager who was a bingo hall owner over a period of 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this administration supports 

gaming dollars that will go into the Consolidated Fund, that will 

go back into the forum of health care and of education, and I 

want to say we support jobs whether it be in horse-racing or 

whether it be in expanded casinos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support the people of this province.  We're 

going to ensure that the dollars from gaming stay in this 

province where they belong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rabies Prevention 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to address this 

question to the Minister of Health, and I appreciate that the 

minister has been aware of the situation and look forward to her 

help and cooperation. 

I raised with the minister the fact that there is a rabies concern in 

the Estevan area, and in particular, particularly a mother phoned 

me, Yvonne Mellom of River Park trailer court, and her 

daughter has been bitten by a rat.  Other children in the area 

have experienced the same situation.  And the Regina Health 

Board is sending serum down, as I understand, for rabies shots. 

 

My question to the minister is, obviously, if she will do 

everything that she can with her resources to work with the city 

and with the rural municipal council not only in Estevan, but in 

neighbouring communities and perhaps in the south-east area as 

a result of, I think, and perhaps the water level rising and the 

particular problem with the rodents, and frankly the frightening 

situation for parents who are worried about their children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to thank the hon. member for the question and for having 

given me an opportunity to contact the Department of Health to 

see what is possible. 

 

The issue of pest control is a municipal responsibility.  However, 

the public health office will be working very closely with 

municipal government to deal with this particular issue. 

 

I will also be talking to the minister responsible for Municipal 

Government to see if we can't coordinate something at the 

government level.  However it is primarily the responsibility at 

the city and town level. 

 

But I appreciate the question.  And the Department of Health has 

been instructed to look into it immediately and take whatever 

measures are necessary to help out.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to make a 

statement on a point of order that was raised yesterday.  

Yesterday the member for Rosthern raised a point of order 

concerning a response to a question posed to the Minister of 

Health during the question period of March 11.  The member 

disputed whether the minister had actually taken notice of the 

question on that day.  I have reviewed the verbatim record for 

March 11, and find that the minister did respond to a question 

put by the member for Kindersley by stating, and I quote:  "Mr. 

Speaker, I will have someone look into the situation that the 

member opposite has raised . . ." 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

It is apparent that the minister did not expressly take notice of 

the question, whether or not it was her intention to do so.  I 

remind the minister that a ruling of the Chair dated April 8, 1988 

urged all ministers to clearly state to the House when they are 

taking notice of a question.  To avoid confusion in the future, I 

ask all ministers to keep this in mind when it is indeed their 

intention to take notice of questions. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Western Grain Transportation Agreement 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to deal with 

the motion before the Assembly which I will move at the 

conclusion of my remarks, which says: 

 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 

immediately cease following the agricultural policies of 

the previous government as evidenced in their budget 

which: 

 

continues to erode the Western Grain Transportation 

Agreement to the tune of $19.8 million in cut-backs this 

year alone, compounded by the previous administration's 

10 per cent cut; and 

 

does nothing to address their "red book" promises of some 

relief to farmers by way of interest-free cash advances, 

 

together with other short-sighted farm policies by which 

the federal governments past and present have seriously 

harmed prairie agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue affecting farm 

families.  And if you bring this issue into perspective, one has to 

go back to the federal election of '93 or the federal campaign 

where it was under everybody's impression, all the voters' 

impression at that time that the next Liberal government -- it was 

obvious they were going to win by their support that the polls 

were saying -- it was under everybody's impression that they 

would reinstate the previous funding to the Western Grain 

Transportation Agreement, and they would also reinstate 

interest-free cash advances. 

 

There was also some candidates, Liberal candidates, at that time 

saying that they were going to have half of the cash advance 

available in the spring.  Now none of that has happened, Mr. 

Speaker.  And if you look in the so-called red book they used for 

their federal election, it clearly states in there that they were 

going to reduce input costs to make farming more viable.  Mr. 

Speaker, this is how they got elected -- they promised these 

things to farm families. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, I understand the federal fiscal 

situation, and I also know that so did Chrétien before the 

election.  He obviously should have known because he was the 

one that started deficit financing.  He was the Finance minister 

when the Auditor General clearly said that federal spending is 

out of control and they have to get a handle on it. 

 

With all these cuts, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has no 

plans to balance the budget.  And this makes no sense in the 

scheme of things if you're not going to balance the budget.  

During the election they were running around saying, we're 

going to reduce the annual deficit to 3 per cent of GDP (gross 

domestic product).  It sounds like good politics but none of the 

voters knew what it meant -- 3 per cent of the GDP. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what does that mean?  That means they're 

going to reduce the annual deficit to $26 billion.  They're 

making these cuts and they're not going to balance the budget.  

They're going to do the 3.7 per cent of GDP.  So they're keeping 

the promise on not balancing the budget but they're not keeping 

their promise in the red book, namely the WGTA (Western 

Grain Transportation Agreement) and interest-free cash 

advances.  They're hurting Saskatchewan farm families as well 

as all people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberals of Chrétien and Goodale are 

continuing the direction of Mulroney and Mazankowski and 

Mayer.  If you take the cuts to the WGTA and the cash advance, 

not reinstating interest-free cash advances, they're going on the 

same path that the federal Tories did. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, not so long ago in a press statement the 

former prime minister, Mr. Mulroney, said that he still feels like 

he's prime minister because the Liberals are doing the same 

thing he was doing. 

 

If you take these cuts in the WGTA, Mr. Speaker, 10 per cent 

last year, or 40 million for Saskatchewan, another 5 per cent this 

year which is another 20 million for Saskatchewan, that's $60 

million out of the Saskatchewan economy.  They're not saying 

nothing about next year because obviously it's going to be 

another 5 per cent cut next year if they don't change this. 

 

(1415) 

 

And if you take it into consideration, Mr. Speaker, on an average 

size farm where you seed a thousand acres of wheat in 

Saskatchewan, these cumulative cuts will have cost that farmer 

$1,600.  And if you add another 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, which 

will be over $500 the following year, that's going to be $2,100 

for each farmer. 

 

It's such an important issue.  If you take the municipality where I 

once was reeve, where we grow a lot of grain, obviously export 

a lot of grain, it affects that municipality to the tune of $260,000 

per year. 

 

This is a very important issue, Mr. Speaker.  The official  



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

opposition and the third party have been silent.  They refuse to 

address this issue.  And therefore on February 24 I stood in this 

Assembly during question period and asked that question to 

acceleration this issue, because obviously the third party and the 

official opposition weren't doing that.  I think I know why.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, when I asked that question, they weren't interested 

in farm families.  All they did was heckle me while I was on my 

feet. 

 

And getting back down into the third party, talk about the 

member from Shaunavon.  I clearly remember when he was on 

our side of the House last year, when he was debating the budget 

speech, he was talking to the opposition members telling them 

they have to come clean where they sit on this WGTA funding.  

They have to come clean. 

 

I clearly remember him saying, which side are you on?  I clearly 

remember that.  I ask the member:  I know where you were; I 

don't know where you are now, but I'm hopeful you're still on 

the side of farm families.  I'm hopeful it's on the side of farm 

families and not on the side of your Liberal cousins in Ottawa. 

 

I want to offer you to enter this debate, Mr. Member, and tell the 

Assembly and tell the people just which side of the issue you're 

on.  Stand in your place, hon. opposition and third party 

members, and support farm families.  And you can urge the 

federal Liberals not to continue on the path of the previous 

government. They said they would not, if you read in the red 

book, they said that they were going to reduce input costs to 

farm families.  They can change this, Mr. Speaker, if we have a 

united cause here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is why, Mr. Speaker, these reasons -- and 

there's many more and you will hear them from other 

members -- but this is why I brought forward this motion, which 

is seconded by my colleague, the member from 

Shellbrook-Torch River, which reads: 

 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 

immediately cease following the agricultural policies of 

the previous government as evidenced in their budget 

which: 

 

continues to erode the Western Grain Transportation 

Agreement to the tune of $19.8 million in cut-backs this 

year alone, compounded by the previous administration's 

10 per cent cut; and 

 

does nothing to address their "red book" promises of some 

relief to farmers by way of interest-free cash advances, 

 

together with other short-sighted farm policies by which 

the federal governments past and present have seriously 

harmed prairie agriculture. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, and I'm looking forward to having other 

members enter this important debate. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will be seconding 

this motion brought up by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

The member from Shaunavon and the member from Kindersley 

are kind of laughing about this Bill . . . or this motion, Mr. 

Speaker, but I want to tell you, they are part of the cause of the 

problems out in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I find it amazing that the federal government has decided to 

continue the cuts to the Crow benefit, Mr. Speaker.  It simply 

bugs the imitation of that government.  That government is 

definitely the cause of this Crow.  And, Mr. Speaker, we live in 

a . . . Saskatchewan is in the middle of agriculture.  And I'm 

telling you this is really not a laughing matter.  I want to say that 

the farmers in my constituency are pretty upset with the 10 per 

cent cut last year, the 10 per cent cut this year to the Crow.  It's 

going to mean a great lot of money lost by the farmers in my 

constituency. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the problems that lie in 

Paddockwood . . . they've got road . . . railroad being abandoned 

from Paddockwood to Henribourg last year.  This year it's going 

to be from Paddockwood to White Star and also from P.A. 

(Prince Albert) to Shellbrook. 

 

What will this mean, Mr. Speaker?  This means higher costs for 

the farmers to truck their grain longer distance.  Also this means 

a higher cost to the rural RMs, as they have to upgrade the 

railroads, also to the provincial government.  I want to say that 

this will be a devastating cost to not only to the RMs and to the 

farmers, but also to the communities in rural Saskatchewan.  

Agriculture virtually has no profile in the federal budget this 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- None whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Langford: -- That is, in this case the old adage of new . . . 

no business being good business just wouldn't fly.  In this case, 

no business means bad business.  The 10 per cent reduction 

announced by the former Mulroney government seems to have 

been made permanent by the Liberals. 

 

But let's take one step back, Mr. Speaker.  Not only is the federal 

government making a Tory policy permanent, they're taking it 

one step further, if you can believe that.  A further 5 per cent 

reduction in the Crow also appears and it's supposed to be for 

this year if legislation can be amended before the crop year 

begins. 

 

As I've already stated, Mr. Speaker, if the Liberal government 

insists on the gradual erosion of the Crow, this change, even 

more than the railway lines being abandoned or our elevators 

closing, will input onto Saskatchewan more than any other 

province. 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

It's time we made the federal government realize our province is 

our home and our home is our castle and our castle needs to be 

maintained, which means we make our living farming.  What are 

they trying to . . . make our life difficult for us?  Why are they 

trying to make our life difficult for us, Mr. Speaker? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Cats are cats. 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Cats are cats.  Right. 

 

Why are their policies made in a vacuum?  Agriculture is a 

living, breathing industry, an industry that has suffered through 

much these last few years.  But it's beginning to turn around.  

For the sake of our farmers, Mr. Speaker, let us rebuild our 

industry.  Don't keep throwing policy roadblocks in our way.  

We simply need to maintain rural Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

obvious that we've got to bring some sense to the debate and the 

motion brought forward by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena.  So, Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I'll 

make an amendment to the motion: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting everything after 

the words "That this Assembly" and substituting the 

following words therefor: 

 

call on the provincial government to immediately take 

action to ensure a viable way of life for Saskatchewan 

farm families by (1) making changes to GRIP so that the 

surplus in the fund will reach those producers that need it 

for spring seeding; (2) take immediate action on crop 

insurance premiums to make them more affordable for 

farm families; and (3) show clear leadership in agricultural 

diversification by promoting the hog, beef, and grain 

industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the members of the government 

made a few correct statements insomuch as saying that the mess 

that was left by the federal Conservative government was 

somewhat shocking.  I know that it was the federal Conservative 

government under Brian Mulroney that began the erosion of the 

WGTA with two 10 per cent cuts in the last couple of years. 

 

And we all know that GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade), well GATT seemed to go on for ever and ever, and they 

seemed to have worldly meetings -- Geneva and Uruguay.  But 

nothing ever came to an end, Mr. Speaker.  No end in sight at 

all.  And of course they were also going to do away with some 

cash advances. 

 

However, when the present federal Minister of Agriculture, 

Ralph Goodale, took his position in government, immediately he 

took action on a few of these very important concerns.  We now 

see GATT coming to some sort of a closure. There's some 

promise on the future for farmers, for farming.  He's taking 

action on the cash advances. 

 

I know that in speaking with him, he will be . . . he's got some 

dialogue with farm groups to see how best to attack this problem 

where you're spending 50 to $75 million a year on one subsidy, 

and is that best for the farmers.  That's being looked at. 

 

But you know, when I travel out in rural Saskatchewan, I'm not 

hearing the same concerns as the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena.  You know what the farmers are telling 

me?  They're telling me Ralph Goodale is doing a great job.  In 

fact, when we look at the polls and all other water levels, he's 

doing a great job.  Farmers are solidly behind the federal 

government's agriculture programs. 

 

But you know what they do say?  What those farmers are telling 

me is that they're in serious trouble for a few very clear reasons, 

Mr. Speaker.  In fact what they say is they will never forgive the 

member from Rosetown and the Premier for trying to destroy a 

way of life in rural Saskatchewan that people have built up for 

years and years and years. 

 

And I think back to a few of the problems that they brought 

forward to rural Saskatchewan farm families, that being, one, 

when they were going to gravel the highways.  I know in my 

own constituency they wanted to gravel 90 miles of highway.  

They want to talk about changes to the grain transportation and 

they wanted to gravel all the highways out in rural 

Saskatchewan.  Makes no sense.  Makes no more sense than it 

does to close hospitals and close schools in rural Saskatchewan 

and destroy a way of life, and in fact put in a process that 

ensures these people can't rebuild what that government is going 

to destroy. 

 

(1430) 

 

You know, one other thing I hear farm families telling me in 

rural Saskatchewan is that they recall in the '91 election, in the 

'91 election when the Premier was on almost every stage in this 

province waving his finger saying, not one more farmer, Mr. 

Speaker.  I recall at the time everybody felt, well this must mean 

not one more farmer is going to go into bankruptcy. 

 

Well little did we know it meant not one more farmer is going to 

get help from this government.  In fact what's happening is just 

the opposite.  When he's saying not one more farmer, he already 

had plans in place to start taking legal action, had his Agriculture 

minister take legal action against farm families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I look at some of their legislation that they've also 

brought forward, like the six-year leaseback program.  On the 

surface it sounds good.  What they've done is put in place 

legislation that puts rules and laws in place for banks and our 

credit unions -- our credit union system, which is the reason why 

many farmers are surviving in rural Saskatchewan today.   and 

yet their very own lending institution, ACS (Agriculture Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

gets to play under an entirely different set of rules, Mr. Speaker.  

They put in place avenues that allows ACS to begin foreclosure 

process on some of those farmers. 

 

Why is the rules always different for the government than it is 

for the farm families in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We look at some of the programs that they were cancelling, or 

cancelled early on in their administration.  I recall when I sat on 

that side of the House and the discussion in caucus on FeedGAP 

(feed grain adjustment program).  Now the member from Biggar 

is chirping from his seat.  However, I recall the strong stand he 

took on FeedGAP, trying to stop that Minister of Agriculture, I 

guess the member from Rosetown at that time, from cancelling 

this program because of course it was really . . . it's an offset of 

the effects of the Crow benefit and it was bringing in something 

like -- and I believe it was the member from Biggar that gave me 

these figures -- four or five times more money to the province in 

economic development than what it was costing the government. 

 

So of course with enough pressure from the caucus, from 

enough pressure from the general public, they pulled their horns 

in on that one and made the changes.  They didn't go ahead with  

FeedGAP at the time. 

 

But, you know, some of the more dramatic ones -- and I think 

back to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program -- where there again they have the right in their mind to 

go about making and changing the rules for farmers and putting 

farm families at risk, putting some of these farmers and their 

families in a situation where that they've actually been 

foreclosed on because of the financial effects of what that 

government did to their farms. 

 

You know, it's no wonder, it's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, why 

everyone -- it doesn't matter if it's a co-op movement, if it's farm 

families -- hundreds of people are now suing that government 

for what they've done to their lives.  The unilateral changes from 

GRIP has just destroyed many livelihoods, and I don't think they 

have any right to sit there grinning about it. 

 

What they could be doing, instead of trying to convince some of 

their members to be part of something and make them feel like a 

team, is perhaps to start taking action on what we've been calling 

for for some time -- the $320 million in the GRIP surplus. 

 

I look at other provinces, Mr. Speaker.  They don't have 300 or 

$400 million GRIP surplus because they ensured that the design 

of their programs would get money out into the hands of farm 

families and not be sitting in a bank account somewhere that 

they would like to have people not know about so they could 

perhaps use it for other reasons. 

 

We have farmers, farm families, going into the spring seeding.  

In my area, it's a month away; they'll be out in the fields.  And 

they have no plans -- no plan, Mr. Speaker, to bring forward any 

programs to ensure that these farm families can put their crop in, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What they've also done to crop insurance, they should be 

ashamed of themselves.  They've taken premiums . . . the 

premiums have risen 20 per cent while at the same time 30 per 

cent of the farmers, Mr. Speaker, are dropping out of the 

program.  Now that doesn't sound like a government that really 

does care about rural Saskatchewan and the farming way of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the time is getting short.  I can tell by the 

worry on your face.  I will pass the motion now, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting everything after 

the words "That this Assembly" and substituting the 

following words therefor: 

 

call on the provincial government to immediately take 

action to ensure a viable way of life for Saskatchewan 

farm families by (1) making changes to GRIP so that the 

surplus in the fund will reach those producers that need it 

for spring seeding; (2) take immediate action on crop 

insurance premiums to make them more affordable for 

farm families; and (3) show clear leadership in 

agriculture diversification by promoting the hog, beef, 

and grain industry. 

 

Seconded by the member from Greystone. I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Shaunavon has moved an 

amendment, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone.  I must remind the member that his amendment is out 

of order since the member from Saskatoon Greystone is not in 

her seat. 

 

Order, order.  Order.  Does the member have another seconder? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Seconded by the member from Regina 

North West.  Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I guess 

two out of three isn't too bad. 

 

I rather enjoyed myself over the last 25 minutes or so, or 35 

minutes, listening to the various speakers as they tried to strut 

and perform in this Assembly here, each trying to outdo each 

other, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The mover was making some points against a Liberal 

government at the federal level.  And I couldn't help but take 

some of the notes that he was using out of the red book, 

so-called infamous red book during that election where the 

Liberals apparently had committed themselves to reinstate 

interest-free cash advance, which of course is -- what is it 

now? -- about two, two and a half per cent that people have to 

pay.  They made that promise. 

 

They also made the promise that they would reinstate the full 

amount paid to the Crow, on the Crow, and also that they would 

reduce input costs.  And he said, 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

this is how they got elected; these were the promises that they 

made.  And this is how they have let the people down. 

 

And I guess that was a good point.  But, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

colleagues in this legislature, does it not remind us of another 

scenario, very, very similar, in October of 1991 when we had 

such dramatic promises as no new taxes for the next two years?  

And what happened, Mr. Speaker?  And I don't want to take the 

time up of this Assembly now to go through the long litany of 

promises. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line, the bottom line was that those 

folks across the way got elected on promises that they made, and 

the people believed them and now they formed government.  

And I find it just a little bit ironic, Mr. Speaker, that we find the 

member who made this motion get up in his seat and complain 

about the federal government being elected by promising certain 

things and now look what they are doing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we do find, I have to admit, that the federal 

level, the federal Liberals, are embracing certain fundamental 

core beliefs of the former Conservative government in Ottawa 

such as, for example, free trade.  I'm not quite sure what their 

stand was in the '88 election on free trade; it was wavering back 

and forth, back and forth. 

 

But now we have NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement).  And NAFTA was an issue during the federal 

election and how bad it was, this trade with Mexico, as my 

colleague, the House Leader, said that we will make this an 

issue; we will make this an issue and we'll send our MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) out; we'll fight it tooth 

and nail during the federal election. 

 

Now what happens afterwards, Mr. Speaker?  We find out that 

the federal Liberals are now embracing it and saying hey, maybe 

it's not such a bad deal after all; maybe it's got something going 

for it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have the situation of the WGTA.  We had 

the dramatic cut, and I admit it, it was a dramatic cut that the 

Conservatives in Ottawa made before the federal election.  And 

this was going to be restored.  But what do we find now?  What 

has the federal Liberal government done to it?  It has increased it 

even more. 

 

But, member from Shaunavon, don't get excited. I'm coming to 

the NDP (New Democratic Party) now, so we'll concentrate on 

them for a little while.  Because the inconsistencies, Mr. 

Speaker, of members opposite who now have formed 

government based on promises that they made, betrayed those 

promises.  And now what do we have?  Not only have they 

betrayed those promises, but they have betrayed their own 

principles, the principles upon which the New Democratic Party 

was formed, upon which it was founded.  And we have the 

scenario about Tommy Douglas being brought up all the time. 

 

What about bonds?  Do these people believe in bonds?  

Apparently they never did.  How terrible -- free enterprise, you 

can't have that.  What are they doing, Mr. Speaker?  They have 

now recognized what the former government instituted had a lot 

of merit, because they're promoting, they're selling; they're 

saying, people in Saskatchewan, invest in your own province.  

And I commend you for that -- for waking up and recognizing 

that that is the proper format. 

 

What about uranium, Mr. Speaker?  We know their stand on 

uranium prior to the election.  And what are they doing now, Mr. 

Speaker? -- exactly the opposite. 

 

And we could go on and on.  Perhaps the one salient point I 

should mention is that prior to the election they said, oh those 

nasty Conservatives are going to close the five hospitals, in 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in the by-election.  And we find that 

now, how many hospitals have you folks closed?  Fifty-two 

hospitals.  Where have you closed them?  All in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's what this motion talks about, is rural Saskatchewan.  

It talks about fundamentally Saskatchewan.  Because as goes 

rural Saskatchewan, so goes all of Saskatchewan.  Certainly 

particularly economically speaking. 

 

And so when we look at the situation here, and I recognize the 

amendment that the member from Shaunavon made and it's a 

good amendment.  I had an amendment of my own that was 

almost as good, but seeing that we've got an amendment on the 

Table I'll refrain from doing so.  Because what we have to do is 

get you people to come to grips with the situation.  That's what 

you have to do. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit about that GRIP.  I want to talk a 

little bit about your promotion that the Minister of Agriculture 

fondly calls Agriculture 2000.  Now admittedly there will only 

be 2,000 farmers by the turn of the century, by the year 2000.  

That's perhaps the future as you see it. 

 

And the direction and the speed at which you're going, that's 

exactly what will happen.  Because let me assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, Agriculture 2000, as a policy for a government to say 

this is our policy, this is what we envisage for agriculture in the 

future, that is shallow, Mr. Speaker.  It is hollow.  Because it 

doesn't do anything. 

 

I have yet to talk to one farmer, quite specifically, that even 

knows that there is such a policy as Agriculture 2000.  And 

when I try to explain it to them they say, well what does it do for 

me?  Where does that leave me?  You know what their policy is, 

Mr. Speaker?  They've gone around with one of their happy little 

committees, their advisory committee.  And their advisory 

committee has come forth with suggestions as to what to do to 

save the agricultural economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know what the Minister of Agriculture tells us?  The 

Minister of Agriculture of Saskatchewan says 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

 that that advisory recommendation is going to form the basis for 

further discussion.  We don't need further discussion.  We need 

action.  And we need it now.  To sit down with the Minister of 

Agriculture and these recommendations to come up with 

something for the future bodes ill indeed, Mr. Speaker, on this 

day of the ides of March.  And we heard a member before refer 

to the ides of March.  And we know what happened to Julius 

Caesar.  Et tu, Brute. 

 

And that is what the people of the province are saying to you 

folks now, because you have betrayed us.  You have betrayed us 

because we expected more, we expected better.  Simply because 

those were the promises that you were making.  And I don't 

think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province are asking 

too much for this government to stand up to those promises that 

they made. 

 

But what have they got done now?  We find that example and it 

talks about GRIP.  Let's talk a little bit more about GRIP. 

 

You folks have got now about $200 million and next year it will 

be three -- $200 million in your treasury, in the Consolidated 

Fund.  And you know where that money comes from, Mr. 

Speaker?  It comes from the pockets of the farmers, the 

premiums that the farmers are paying. 

 

(1445) 

 

Well how come you had a surplus of $200 million?  I've asked 

the Minister of Agriculture this question.  Why is it in the 

Consolidated Fund?  It comes out of the pockets of the farmers.  

Why isn't it being paid out?  Because you changed GRIP.  You 

unilaterally changed GRIP so the farmers would not be able to 

benefit. 

 

Alberta doesn't have that problem of $200 million surplus.  

Manitoba doesn't have that.  Because their original GRIP is still 

there.  Ours is not. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, because of high premiums, low pay-outs, 

the farmers that I'm meeting . . . And I had to miss this meeting 

in Saskatoon yesterday, and I compliment the Minister of 

Agriculture for holding a series of meetings around this province 

dealing with this issue of crop insurance.  But I talked to some 

people and I phoned some people up that were at this meeting in 

Saskatoon and that encompassed a large area.  There were many 

people out there.  I suspect between 3 and 400 farmers, who 

came up and said, what have you got for us?  What can we look 

forward to?  What hope can you give us?  Can we put our seed 

into the ground? 

 

We're not going to get a pay-out.  That's already been announced 

and usually the premiums are being deducted from the pay-out 

so that the farmers can pay their premiums.  That's not going to 

be the case. 

 

The end result, I am told, Mr. Speaker, is that when the meeting 

concluded there were only half the number of farmers there that 

were there at the beginning of the meeting, that simply left.  

There was nothing in it for them.  There was no hope.  There 

was no direction.  Exactly and precisely, Mr. Speaker, as I've 

told you about the entire agriculture . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to enter into 

the discussion on the issue that we're talking about today under 

rule 16 and the whole area of grain transportation. 

 

But I think the members opposite, particularly the official 

opposition and third party, need a history lesson on grain 

transportation.  Do you want to know who -- I ask the 

question -- do you know who initiated the changes of 

deregulation in the grain handling system?  Otto Lang, the 

minister of Transport, also minister of state of the Canadian 

Wheat Board in the mid-70s. 

 

Do we all remember the phrase, user pay?  That was the 

initiation of what we saw in terms of the user pay and the change 

of deregulation to the Grain Transportation Authority. 

 

Do you know who the executive assistant of the federal minister 

of Transport was at that time?  Ralph Goodale, now the federal 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

As we went through into the '70s and '80s . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Wilkie says, what's the 

point?  Well I have to say the Conservative Party and the 

previous Conservative government took credit for the 

deregulation of the grain handling system.  I wish to correct him, 

that they cannot take the full credit, because the former Liberal 

administration before that put the wheels in motion. 

 

If one remembers in terms of the payment and the arguments 

that took place in terms of changing the grain handling system 

and deregulating it, that in the '81-82, the minister of Transport 

at the time -- who it was? Jean-Luc Pepin, the Liberal minister 

of Transportation -- made the changes and created the Western 

Grain Transportation Act.  He was the first one to put the nail in 

the coffin and create the deregulation of the grain handling 

system and the massive changes that we're seeing now in the 

grain handling industry. 

 

Jean-Luc Pepin at that time brought forward in that legislation 

the concept of paying the producer.  Do you know what the 

people of Saskatchewan said to that concept?  No.  A petition of 

approximately 125,000 people from all walks of life in the 

province of Saskatchewan was signed and delivered to that 

minister.  And that minister was handed that piece of paper and 

then decided not to do it. 

 

But at that time, when the delegation went to Ottawa to present 

this petition of farmers and political leaders, different provincial 

parties at that time brought forward also representation.  Do you 

know who the leader of the Liberal Party was at that time?  The 

federal Minister of Agriculture, Ralph Goodale. 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

And do you know what Ralph Goodale said at that meeting?  Do 

you know what he said to Jean-Luc Pepin?  He says, I support 

the people of Saskatchewan; pay the railways, don't pay the 

producer.  He said that to a crowd, to the national press.  Pay the 

railways. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where does the member from Shaunavon 

stand? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Where does the member from Shaunavon 

stand?  So I say to you what takes place.  In terms of the final 

one who put the nail in the coffin in terms of the legislation and 

guiding it through the House of Commons -- do you know who 

that was?  It was then the minister of Transportation, Lloyd 

Axworthy. 

 

So as you see, fellow members, and Mr. Speaker, that the 

change was initiated under a Liberal regime.  Well I have to say 

that the next regime under the Conservatives accelerated the 

speed by which change was taking place.  And I think it would 

be safe to say had they won the election, we would have saw 

rapid change in the grain handling system. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of trying to determine now where the 

former leader of the provincial Liberal Party, now the Minister 

of Agriculture, stated that he supported pay the railways.  We 

have somewhat of a more confused message from the now 

Leader of the Third Party.  And I wish to quote from Hansard, 

March 3, 1993, when we spoke about this very issue. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What did she say? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I will tell you.  In another news article, this 

one in The Western Producer, dated September 19, 1991:  

Liberal leader said election is more about agriculture.  But what 

does the Liberal leader say about grain handling and 

transportation?  The Crow benefit should be paid directly to 

farmers rather than railways.  The Liberals generally favour less 

regulation to the industry. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who said that? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Who said that?  Yes.  Who said that?  The 

member from Shaunavon, the member from Shaunavon. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a grid road map of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  When one talks about deregulation, one in 

villages in terms of a railway system which consists possibly of 

two or three railways going across the province of Saskatchewan 

. . . I see the members opposite are rather amused. 

 

I have a map that talks about different areas of the province.  

And I wish to ask the hon. members from certain ridings, the 

member from Kindersley and the member from Shaunavon, 

what they will do when deregulation comes in the grain handling 

system; when Shaunavon elevator is closed and they have to 

haul to the main line; when Eston is closed and they have to haul 

to the main line; when Plato is closed and they have to haul to 

the main line.  You tell me what solutions they offer in terms of 

what happens to deregulation in the change of the grain handling 

system. 

 

I know studies done by the Senior Transportation Authority that 

talks about changes in deregulation of the grain handling system, 

where for my member from Meadow Lake, the cost of hauling 

grain, the difference between if we see a change between 

Meadow Lake and Saskatoon is $60 a tonne.  It does not become 

worthwhile to grow any grain in that area of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I say to you that does not recognize the potential of this 

province.  It does not recognize and it penalizes this province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of being land-locked in this 

country.  The grain transportation subsidy is devised to create 

equality out there. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we change the system to 

that of a pay-the-producer system that's being advocated by the 

previous regime -- and I firmly believe that the Liberal regime is 

following the same tack -- that we will see an undue penalization 

of the producers of Saskatchewan.  Not just in grain, but also in 

livestock.  Because I wish to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

the province of Alberta is hovering over that method of 

payment; they are strongly taking the position they will get their 

lion's share. 

 

Studies have proven, in terms of the slippage that will take 

place, that this province could lose from 100 to $400 million in 

terms of a change of method of payment, Mr. Speaker.  I say 

shame.  That is not the right thing for the producers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And when this Liberal regime takes out $90 million right now 

from the producers of Saskatchewan, again I say shame, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not the direction we want to take in terms of a 

federal government.  We must see some reason, we must see 

some understanding of the producers of Saskatchewan, we must 

have this kind of compassion deal with this.  We do not want a 

deregulated system in the grain-handling system. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you travel to North 

Dakota, South Dakota, and Montana and saw what Ronald 

Reagan's deregulation did to the grain transportation system 

there, saw the changes that took place, those are the same things 

that are going on here. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . 30 years ago. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- The member from Kindersley says, 30 years 

ago.  No, if he checks history, Ronald Reagan passed legislation 

in 1980 to deregulate the transportation industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I await to see how these people will deal 

with the devastation in rural Saskatchewan.  I wait to see what 

answers they will provide.  I ask again, what will they do when 

these elevators close?  What will they do when the branch lines 

are tore up?  What 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

will they do?  What will they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be very pleased to 

support rule 16, the motion brought forward by the member 

from Kelvington-Wadena, but I will oppose the amendment for 

the very reasons that I have spoke.  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think I 

would like to make a few comments on rule 16.  I first think I'll 

make a few comments about what I thought was happening in 

this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've made every effort in this House to cooperate 

in the spirit of the new age of politics.  What we think we're 

hearing from the people out in the . . . now we have tried to give 

credit to the government where it's due and we have moved 

question period away from a purely partisan exercise to one 

where the public can get involved.  We have tried to find ways 

to eliminate patronage without diminishing the government's 

ability to govern effectively. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we're listening to the people.  The people 

that we're listening to are not just PCs (Progressive 

Conservative), they're from all parties.  We are listening to 

people from both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, and they're 

telling us they want change. 

 

However it appears that the government is stuck in the '70s 

where the only tactic they can think of is to paint yourself white 

and declare everything else black.  We go to the story of the 

black and white mice and we dig up some . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Black and white cats. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Cats.  Well black and white cats, we do that 

every time.  We dig up poor old Tommy Douglas and rattle him 

around a while, trying to stay in the past where they felt secure, 

where they feel comfortable and secure, way back in the past. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. mover is trying to rewrite history.  

And they are proposing to attack and turn their backs on the 

agriculture policies of the previous federal government, meaning 

the PCs.  Well, Mr. Speaker, does that mean that we turn our 

backs on over $15 billion, $15 billion that the agricultural 

society received in assistance from the previous federal 

government? 

 

The hon. mover suggested that that was part of the problem.  I 

can't understand that; $15 billion in assistance is part of a 

problem because of the Crow?  Come on, I can't see the logic 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been more assistance to the western farmer 

than any government before.  Mr. Speaker, he's asking us to turn 

our backs on years of drought, assistance for drought.  Generous 

spending on the fuel rebate program.  Numerous farm 

diversification programs.  Mr. Speaker, as late as August of 

1993, 25 million to help farmers develop farm income.  Turn 

you backs on that?  That's what you want them to do? 

 

Well I would say to yourself, ask yourself the question -- ask 

yourself the question.  How many farmers would be gone off the 

farm today if they hadn't had that assistance from the previous 

administration?  The previous government persistently combined 

consultation, ingenuity, hard work, for stable, workable 

conditions for the farm economy. 

 

They came up with solutions to problems in Canadian 

agriculture.  The GRIP and NISA (net income stabilization 

account) programs for instance, that somehow mysteriously 

work in Alberta and Manitoba, but for some reason won't work 

in Saskatchewan where 45 per cent of the farmers are . . . farm 

acreages are.  Why would it work that way? 

 

This government is quite willing to put $300 million in their 

pocket out of the GRIP program that should have went to the 

farmers.  And they gleefully tell you how much more Alberta 

has in a debt and Manitoba has in a debt in the GRIP program, 

while they stuff 300 million in their pocket. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if that's what you want to turn your 

back on.  We have to wonder, we have wonder here, as in the 

GRIP debate that took place, we wonder if the opinion of the 

members opposite had more to do with old style politics than 

they do with responsible government.  The socialistic policy, 

socialist policy: more, more, give me more, give me more, but 

don't make me pay for it; make some rich, mysterious rich 

person pay for it. 

 

The trouble with us in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we don't 

have enough rich people.  Because this government in the years 

gone by when there was some money in this province wasted 

it -- during the 1970s.  They talk about our waste and 

mismanagement.  Ten years of the best income this province 

ever had -- down the tube. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Down the potash holes. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Down the potash holes, as one of my colleagues 

says. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the problems of Canadian agriculture went 

through the '80s, continue through today, and cannot be solved 

by just throwing money at them. 

 

Unfair foreign trade practices are the biggest detriment to our 

foreign policy.  And who put that on the GATT platform?  Who 

put that before the GATT? It was a Conservative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The mover talks about the cuts to the western grain 

transportation system.  Well let's look at that a little bit.  Under 

that program, the government -- this government that they say 

should not be followed -- took it from zero to over $2 billion in 

the space of six 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

years.  And I would ask which federal government are they 

talking about?  Which one do they want us to model after -- Mr. 

Trudeau, who called farmers cry babies; or our current Prime 

Minister who clings to that era of the old Canadian politics, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Producers were asked by the previous federal government what 

changes they wanted to Crow.  Changes, Mr. Speaker, are 

necessary, not because of wheat or oats or barley; but all 

producers don't grow grain.  Not all farmers are grain farmers 

and, Mr. Speaker, GATT may rule in the end that it's an unfair 

subsidy.  So what did the federal government do?  They said, 

you must prepare for changes.  The previous administration 

created a panel -- it was called the producer payment panel -- to 

consider options and alternatives to the Crow. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the producers were alerted to 

further cut-backs if the method of payment was not modified.  

And to date there's been no resolution.  The farmers, 

producers -- and I have all respect for them -- have not decided 

how they want the payment to be made.  So when the member, 

the mover, gets up and starts bellyaching about the cuts, when he 

knew very well they were going to be there . . . well I don't think 

that was unparliamentary.  I thought you were a little nervous 

there, Mr. Speaker, but that's what he did; he's bellyaching about 

the cuts that he knew were coming.  If he didn't know, then why 

would he get up and make a motion like this, if he didn't know 

what he was talking about.  Now whether that was a fair thing 

for them to do, is for somebody else to talk about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the current government may be as 

responsible and consultative as the last in its agriculture policies.  

No one can deny that; no one can deny it would be a significant 

improvement over the agriculture policies of the '70s.  Well the 

mover is looking for real examples of short-sighted policies 

which has seriously harmed agriculture.  He has to look no 

further than his own backyard or maybe closer to his front 

benches. 

 

Who hurt, who hurt the agriculture in Saskatchewan more than 

that triumvirate sitting right over there?  Who hurt them the 

most, Mr. Speaker?  Well they knocked the farmers out of 

contention in the GRIP; they have no right to reap recourse in 

the courts.  Who done that?  Was that the federal PCs, or was 

that the Saskatchewan NDP?  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

farmers know who hurt them the worst, whether it was the 

federal PCs or the Saskatchewan DPs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look.  Saskatchewan farmers' 

transportation infrastructure is under attack by the Department of 

Highways decision to reduce maintenance on roads while the 

assistance available to them has been reduced by -- I'll tell you 

why -- the cancellation of the feed grain adjustment program, the 

red meat production equalization program, all cash advance 

programs, and most especially by the cancellation of GRIP. 

 

Their costs have gone up, breeders' fees have gone up, pasture 

rental fees have gone up, fuel rebate has been capped, municipal 

revenue sharing has been reduced, causing their taxes to go up.  

The Crown lease surface rights have been eliminated . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has 

elapsed. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to enter this 

debate today and I want to point out a number of things that I 

think have been omitted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the discussions 

that have gone on earlier. 

 

I believe that this province and people in this province have 

talked about who pays the Crow rate.  They've talked about what 

their volume of dollars should be to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They've also, Mr. Speaker, gone on record and 

said in many instances that we should talk about how it gets 

paid.  How it gets paid, Mr. Speaker, is very significant in this 

discussion. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what we are having when we talk about 

how it's being paid, we are having an erosion of the 

transportation subsidy paid to western Canada.  It, Mr. Speaker, 

should be called an entitlement to western Canada.  But what we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan and Manitoba today is 

we're talking about how it's being paid and how it should be or 

could be paid, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, and members of this 

Assembly, we should be talking what is being paid and how 

much is being paid and whether we have an entitlement in this 

province to the amount of monies that have been set aside in 

perpetuity to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's what we should be talking about in this 

province and not how it's being paid.  Because for 50 years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been talking about how it should be paid and 

whether we're going to have at the conclusion of the debate no 

money at all being paid to western Canada.  And that's where the 

problem exists.  And as I have outlined earlier and in past 

discussions on the Crow and the Crow rate benefit to the people 

of this province, it's not how it should be paid is what we should 

be talking about, it's what should be paid.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is as important as this issue is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Alberta and the people of Manitoba 

have traditionally said that they want some changes.  And as we 

go through the process of time, the people in Saskatchewan are 

also saying we need changes.  But what we have consistently not 

said to the people in Ottawa, whether it is a Liberal or a 

Conservative government, is that the fact needs to be addressed 

in a firm and concise and precise way that what we get paid has 

to be established and then we can legitimately talk about how. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, today is not the time to talk about how it's 

paid; the time today, Mr. Speaker, is to talk 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

about what is being paid.  And as we talk about how -- and what 

the people opposite have always talked about is how -- what we 

have had is an erosion of the amount of money that is paid into 

western Canada for transportation.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what we should be dealing with today.  Nineteen million dollars 

is the cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in one program alone, in changes to the fuel tax to 

rural Saskatchewan, those members opposite cut $26 million out 

of rural Saskatchewan.  Did they blink an eye?  No, Mr. 

Speaker.  Today they talk about $19 million coming from the 

federal government as being a huge amount of money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what they neglected to consider is that they 

have undermined agriculture far more than any federal 

government ever has.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  Talk 

about GRIP in the same context, Mr. Speaker.  What did they 

do?  They undercut rural Saskatchewan to the tune of not even 

letting them go to court to defend their opportunities that they 

had in relation to monies being paid out. 

 

And what do we have today, Mr. Speaker?  We have them 

talking about $19 million when in their kitty, in GRIP, in 

revenue insurance they got 200 million or is it 300 million?  Or 

is it 350 million?  Will they tell us?  No, Mr. Speaker, they will 

not. 

 

And that is the reason why we should . . . what we should be 

talking about and not this insignificant amount of money when it 

comes to what these people have already pilfered out of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan in rural Saskatchewan.  

That is the issue that we should be dealing with, Mr. Speaker, 

and how to re-establish the opportunities that haven't existed for 

a long, long time in this province on how to benefit those people 

who can't defend themselves in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Have these people here done that?  No, Mr. Speaker, they have 

not.  They have not.  They have consistently undercut rural 

Saskatchewan.  They defend in this motion, they defend the $19 

million that comes from the payment of the transportation 

agency.  And in one, in one fell swoop in the taxation on 

gasoline, they cut out $26 million out of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I could add hospitals.  I could add user fees.  Mr. Speaker, over 

and over again these people have cut out the feet from under 

rural Saskatchewan and delivered it without a doubt -- without a 

doubt -- without even a conscious word about how it's being 

done.  And they say $19.8 million is being cut out of 

transportation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as they're piling up their revenue insurance, 

Mr. Speaker, they have suggested to this Assembly that that 

money will flow back to the people who provided it.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, will give back to the federal government a hundred 

million dollars that is in their treasury.  And will they blink an 

eye?  No, Mr. Speaker, they will not. 

 

And they come into this Assembly and have the nerve to talk 

about $19 million?  I think they should be ashamed of 

themselves.  They will take and put in their own provincial 

treasury a hundred million dollars in revenue insurance.  It will 

go into the Consolidated Fund.  They'll give a hundred million 

back to the farmers, and the federal government will be paid 

their hundred million dollars.  That's what they're going to do 

with the revenue insurance. 

 

And then they have the audacity to talk about $19.8 million in a 

resolution about grain transportation.  It's sick, Mr. 

Speaker -- it's sick. 

 

They talk about defending rural Saskatchewan.  They are so far 

back they think they're first.  They're so far back in agriculture, 

they don't understand the beginnings of agriculture. 

 

And the member from Rosthern talked about the program 

Agriculture 2000.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they don't understand 

even that part of it in dealing with agriculture in this province.  

They don't understand it well enough to deliver a proper 

program to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I hear on the street over and over again, 

just let this government get out of my way so I can move 

forward and do my own thing, because I can make a living in 

this province.  I can grow grains and oilseeds in this province, 

and I can make money doing it.  And I will be a taxpayer in this 

province, and I will hold my head up high when I'm doing it.  

And that is even the toughest part of agriculture. 

 

In the good parts, Mr. Speaker, in the parts where the livestock 

industry are doing their thing, Mr. Speaker, they're paying tax 

and they're proud of it.  But what do these people do every time 

you turn around?  They tax you more.  They tax you in fees in 

every way, shape, or form.  There isn't a thing that moves out in 

the country . . . and next they'll be taxing the gophers on our 

property as well.  That is what they're doing -- taxing everything 

in existence. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is where the problem of this 

administration has focused.  They have talked for so long about 

how the Crow gets paid that they've lost sight of anything else 

productive in agriculture.  It's time to talk about what gets paid, 

as I've stated earlier, and that's where you need to start.  And 

members of this Assembly I believe need to do that.  We need to 

do that with our farm organizations, Mr. Speaker.  These people 

over here need to start doing that with the Sask Wheat Pool.  

They need to start being fair and open and honest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Crow payment to western Canada is an 

entitlement -- it's an entitlement for western Canadian producers.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, has not been addressed by those people 

opposite.  That's what we should have been talking about today 

in this discussion -- the entitlement to western Canada of $720 

million.  That's what we should have been talking about. 

 

(1515) 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Under rule 16, the 65 

minutes of time has elapsed.  And according to our new rules, 

the 65 minutes of debate shall be followed by a maximum of 

10-minute question-and-answer period.  And we will do that at 

this particular time. 

 

I will say to the members that I will conduct this 

question-and-answer period in a similar manner as I do our 

regular oral question period, so that one member or two 

members do not dominate the 10-minute period.  So keep your 

questions short, and also keep your answers to the question that 

is directed to the member. 

 

I will now recognize members for questions, if there are any 

questions. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

question for the member from Shaunavon, who talked about and 

amended the original motion, and he talked about GRIP.  The 

question is, Mr. Speaker, if you're such a . . . member from 

Shaunavon, if you're such a strong advocate of GRIP, why are 

you silent on the federal government cancelling GRIP?  And if 

you and Ralph are so close, why didn't you bring up and ask him 

to introduce your new GRIP that you were working on when you 

were on our side of the House? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously they 

didn't have time to write his question, as they did his speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what became obvious at a recent meeting at 

Winnipeg where they had the Agriculture ministers from each of 

the provinces and the federal Agriculture minister and they did 

have discussions on GRIP, and what was obvious at that meeting 

was that Saskatchewan was the only province that did not want 

to support a GRIP program.  All other provinces wanted to retain 

a GRIP program, which begs the question, why didn't that 

government . . . why didn't the province of Saskatchewan come 

up with a GRIP program?  They've had two, two and a half years 

to come up with a program as an alternative to GRIP; instead 

they come up with some shiny, glossy booklets and it just 

doesn't do anything for the farm families of Saskatchewan.  Start 

to address what really means something out there. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Supplement to the question, Mr. Speaker; 

obviously the member didn't ask a question.  Did the member 

from Shaunavon talk with the federal Minister of Agriculture 

and introduce his new GRIP proposal that he advocated when he 

was on our side of the House? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When he is 

referring to the program that I did design, what he should be 

making quite clear is the full support I had from the rural caucus 

when I did that, including the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena.  If he's at this point saying he didn't support 

it, he had better go back to his farmers up in his area and explain 

to them why he mailed out so many copies to them. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Just to clarify that, Mr. Speaker, I never mailed out 

any such copies.  I don't know where he'd get that intelligence 

from.  But obviously since that member isn't going to ask and it's 

maybe worthless to continue, I have a question for the member 

from Morse.  I'm wondering why he chose to speak the clock 

instead of voting off the amendment and voting on this motion. 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  That question simply will not be 

allowed.  The questions are to be asked on the content and not 

on the process. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the member from Shellbrook-Torch River.  Mr. Member, 

would you support a pay-out to farmers of the surplus in the 

GRIP program? 

 

Mr. Langford: -- I don't know if I heard the member right, but I 

want to say that definitely I was not in support of the old GRIP 

program.  Definitely, as you know, that our Agriculture minister 

has implemented a program called the Ag 2000, which I really 

support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I'd like to ask a 

question to the same member.  The question was: would you 

agree to paying back the 300 million because you did not 

support GRIP?  Now I understand you didn't support GRIP; 

that's fair ball.  But now there's about $300 million surplus.  

Would you now agree that that money should be paid back, 

simply because you didn't like the program in the first place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you.  This is . . . the member from 

Wilkie just probably doesn't understand pay-back of this money, 

where it comes from.  I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that 

money right now we're talking about is in the middle of the year.  

We don't know what the year-end pay-out, whether there will be 

. . . the price of grain will drop or the price of grain will rise.  

We'll know at that time whether . . . what the money surplus will 

be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

member from Shaunavon.  In regards to the statement made by 

the member of Shaunavon on March 3, 1993 that was mentioned 

here today, which referred to the Liberal leader's position that 

the Crow benefit should be paid directly to the farmers rather 

than to the railways, what I want to know is what the member of 

Shaunavon's position is today, what is the Saskatchewan Liberal 

position.  And tell the people of Saskatchewan what your stand 

is.  It's very simple.  Should the Crow be paid to the railways or 

to the farmers? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased that 

the member from Bengough-Milestone did ask the question 

about what our position is as of paying out monies that the 

governments have to farms 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

and farm programs.  And we fully support getting the money in 

the hands of the farmers that need it for their spring seeding. 

 

And this would be a good one for that member to ask her own 

Agriculture minister, and Premier, why don't they support 

getting the $320 million out into the hands of farmers for farm 

seeding?  Or perhaps dealing with the $600 million of crop 

insurance debt which is the reason why the farmers in 

south-west Saskatchewan are so negatively hit with premiums in 

the crop insurance program.  If they really want to address 

something, they're in power, why don't they start to address 

some of those issues? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena how he and his caucus handle 

the deputy minister of Agriculture whose position on the Crow 

has been, throughout the province, as pay the producer.  And I'd 

like to know from the member from Kelvington-Wadena how he 

rationalizes that out in his caucus and through his minister. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. 

member for that question.  My original motion, and what I 

talked on, was the red book where the federal Liberals said, 

we're going to reduce input costs to make farming more viable. 

 

And more importantly on the method of payment, which the 

member knows, when you take $60 million out and a potential 

of 20 million out next year for Saskatchewan, it ends up $1,600 

per producer.  The more important answer here is the total cost, 

what it's costing the grain producer, and has nothing to do with 

the method of payment.  The Saskatchewan share is 

disappearing and none of the hon. members will agree to voting 

on a motion where we could send the federal government a 

message. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like to know from the member from Biggar 

if he would be in favour of paying back the 300 million-plus that 

is already in the revenue insurance program; whether he would 

be in favour of paying that back to producers, and the federal 

government's share and the provincial government's share as 

well. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

it's rather early and premature to be talking about what we're 

going to be doing with premiums when we haven't gone through 

a crop year yet.  I think we have to measure and see what 

possible problems could arise.  We're not as sure yet, in terms of 

what the price of grain is going to do.  It is rather unstable right 

now. 

 

We have seen our customers, in terms of Russia, not buying 

grain.  So it is rather an unstable year.  So we've seen some 

declines in terms of the price outlook for these crops drop in 

recent statements in terms of the gross revenue insurance 

program.  So I think we have to be careful of that in terms of 

making any statements, or premature to be assessing any . . . 

(inaudible) . . . in the program at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena the same question: would he be prepared to 

pay back to the people of Saskatchewan the premiums that have 

been collected on behalf of the farmers and on behalf of the 

farmers that the provincial government has paid into the revenue 

insurance and on behalf of the farmers the federal government 

has paid in the premium?  Would he be willing to allow the 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to get that money so 

that they can have an opportunity to put their seed in the ground?  

Would he answer that question? 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously we're in the middle of the 

crop year.  We don't know if there's going to be a surplus.  And 

the member opposite knows full well that the money from the 

federal premiums, the program that they set up, is targeted for a 

new program. 

 

Sure I'm in favour of paying back that federal money, but how 

can we when the original program they set up doesn't allow us to 

do that?  And we have, at least we're going to have, a surplus in 

the program, hopefully, not like Alberta whose premiums went 

up 46 per cent, there's a deficit, and the producers have to pay it 

back. 

 

I'd rather have a surplus in that program with a good chance of 

being able to pay that back to the farmers.  And I think . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to thank members for abiding by the 

rules that they themselves have set down.  And I think it was a 

fairly orderly question and answer period, although some might 

not have liked the answers that were given. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 33 -- Convening of the Standing Committee 

on Privileges and Elections 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I believe 

the matter that we bring before this Assembly is very important.  

And it's important that this matter be brought before this 

Assembly today. 

 

In his letter dated February 15, 1993 the member from Yorkton 

crossed lines that MLAs must follow.  The member from 

Yorkton has violated two items listed under not acceptable uses 

for MLA communication dollars under section 50(3)(f).  The 

first states material of a blatantly partisan nature, Mr. Speaker, 

and the member's letter is clearly partisan. 

 

The letter begins, Mr. Speaker, with the greeting:  "Dear New 

Democrats."  It contains such remarks as, and I quote: 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

. . . I try to remind people that Saskatchewan was a great 

place to live and is again because the "Tories are gone". 

 

It goes on to speak of 10 years of Tories filling their pockets, 

Mr. Speaker, and other blatantly obvious partisan remarks.  For 

anyone to say that this letter is not partisan, Mr. Speaker, would 

be completely off base. 

 

The second item under not acceptable, Mr. Speaker, states: 

 

. . . material which solicits donations to a political party or 

attendance at political functions 

 

Within the same envelope members from the Yorkton 

constituency received the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

membership update including 400 club ticket sales to eliminate 

the constituency's $4,000 debt, invitations to the NDP curling 

funspiel, the executive's spring barbecue and appeals for support 

of the NDP membership and donation drive. 

 

(1530) 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is in full violation of asking for 

political donations and attendance at political functions.  Further, 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear that this is common practice since the 

constituency update starts out by saying: 

 

Here we are again, stuffed in with our M.L.A.'s letter, 

saving money and getting some constituency information 

to you! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a serious matter.  This misuse of 

communications dollars must be dealt with immediately in order 

to ensure that the public is fully informed of this matter and that 

the integrity of elected officials can be restored. 

 

These sorts of allegations have been taken very seriously today 

and I don't see any reason why the member from Yorkton's 

situation is any different.  Accusations of breach in other 

circumstances have been treated in a very different manner.  For 

the sake of fairness and equitable treatment of all members, Mr. 

Speaker, this matter needs to be addressed immediately and 

objectively. 

 

All members in this Assembly have experienced at one time or 

another cynicism from the public.  Saskatchewan people should 

be fully informed about the use of their tax dollars not because 

they demand it, but because they deserve it, because it is their 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they deserve to be fully informed with the details 

of this situation as they have when other similar circumstances 

have come about.  It is imperative that the Standing Committee 

on Privileges and Elections determine exactly what has 

happened in this situation and that appropriate measures be 

taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all need to know how many times this has taken 

place, how many times the member has included partisan 

material and schedules of NDP Party functions and political 

donation drives, and how much money is involved.  We need to 

find out how much money has gone toward this exercise not 

because it is an exorbitant amount, Mr. Speaker, but because 

principles have been violated and we need to ensure this does 

not happen again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to restore faith in elected officials in 

general and faith in members of this Assembly.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the member for Yorkton could take the first step 

toward this initiative by offering an apology to the public of 

Saskatchewan and to the members of this Assembly. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Thunder Creek: 

 

 That there be an immediate public convening of the Standing 

Committee on Privileges and Elections, and that the committee 

consider, but not limit itself to determining the following:  (1) 

the amount of money expended on postage, letterhead and 

sundry expenses involving the February 15, 1993 letter to New 

Democrats from the member from Yorkton; (2) immediate 

restitution of the above expenses from the member personally 

or the NDP constituency association; and (3) immediate and 

unequivocal apology from the member to the public of 

Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue that my colleague from 

Yorkton brings to the Assembly this afternoon is not one that 

any of us here should take lightly.  I think any time a question 

arises about integrity or the character of any colleague in this 

Legislative Assembly, we all share in the consequences, no 

matter what our political affiliation is. 

 

And as such, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it absolutely clear this 

afternoon that I don't believe anyone in the discussion today 

should be here trying to make political points at the expense of 

any one member.  And I certainly say in the case of the member 

from Yorkton, who I personally think is a fine member of the 

Legislative Assembly, that this should not be aimed personally 

at him.  But, Mr. Speaker, the challenge of this Assembly this 

afternoon, I believe, is to set in place the goals that would allow 

members of this assembly to understand very, very clearly what 

the procedures are in regard to the issue in front of us. 

 

In other words, how is the framework regarding violations to the 

Board of Internal Economy handled.  Mr. Speaker, the Board of 

Internal Economy under directive no. 4 allows each member to 

receive reimbursement or payment by the Government of 

Saskatchewan for amounts incurred by a member 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

in respect to duties as a member for postal, advertising and other 

communication expenses. 

 

Each of us in this Assembly does that on a regular basis.  

Communication, as we all know, is a very integral part of being 

an elected member of this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the board has determined over time and 

directed that postage and letterhead are acceptable items for 

reimbursement, but that materials of a blatantly partisan nature 

and materials which solicit donations to a political party or 

attendance at political functions are not acceptable items. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not a concealed order.  This directive 

is contained in the members' handbook, which we all have, 

which is regularly updated, and, Mr. Speaker, which we 

constantly address, as you well know, in the Board of Internal 

Economy. 

 

The directive in the handbook states very clearly: 

 

It is essential that the above items (acceptable items) not 

be blatantly partisan in nature.  Members must be aware 

that the allowances available to them are public funds and 

they receive these funds to enable them to . . . (represent 

all of the people in their particular riding). 

 

Now the term, political, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, can be 

interpreted in many different ways.  It is important to note 

though, Mr. Speaker, that the term used in the directive is 

partisan, which refers to items which deal with party matters, be 

they Conservative or Liberal or New Democrat or whatever the 

make-up of that particular house. 

 

And the intent of the directive is to ensure that MLA funds are 

not used in the place of party funds.  And I believe in this the 

directive is an honourable one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as my colleague from Yorkton has outlined to you, Mr. 

Speaker . . . or from Moosomin has outlined to you, Mr. 

Speaker, in this Assembly, the letter sent from the member from 

Yorkton on Assembly letterhead, presumably with Assembly 

postage, did not go to all people in that riding.  It only went 

exclusively to members of the New Democratic Party. 

 

The letter itself I believe did have a lot of inflamed political 

rhetoric in it, and partisan references.  But I guess what I think is 

very important to the issue at hand, Mr. Speaker, which we as all 

members have to sort out, is the fact that in the same envelope, 

in the same envelope was a document which is entitled 

Constituency News, which was generated exclusively by the 

Yorkton New Democratic Party executive, by the president and 

the secretary of that association.  And what is absolutely clear 

about the admission -- the admission, the violation of the board's 

directive, and I quote from the letter, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

Here we are again, stuffed in with our M.L.A.'s letter, 

saving money and getting some constituency information 

out to you! 

 

That says to me, Mr. Speaker, that this wasn't the first 

occurrence; that the president and secretary of the Yorkton New 

Democratic Party organization considered this a regular and 

ideal way to disseminate the message of that political party 

gratis, gratis of the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no other reason for that sentence to 

be in there.  Now as my colleague mentioned, Mr. Speaker, there 

was a lot of constituency information in there, and I don't think 

that I need to elaborate on that because that's all been addressed 

here before. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if this was simply a case of the particular 

member playing hardball politics, as we all understand the term, 

I think there would be probably enough interpretations available, 

Mr. Speaker, that this issue would not be here today.  However it 

is clear, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely clear that this package was 

designed to benefit the New Democratic Party in its Yorkton 

constituency and also the New Democratic Party in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I don't think, Mr. Speaker, one can call this anything but 

blatant.  So as such, Mr. Speaker, the opposition raises a 

question of privilege, a question of disobedience of the rules of 

the House or a committee or contempt of this Assembly.  And I 

think that is only proper, Mr. Speaker, when these things come.  

Because as my colleague said in his text the other day, and I 

would quote from the 1982 edition of Parliamentary Privilege in 

Canada by Joseph Maingot, the affirmation of this claim is very 

clear.  He states: 

 

Disobedience of the rules or orders represents an affront to 

the dignity of the House and accordingly the House could 

take action not simply for satisfaction, but to ensure that 

the House of Commons is held in the respect necessary for 

its authority to be vindicated.  Without proper respect, the 

House of Commons could not function.  Thus disobedience 

may well be considered contempt . . . 

 

Disobedience of the rules or orders is an obvious contempt 

. . . 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe that the time and the prima facie 

case had been established.  And, Mr. Speaker, you ruled against 

the question of privilege, stating that the Board of Internal 

Economy was not a creature of this Assembly but a creature of 

statute and therefore breaches of the board directives are not 

breaches of the Assembly.  And I respect your ruling very much, 

Mr. Speaker, in that regard. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the consequences of that technicality are very 

broad and are something which this Assembly, I believe, must 

deal with in order to arrive at a solution to the question at hand. 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

For instance -- and I have sought opinion on this, Mr. 

Speaker -- I believe that the ruling means that a member's 

privilege does not extend to meetings of the board.  That is 

something that the six of us or seven of us in this Assembly right 

now that are on the Board of Internal Economy have to be very 

concerned about. 

 

In other words, the protection that I as a member receive in this 

Chamber today and any committee of this House does not 

extend to me now in the Board of Internal Economy -- the very 

board which is charged with developing the directives, the 

directives which members are supposed to live by.  In other 

words, any member here or any member of the public could sue 

for slander, could sue for bringing false pretence.  Mr. Speaker, 

that is a very serious implication. 

 

Your ruling also mentioned that this matter could be dealt with 

in two ways:  by a substantive motion or by the board itself.  Mr. 

Speaker, as you know, we have initiated action on both fronts.  

We have asked for the board to sit at its earliest possible 

convenience, and I understand that process is under way. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, we are moving a motion to go to the 

Committee on Privileges and Elections, to be convened at the 

earliest possible time in public to deal with this issue. 

 

The issue must be addressed, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it is the 

collective responsibility of the members of this Assembly to do 

it as expeditiously as possible.  Because, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

lot of confusion in the minds of members and in the minds of the 

public. 

 

On page 119 of the March 3, 1994 minutes of the Board of 

Internal Economy, I did raise this issue.  I raised this issue, Mr. 

Speaker, because in one instance we have a breach of directive 

no. 4 that is now in the legal system.  And, Mr. Speaker, we also 

today are discussing the possible breach of another directive no. 

4 that has not entered the legal system.  It simply, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, has been shoved aside by this House. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, that simply should not be acceptable to any elected 

member of this House.  Those rules and directives must apply 

equally to all 66 sitting members of this House, and their 

adjudication and the process around it must be equal, Mr. 

Speaker, or there will be no confidence in this House, or any 

board or commission or committee of this House which allows 

unequal treatment to take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the reason this motion must be brought 

forward today and dealt with.  It is a reasonable motion.  The 

last time that Privileges and Elections met in this Assembly was 

1977.  It was over an issue of name-calling, and Mr. Speaker 

probably remembers it well.  Mr. Former Member Brockelbank 

was in the chair at the time.  It resulted in fairly severe and stiff 

penalties to members of this Assembly. 

 

But it was over name-calling, Mr. Speaker -- name-calling.  

Today we face an issue surrounding the expenditures of public 

funds in a partisan and, I believe, sir, blatant disregard for the 

rules of this Assembly in the area of fund 

_raising for political parties. 

And we also have the issue of a directive of this Assembly 

resulting in the entry of the legal system into the mix. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those things are far more dangerous to this 

Assembly and the members in it than simply name-calling.  And 

the motion brought forward by the member from Yorkton -- or 

Moosomin, rather -- from Moosomin, to call together Elections 

and Privileges, I think, Mr. Speaker, is only fitting. 

 

And then the members that were on that committee can be 

charged with rectifying what obviously is a very difficult 

situation.  And then members can feel confident that the rules of 

this Assembly will apply equally and fairly and that we all must 

must subscribe and live to those rules as they are laid down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly support the motion of the 

member from Moosomin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I've listened carefully to the remarks 

made by the member for Moosomin and the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition.  If I understand correctly, the essence of the 

arguments put forward by both the mover and the seconder of 

the motion before the Assembly, I understood the mover to say 

that in essence he brought it to the House because he believes 

that it is desirable to restore public trust in elected officials and 

that's his motivation for doing that. 

 

As I listened carefully to the words of the seconder of the 

motion, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, what I understood 

him to say was that he supported the motion because he saw it as 

a goal to set in place procedure to make clear rules and remedies 

related to members' use of allowances. 

 

What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that I support both of those 

objectives.  And in light of that, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving at 

the end of my remarks, an amendment to the motion to the 

effect: 

 

That all the words after the word "that" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

The Board of Internal Economy be convened at the earliest 

opportunity to review and clarify directive no. 4 and the 

associated guidelines for communications expenditures by 

members. 

 

And I'll be moving that at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly do not speculate that the 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

motives of the members in bringing this resolution to the 

Assembly are anything other than what they've stated.  And it 

would be certainly be my view that if you have a problem, you 

solve it.  That is not a complicated way of looking at the issue. 

 

And as I reflect on the matter that members bringing to the 

Assembly with some concern for a resolution to a problem, and I 

reflect on public comment on related matters, my attention 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, has been caught by an editorial written in 

Yorkton this week, dated March 12, which would be . . . I guess 

that would be on Saturday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I'd like to quote verbatim from just a portion of that 

editorial.  It writes in part, and I quote: 

 

On Wednesday, the Speaker of the legislature refused a 

request from the Conservatives to hold a special meeting 

to determine if Serby broke any rules.  However, the 

matter will likely be raised with the Board of Internal 

Economy . . . of MLAs which makes rules on members' 

pay and allowances. 

 

In a prepared statement, Serby says he welcomes such a 

review, and he should. 

 

The editorial goes on to say: 

 

If the board determines the rules should be clarified, then 

some good will come from this matter. 

 

And the editorial concludes: 

 

There appears to be some confusion among MLAs over 

what they can and cannot do with allowances.  Until this is 

clarified, allegations will continue to surface to the 

detriment of MLAs and the legislature as a whole. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, there is a fair amount of wisdom in 

that final sentence of that editorial, that serves as some guideline 

to those of us in this Assembly who do seek, as the members 

have said, to restore public trust in the elected officials and to set 

in place procedures to make clear the rules and the remedies 

related to members' use of allowances. 

 

And I note as well, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition in his remarks made reference to page 119 of the 

Hansard of the Board of Internal Economy meeting of March 3.  

And I do want to remind the Assembly of that, and members 

will have received that on their desks yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to make some comments about that meeting and the 

content.  In saying that, I want to be very clear that I do 

understand that it is inappropriate in rules of debate to involve 

the Speaker and officers of the Assembly in the debate.  And I 

have cautioned myself accordingly and will do the best I can to 

communicate from the meeting without violating that important 

principle of debate here. 

 

I do want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that an agenda item 

brought to the Board of Internal Economy meeting on March 3 

was intended to in fact address, I think, this very issue that has 

been referred to by the members in their debate on the motion.  

And consequently there was brought to the members of the 

Board of Internal Economy for consideration a statement of 

guiding principles related to members' expenses and allowances.  

And that was what was under discussion then on pages 119 and 

120 of the Hansard of the Board of Internal Economy at that 

time.  And as he said, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition did 

request some clarification as to what the guidelines are and what 

are the remedies. 

 

Now being very acutely aware, Mr. Speaker, of the rules of 

debate, I simply want to say that in the discussion it became 

clear that a precise definition of partisan, as it applies in the 

word "directive", has some fuzziness about it.  It also became 

clear that the remedy for raising the question also is less than 

precise at the current time. 

 

It also became clear, Mr. Speaker, that the subject of 

consideration of a statement of guiding principles is not 

something that had been to the board before.  And it was thought 

to be desirable so as to give, as much as possible, clear direction 

to members and in response to some legitimate questions being 

raised by members of this Assembly, whose desire was and is to 

bring a clear understanding to do the two things that the hon. 

member for Moosomin and the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

raised in their debate. 

 

I want to note as well, Mr. Speaker, that that discussion 

concluded with the members of the board clearly committing 

themselves to in fact come back to this issue, to consult with 

their caucuses, and then to come back on the public record, as 

the Board of Internal Economy is now open and does carry out 

its debates on the record, and then to come back and attempt to 

resolve it in the interest of . . . and I share, I repeat again, I share 

the objective of the member from Moosomin of restoring the 

public trust in elected officials. 

 

And I share as well the conclusion of the Yorkton This Week 

when they say that if the board determines the rules should be 

clarified, then some good will have come from this matter. 

 

So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, and the desire I think shared 

by all members of this House to see clarity brought so as to help 

to restore . . . and noting as well that I got on my desk this very 

day a notice of meeting of the Board of Internal Economy for 

Thursday of this week, Mr. Speaker, with all of that in mind, I 

move, seconded by the member for Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That all the words after the word "That" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

the Board of Internal Economy be convened at the earliest 

opportunity to review and clarify directive no. 4 and the 

associated guidelines for 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

communications expenditures by members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 34 -- Regional Economic Development 

Authorities 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

colleagues of the House.  It gives me a great pleasure to stand 

here in support of the development of the formation of REDAs 

(regional economic development authority).  And at the 

conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again the development and the formation of 

regional economic development authorities is a prime initiative, 

one of the major initiatives and the cornerstone in the 

Partnership for Renewal, the economic development blueprint 

that we have released, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to say that there has been some marvellous 

announcements in some communities, certainly taking the 

forefront and demonstrating leadership in the establishment of 

REDAs. 

 

(1600) 

 

I want to say first of all that the REDA formation again is 

community-driven.  It's a grass roots exercise, Mr. Speaker, and 

fellow colleagues, and it gives the opportunity for communities 

and third-level governments and stakeholders to pool their 

resources together and to identify strengths and to work together 

in a cooperative and collaborative approach. 

 

And again, I think it is much along the lines of the spirit of 

cooperation.  And I think it's nice to see that today more than 

ever that spirit is alive and well in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to take this opportunity however to highlight two 

particular communities and two REDAs that have been formed 

recently, the first one being the Prince Albert Regional 

Economic Development Authority which was formed and 

officially announced in January of this year.  And again, as I say, 

it points to the hard work of individuals in Prince Albert and the 

many communities around Prince Albert.  And certainly they did 

a tremendous amount of work in establishing this particular 

regional economic development authority. 

 

And I'd like to recognize some of the communities and 

stakeholders that are participating in this regional economic 

development authority at this time.  Some of those are the 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology), Woodland Institute; the Birch Hills Economic 

Development Authority; the Prince Albert Indian and Metis 

Friendship Centre; the New Opportunities Rural Development 

Corporation; the Meath Park and Albertville and the RM of 

Garden River; the Lakeland District Chamber of Commerce; the 

village of Weirdale; the town of Birch Hills; the RM of 

Buckland; the RM of Prince Albert; the RM of Birch Hills; the 

RM of Paddockwood; CLIO Communications; the RM of 

Lakeland; and the Prince Albert Multicultural Council. 

 

I think we take our hats off to all of these particular 

stakeholders, these towns and villages and RMs, chambers who 

have come together in the spirit of cooperation, at a time when 

this province needs that, at a time when we've got to pool our 

resources. I think we should take our hats off for their leadership 

in demonstrating that we can do it in the 1990s, working 

together. 

 

And I'm looking for exciting and innovative ideas coming out of 

the Prince Albert Regional Economic Development Authority.  

Already, Mr. Speaker, they're working on numerous projects that 

have been identified and again identifying their strengths, and 

some of those strengths in the Prince Albert area, and they're 

working on some of those projects. 

 

So again, I think all of us should take a special time to thank and 

congratulate these particular communities.  I'd like to also take a 

bit of time to also commend the recent announcement of the 

Rosetown-Biggar-Elrose Regional Economic Development 

Authority which is entitled the Entrepreneurs REDA 

Incorporated which just was recently announced. And the 

Rosetown REDA, again similar to the Prince Albert Regional 

Economic Development Authority, is comprised of local RMs 

and communities and stakeholders. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, and fellow colleagues, that 

there's a tremendous amount of excitement and enthusiasm 

around the Rosetown REDA and the development and the 

creation of this REDA.  The participants in the Rosetown REDA 

are the Bear Hills RDC (rural development corporations) out of 

Biggar; the Eagle Creek RDC out of Harris; Rosetown and 

District RDC Rosetown; the RM of Monet No. 257; the town of 

Elrose; the Prairie West Regional College; and the Prairie Centre 

Credit Union.   Again, these communities and all of these RMs 

have come together to form this REDA. 

 

I just want to read some of the comments that some of the 

representatives from these particular stakeholder organizations 

. . . the comments that they made on the release of this regional 

economic development.  And again, it is testimony to the spirit 

of cooperation and the spirit of working together.  But some of 

the comments that some of the particular individuals made were 

from one individual. 

 

The Rosetown Economic Development Authority chairperson, 

Roy Haddock, said it is gratifying to see the establishment of a 

regional economic development authority.  I have never been 

through a more positive thing in my life, said Haddock, who is 

one of the 14 directors on this new regional economic  



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

development board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this individual is saying that he has never seen 

something as positive as the creation of this particular authority.  

And this is an individual who's seen a lot of economic 

development initiatives in his career. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, he is seeing firsthand what the Partnership for 

Renewal and the initiative of the REDA formation is doing for 

communities like Rosetown and surrounding districts.  And what 

it is again is the concept of bringing all of our resources, pooling 

all of these resources together in a given region where these 

particular regions have compatibilities and have links together. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't only have to be restricted 

along regional economic development lines as well.  We're 

applying this particular philosophy all along.  If you take a look 

at the community governments with the ICC (intercommunity 

cooperation) program, again similar in nature -- getting 

communities to work together. 

 

Another comment that was made was by the Rosetown mayor, 

Mayor Subhas Maharaj, who told that: economic development 

has been central to our strategy for the future; your efforts will 

secure a solid future for generations to come.  And again the 

mayor is seeing some of the positive highlights and some of the 

great potential and possibilities from this particular formation. 

 

Again I want to stress that REDAs and the REDA formation is 

voluntary; it is community-driven.  The government is not in any 

way, shape, or form, going out to communities, drawing 

boundaries, or telling particular communities or stakeholders 

which ones can or cannot be in a particular REDA. 

 

This is a grass roots, it's a community-driven formation. And 

we're allowing that to happen naturally, because if you let it 

progress along developmental lines, the particular strengths, the 

particular links, the ties between communities and community 

organizations and all the rest will be identified and then they can 

form their REDA along those lines.  And we're seeing that it is 

happening. 

 

The government's participation and the contribution, the 

financial contribution to this particular initiative, Mr. Speaker 

. . . and it must be noted, because without financial assistance to 

this particular initiative it would be difficult at times to get them 

to set up all of the administrative apparatus. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan, through the Department of 

Economic Development, is funding approximately $1 billion to 

assist the development of regional economic development 

authority.  Fifty per cent of that goes towards the incorporation 

of the economic development authorities; the other 50 per cent is 

used for administration and other expenditures. 

 

I want to say that we're very, very excited and very positive that 

this formation and this development is going to continue.  In fact 

we will probably see approximately 20 regional economic 

development authorities created by the end of 1994.  And that is 

going to be a tremendous boost to regional economic 

development.  And we're excited to see that again we are 

meeting the time lines as set forth within the Partnership for 

Renewal. 

I think it's important to note and to realize that as we head 

towards a new century and as the world and the market-place get 

smaller and smaller every day, and of course globalization is a 

thing that is a reality today, and we're seeing that many, many 

major industrialized countries and even developing nations are 

using the same concept.  They're pooling their resources, they're 

cooperating much more, they're forming strategic alliances. 

 

And this is something that has not been lost on the 

Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan people.  And 

we are moving to meet that new challenge in the 21st century.  

And the formation and the development of regional economic 

development authorities is going to play a key, a key role in 

getting the Saskatchewan economy prepared for this new 

economic order in the 21st century. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, and fellow colleagues, I want to 

personally congratulate the Prince Albert Regional Economic 

Development Authority and all of the individuals who 

contributed in the development of this particular corporation, 

this particular authority.  And I want to congratulate all of the 

participating communities and I want to urge other communities 

in the Prince Albert area to look at the possibility of getting 

involved. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Rosetown individuals and 

organizations for their formation of their regional economic 

development authority and I want to congratulate all of the 

individuals who worked so hard to make this a reality. 

 

And I want to, in conclusion, say that the Government of 

Saskatchewan will be working with the other communities and 

other regions of the province to help them in the establishment 

of their own particular . . . their own regional economic 

development authorities, and I want to congratulate the 

Saskatchewan government for having had the foresight to set 

this particular initiative in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I'd like to move my motion, seconded by 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

 That this Assembly give recognition to those communities 

which are working together to address regional economic 

development in a coordinated and cooperative fashion by 

setting up regional economic development authorities such as 

the ones in Prince Albert and Rosetown. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Kinistino has moved . . . I 

believe we have a little bit of a problem here.  The member from 

Prince Albert Carlton was not in his chair at the time that the 

motion was moved, and the member needs to be in his chair in 

order to second the motion.  Will the member from Kinistino 

move his motion? 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That this Assembly give recognition to those communities 

which are working together to address regional economic 

development in a coordinated and cooperative fashion by 

setting up regional economic development authorities such 

as the ones in Prince Albert and Rosetown. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, I want to make sure the House understands I will 

not accept this as a precedent.  And in the future if the member 

is not in . . . or she is not in their place, I will not accept the 

motion.  So I will not accept it as a precedent for this House. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

great pleasure for me to second this motion put by my colleague 

from the constituency of Kinistino, in particular because it 

recognizes and congratulates the work done by a large number 

of business people in my constituency of Prince Albert and in 

the constituency of Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

The whole concept of the REDA actually starts from a grass 

roots idea, Mr. Speaker.  Many business people in the Prince 

Albert area were looking at business opportunities which they 

felt they might be able to attract or put together, but there didn't 

seem to be a way of doing it. 

 

They saw that over the years, with the NAFTA agreement 

coming in and the free trade agreement being implemented, that 

the ability of the government to deliver programs from a 

centralized level was being curtailed.  It is no longer possible for 

Crowns to act in the same way as they were acting in the '70s to 

deliver the profits available from resources to the treasury.  So 

we needed a new vehicle. 

 

And in particular what had happened is that the people of Prince 

Albert and area, as the people of Rosetown -- indeed people in 

many regions around the province -- noted that there are a lot of 

people with jobs and with ability but there aren't any jobs 

available, or few jobs available.  Certainly the number of people 

available for jobs and the skills available for jobs exceeds the 

number of jobs.  The REDAs then are an attempt to fill the void 

and to work out a system where people will actually be able to 

create their own jobs. 

 

It is very important, I think, that the REDAs, as they're known, 

remain a grass roots organization, remain controlled by the 

people in the area that have come together. 

 

It's important that they have recognition, official recognition, by 

the province and indeed by municipal governments.  And that's 

why I'm very pleased to see that in the case of Prince Albert, a 

whole series of RMs and other businesses have come together to 

give the REDA the credibility that it needs.  And I specifically 

mention the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology) Woodland Institute in Prince Albert -- it came 

into the REDA -- the Birch Hills Economic Development 

Authority; the Prince Albert Indian and Metis Friendship Centre.  

Those three in particular, Mr. Speaker, sort of exemplify a good 

cross-section of the kind of support that's needed for this type of 

an endeavour.  It involves people of all cultures; it involves 

people from organizations -- well-established 

organizations -- and involves people not only from the city of 

Prince Albert but also from the district around Prince Albert. 

 

Also included is the New Opportunities Rural Development 

Corporation which consists of Weirdale, Meath Park, 

Albertville, and the RM of Garden River, the area immediately 

north of Prince Albert in the constituency of Shellbrook-Torch 

River. 

 

It also includes the chamber of commerce, the Lakeland 

Chamber of Commerce, and a series of towns and villages 

including Weirdale, Birch Hills; some RMs, including Buckland, 

Prince Albert RM, the Birch Hills RM, Paddockwood RM, the 

Lakeland RM, and including a business company by the name of 

CLIO Communications, and also the Prince Albert Multicultural 

Council, who was was also very concerned with the search for 

jobs because one of their prime objectives is to help new 

immigrants come in and settle and take their place in the 

community and contribute to the community. 

 

I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, how this REDA fits into the 

total economic development structure, economic development 

objectives and methods being used by this government.  Just 

forming a REDA by itself, of course, won't create any jobs.  It'll 

help people get together, it's a way of people pooling their 

energies, pooling their intelligence, establishing a network so 

that they can use that to bring projects together.  But by itself, 

it's not enough.  Quite often a REDA will need a source of 

funds; quite often a REDA, as we look down the road, we can 

get a project going, will need a way of marketing those. 

 

Now if funds are available from the private sector, that is all 

well and good.  If marketing agents are able to be found or 

developed, that is all well and good, but that's not always the 

case.  Sometimes it's very difficult in a province like 

Saskatchewan, where we're away from major centres, to be able 

to sell the products which our people here are able to produce. 

 

So this government is also bringing in as a parallel to 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

the REDAs, Saskatchewan trading corporation, whose job will 

be to establish a system of exporting or selling the materials 

made by people of Saskatchewan.  Its job will not be exclusive 

to working with REDAs; it will be to help trade in anything 

that's made in Saskatchewan.  But the REDAs certainly will be 

able to make use of this corporation. 

 

We've also formed in this legislature, Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation, which will be another source of 

funding for projects.  This will give a provincial source of 

funding for projects which may not get other . . . may not have 

other money available to them, and projects which would not be 

in competition with existing businesses. 

 

I might mention that I hope that the community bonds 

corporations, which were formed under the former government, 

will also be able to participate in this entire scheme of working 

together to develop opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I think that that was a very excellent way of getting money.  And 

some of the community corporations have been able to get small 

amounts of money but have been able to lend them out to small 

businesses, and in that use the small-business sector and provide 

the small-business sector with a way of expanding.  And we all 

know that it's the small-business people that are really the place 

where businesses start, and hopefully it's the small businesses 

that eventually get to be the larger businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to mention that this concept of devolving 

authority from the provincial level to the regional level is one of 

the earmarks of this government.  We have done that in 

economic development.  My colleague before me spoke largely 

of that.  I've spoken to that as well.  We've done that in regional 

development, but we've done it in other areas as well, and we're 

prepared to do it in others areas on a voluntary basis. 

 

In the case of education, we hear people also asking for 

opportunities to organize on a regional basis where school 

boards are asking for amalgamation.  We are assisting in what 

we can in that and to remove impediments to that process.  

There are several municipalities which are looking at ways of 

saving money and asking government to help them form 

alliances and sharing services on a regional basis. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, with respect to health, we are 

devolving the authority from the Department of Health to the 

regional level where people who are closest to the delivery of a 

service will be able to organize the services and will be 

delivering the services directly.  This represents a major shift in 

power with respect to economic development and health from 

the provincial level to the regional level, something that will be 

recognized as time goes on, Mr. Speaker, as a very significant, 

very, very significant move. 

 

So I close, Mr. Speaker, by congratulating once again all of 

those people in the Prince Albert and Rosetown areas who are 

working on behalf of their neighbours, working on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan really, and looking for new ways, new 

and creative ways to get the province rolling once again, and 

through that get the economy . . . keep the economy buoyant, 

welcoming our neighbours back and our children back to 

Saskatchewan where they can make a good living and bringing 

them back to a place where they like to live. 

I heartily support this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal 

of pleasure to be able to stand today and address this motion.  I 

want to start out my remarks by reminding members of this 

House just exactly what the principles of the governing party of 

this province are, the principles of the New Democratic Party.  

Because I believe that those principles basically are the 

principles that inform this motion and that inform the whole 

notion of regional economic development authorities. 

 

The principles of the New Democratic Party, the social 

democratic movement in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, are the principles of compassion -- compassion for 

those less fortunate than us, and a determination to do something 

to help people who are less fortunate. 

 

The principle of economic and social justice.  The principle that 

says all people have the right to a slice of the good life, to a 

share of this earth.  All people have the right to be treated with 

dignity, to be treated with respect, regardless of religion, sex, 

sexual orientation, ethnic background, or whatever.  So 

economic and social justice is an important principle for the 

New Democratic Party. 

 

Another important principle for the New Democratic Party is the 

principle of community.  It is not solely a big, monolithic, 

centrist government that determines everything and determines 

what thou shalt do and shan't do.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, 

local communities need to be the local decision makers.  They 

are the ones who know best what the problems are in their 

communities and what the solutions are. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, a major, major principle of the New 

Democratic Party, of the New Democratic government of this 

province, is the principle of cooperation.  It is not solely the 

privilege or prerogative of one sector or another, of one group or 

another, to determine solutions.  We find solutions through 

sharing a collective sense of commonality, a collective sense of 

togetherness through cooperating together. 

 

So those, Mr. Speaker, are our principles:  economic and social 

justice, compassion, community, and cooperation.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, those principles are being played out, are being given 

reality, so to speak, in the whole notion of regional economic 

development authorities.  We are saying that it will not 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

solely be the centralist provincial government that decides the 

economic or social adjustment strategy for a community.  We 

are saying that communities will be actively involved in this and 

that there will be cooperation as we search for economic 

solutions in this province. 

 

As part of that, Mr. Speaker, we have been going out and 

actively encouraging communities to reach out, one to another, 

and to share their resources and to share their ideas about 

economic development. 

 

The speakers who preceded me talked very glowingly and 

justifiably about what has happened in Prince Albert and in 

Rosetown.  And I congratulate those communities for their 

excellent spirit of community and cooperation in establishing a 

regional economic development authority. 

 

I am from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and I am very pleased that 

Saskatoon right now is in a dead-heat race with another 

community, that being Swift Current, to find out which of those 

two communities will be the third and fourth area of this 

province to establish another regional economic development 

authority. 

 

I am confident, from what I know of the people of Saskatoon, 

the spirit of Saskatoon, that Saskatoon will likely win that 

particular race, and we will see the third regional economic 

development authority in this province established in Saskatoon, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1630) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Now it's taken a bit of work for Saskatoon to get 

to that point.  They started out, first of all, by having what they 

called an industrial development department in the city of 

Saskatoon.  That was back in the old days when the assumption 

was if you could establish factories on every corner, somehow 

you would establish prosperity in every home.  And so 

obviously the best agency to do it would be a department of the 

municipal government.  And so they had an industrial 

development department. 

 

After a few years, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon realized 

that that was not exactly getting them the kind of results that 

they wanted and needed, and they looked around and said, well 

what are some other models that we could try?  And they 

actually created an industrial development board.  I was very 

pleased, in the late '70s and early '80s, to be a member of that 

industrial development board. 

 

But even that, Mr. Speaker, was not good enough.  For it is quite 

clear that jobs, economic development, in this country is a little 

bit more than merely industrial development.  And so the 

industrial development board decided that what they had to do 

was change their focus and become what they called an 

economic development board. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In your gallery 

there are some fine people from the Lucky Lake area: Bev 

Kimble, the mayor of Lucky Lake; Bill Sheppard, the RM of 

Cannan; and Jim Boon, councillor for the RM of Coteau.  They 

were in to meet with me this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to tell me 

about all the things that are happening around Lucky Lake, and I 

really appreciated them.  And I would like all members of the 

House to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Resolution No. 34 -- Regional Economic Development 

Authorities 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Continuing my remarks, Mr. Speaker.  As I was 

saying, Mr. Speaker, before at least one hon. member introduced 

guests, Saskatoon created an economic development board.  But 

at that point again it was recognized that this response, while 

more in keeping with the modern needs of modern economic 

development, was still not quite an adequate response. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the city of Saskatoon embarked on what it 

considered to be a bold venture, what members of this 

government would consider to be a fairly common-sense 

venture, and that was to create an economic development 

authority independent from, separate from the city, with many, 

many collaborative ties with the business sector and with other 

groups who were very concerned about economic development 

in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

To that end, Mr. Speaker, very recently the city of Saskatoon did 

formally create the Saskatoon Economic Development 

Authority.  And it is not in City Hall; it has separate facilities 

where it is housed in a cooperative, collaborative fashion with 

the local Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce and the downtown 

business development authority called The Partnership of 

Saskatoon. 

 

Those three groups work very closely together to attract 

economic development opportunities to the city of Saskatoon.  

And as part of their work, they have developed an extremely 

good relationship with the Department of Economic 

Development for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Indeed I would venture to say that a big part of their success to 

date has been that good working relationship they have 

developed.  Because they have been able to promote and to push 

various things such as a single-window business development 

concept in the city of Saskatoon.  It's innovative, 

ground-breaking and, I would suggest, will go a long ways to 

helping 



March 15, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

Saskatoon achieve a major milestone. 

 

In Saskatoon right now we have an unemployment rate of 10.4 

per cent.  Now I consider that far too high.  I personally am in 

favour of full employment in this country and I think that is the 

only way that we will ever, for once and for all, resolve the 

problems of poverty in Canada, is by dedicating ourselves as 

politicians, as business leaders, as working men and women, 

towards a full employment policy in this country. 

 

But still, a 10.4 per cent unemployment rate in Saskatoon is 

quite a bit better than it was even a year ago before the creation 

of the economic development authority and all the good work 

that it has been able to do in cooperation with the provincial 

Department of Economic Development. 

 

The unemployment in Saskatoon is down 1.5 per cent from 

1993.  And indeed, Mr. Speaker, the unemployment in 

Saskatoon, while I still consider it to be unacceptably high, is 

actually the fourth lowest in all of Canada.  I would suggest that 

that is partially due to the excellent diversification strategies that 

the provincial government has been encouraging all across this 

province and most particularly with respect to regional economic 

development authorities. 

 

It is a misguided notion, Mr. Speaker, to suggest -- as certainly 

some of the members opposite have in their time in government, 

whether they be Liberals or Conservatives -- to suggest that only 

the private sector can create jobs or that the private sector 

creates jobs in total isolation. 

 

It is also a misguided notion, Mr. Speaker, to suggest -- as have 

some people in my party or in my movement -- to suggest that 

only the public sector can create jobs.  I take issue with people in 

the social democratic movement who suggest that and say that 

the private sector is necessarily wrong and evil. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is time that we move beyond those 

notions and recognize that the private sector cannot work in 

isolation and the public sector should not be working in isolation 

and both private and public sector should not be working at odds 

with each other. 

 

It's time to move beyond those artificial schisms and recognize 

that, in terms of economic development and employment, we're 

all in this together, Mr. Speaker, and we have to take the best of 

both sectors and work together in partnership, collaboratively, 

cooperatively, towards creating strong and healthy communities 

in this province. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the first jurisdiction in Canada to 

admit that we have to have close links between government, 

between industry or economic development, and between 

working people.  We all three groups have to work in tandem if 

we're going to have strong economic development. 

 

We're starting to see some results from that approach, Mr. 

Speaker.  Unemployment in Saskatchewan from year over year, 

February '93 to February '94, increased.  Employment increased 

by 1,000 in this province.  And in fact non-agricultural 

employment increased by 7,000 from February of '93.  So we're 

starting to see major benefits from our diversification strategy in 

this province. 

And we need to do this, Mr. Speaker, because we're moving into 

a new century.  We're seeing many changes on the global 

horizon.  We are seeing the forces of continentalism and 

globalization breathing down our backs, so to speak.  And we 

can't simply hunker down with a bunker mentality and pretend 

that change isn't going to occur.  We need to grasp the winds of 

change and to fashion new responses so that Saskatchewan will 

continue to be a place where we want to raise our children with 

dignity and respect. 

 

In order to do that, Mr. Speaker, we need to build on the 

strengths that we have in Saskatchewan.  One of the strengths 

that we have is a strongly educated group of people who have a 

lot of initiative and show a lot of effort.  People often comment 

to me, when they're talking about people from Saskatchewan, 

and they comment on how ambitious they are and how when the 

tough gets going . . . when the going gets tough Saskatchewan 

people get going. 

 

We have a lot of expertise here.  We have a good public 

education system that provides good training for people for the 

workforce.  And even more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we have 

the basis and the collective will, I would suggest, to continue to 

have a strong and a satisfied workforce in this province. 

 

As proof of that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point to the fact 

that we recently introduced in this legislature the amendments to 

The Labour Standards Act.  These are the first amendments, the 

first substantial amendments that have been introduced on that 

Act since 1977.  Now many people would have anticipated that 

when you open up a major Act like that, that it could cause a lot 

of furore and doomsaying amongst many people. 

 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that that has not been my experience.  

Talking to people who are very active in economic development 

in Saskatoon, I have been pleased, more than pleased to hear 

their positive reaction towards our proposed changes in The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

Now they may have some concerns with specifics on this small 

item or that small item, but to a person, Mr. Speaker, the people 

that I have spoken to whether they are in the mining industry, in 

the hotels industry, representing various economic development 

organizations, in the retail trade industry, or the information 

sector, all these people have said that they recognize that it is 

time to make these necessary changes.  And the reason for that, 

Mr. Speaker, is that these people recognize that you need to have 

a strong and satisfied workforce if you're going to have a strong 

and satisfied economic development force. 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1994 

I would like to at this point, to quote from an article that 

appeared in today's Leader-Post.  It was entitled: "Labor 

changes: cost/benefit analysis," and it's a commentary by Dale 

Eisler.  And he takes a look at what might happen if we had a 

right-to-work regime such as many states in the United States 

have and whether or not that is adequate for creating full 

employment and economic prosperity.  And he clearly says, no, 

that that is not the case.  He says: 

 

If all we had to do to create full employment and 

economic prosperity was to drastically cut the legislated 

costs of doing business, such as with those troublesome 

minimum wage laws and labor standards, then places like 

Arkansas would be shining models to follow. 

 

That's not the model that this government is choosing to follow, 

Mr. Speaker.  The model that we're following is a model of 

cooperation and community; a progressive model that builds on 

the strengths, the collective strengths of organizations such as 

regional economic development authorities. 

 

Mr. Eisler goes on to say -- and I think this is the most telling 

part of his whole article: 

 

. . . (that) experience shows that weak labor standards help 

to create and perpetuate poverty.  Without government 

setting minimal labor levels, poor and desperate people are 

left unprotected and merely bid down the value of their 

labor by competing against each other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- That, Mr. Speaker, is obviously not the kind of 

thing that we want to see in Saskatchewan.  Indeed that's not the 

kind of thing we want to see all across this world. 

 

We need to move beyond the easy comfort of the bunker 

mentality and we need to start thinking in more global terms, 

and we need to think, how can we create a strong, viable base 

here in Saskatchewan as we move outward to compete in the 

global economy? 

 

We will do it, Mr. Speaker, by taking a lot of little steps.  There 

is no one simple panacea for economic development in this 

province or in this country or in this world.  But a lot of little 

steps, collectively, can add up to giant progress. 

 

(1645) 

 

Some of the steps that we have taken, Mr. Speaker, have been to 

encourage value added, particularly in things like agriculture; to 

encourage diversification; to encourage proper international 

marketing; and most particularly, Mr. Speaker, speaking 

specifically to the motion before us today, to encourage 

cooperation amongst communities with respect to economic 

development. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why this government is very proud that 

people in Saskatchewan are endorsing and actively working 

towards implementing our policy of encouraging the creation of 

regional economic development authorities. 

 

Local people know the local situation, the local opportunities, 

and the local challenges.  They can work together with the 

provincial government who can provide them with a broader 

perspective in terms of some of the international marketing skills 

and opportunities that they need.  And through the combination 

of the public sector and the private sector working hand in hand, 

Mr. Speaker, we will see Saskatchewan emerge as a strong and 

viable unit in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to support the motion, moved by 

the member from Kinistino, seconded by the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton, and I think that it will be one of the very 

key building blocks for Saskatchewan as we once again regain a 

sense of prosperity and progressivity in the province.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:47 p.m. 

 


