




















































Hansard: March 23, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1097 

 March 23, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) it is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to ensure the medical needs of Rocanville 

community by allowing the Rocanville emergency unit to 

transport patients. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 

members of the Assembly here today a friend of mine seated in 

the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On March 14, the Onion Lake First Nation successfully ratified 

their band-specific and trust agreements, and on April 29 they 

will have a signing ceremony.  Mr. Vern Chocan is down here 

with other meetings and is here to visit the Assembly this 

afternoon for a half an hour or so.  And I would like all 

members to join with me in welcoming him here today.  Vern? 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

today I'd like to introduce to you and through you the grade 4 

students from St. Angela School which is in my constituency of 

Regina North West. 

 

Their teachers are Ms. Laurianne Jacques and Ms. Elaine 

Giroux Sylvestre.  The chaperons are Sean Chase and Lee 

Kosier. 

 

I'll be meeting with all 68 students and their teachers after 

question period, and I'd like to ask the House to join me in 

welcoming them today. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you I'd like 

to join my colleague across the way in welcoming the St. 

Angela grade 4 students.  In particular there is one, a Michelle 

Dalrymple, who is the daughter of the best constituency 

association president in Christendom. 

 

But I trust that the entire 68 grade 4 students from St. Angela, 

the teachers and the chaperons will enjoy the visit with the 

member opposite.  And I ask all members to again welcome 

them to the legislature, particularly Michelle Dalrymple. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

MLAs vs CBC Hockey Match 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This evening, I'm 

pleased to report that the event of the year is happening this 

evening.  This evening will be a time to see which group of 

people are the most skilled -- the followers of the news or the 

creators of the news.  The corpulent, corporate correspondents 

of the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) or the 

marvellous, masterful MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly). 

 

There's little doubt the CBC is in big trouble.  There's also, Mr. 

Speaker, little doubt about the skill level of both teams. 

 

At 10:15 tonight in the Regina North West Hockey Arena, win 

or lose, the CBC and MLAs' teams are both teamed up to help a 

very, very worthwhile Regina cause.  Chili for Children will 

benefit from the free-will donations accepted at tonight's game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, let me assure CBC 

hockey players there's nothing personal about the elbowing, 

high sticking, holding, and total humiliation that the CBC will 

be feeling tonight.  It is wonderful that they are willing to 

subject themselves to that and suffer so greatly so that Chili for 

Children will win.  I hope to see you at the event of the year in 

the Regina North West Arena, 10:15 this evening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sponsorship of Family from Eritrea 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to tell a story 

about my home town and its neighbour town which gives 

visible and compassionate substance to our statements against 

racism.  The towns of Milestone and Lang, through the United 

Church, have opened their arms to the Aman family from 

Eritrea. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, Eritrea was trapped in a long, 

terrible civil war.  Like millions of people around the world, the 

Ahmends were caught in the violence and had to escape to save 

their lives.  It is a sad comment to make, but they were lucky to 

become refugees rather than victims.  Their journey took them 

from Eritrea to the Sudan, to Syria, to Turkey, to Greece, and to 

Milestone.  And there is a dramatic story connected to each leg 

of their flight.  Along the way, twin girls were born, Sophia and 

Maria.  There is a story of terror, hardship, courage, and finally 

of happiness. 

 

The people of Lang and Milestone have combined to sponsor 

the family, to provide shelter and support, training through the 

Open Door Society, and friendship to the Aman family.  They 

are rapidly becoming members of their extended Canadian 

family right here in Saskatchewan.  While I was driving 

Mohammed to work today, he told me he has been offered a 

full-time job with Dutch enterprises when his work training is 

now complete.  That's good news. 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

I welcome Mohammed, Elsa, Sophia, and Maria, and I'm proud 

of my community and my province for their generosity in both 

goods and spirit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Finance Seminars 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in 

recognition of Agriculture Week in Saskatchewan, I would like 

to announce that throughout the province seminars are being 

held for farm people on farm finance law.  These seminars will 

help us, as farmers, to understand better our requirements and 

our rights and responsibilities in dealing with our finances. 

 

The farm people on farm finance seminars will cover a variety 

of topics in the area of farm finance law.  They will include the 

legal rights and obligations, preclosures, garnishees, farm 

tenure, and The Farm Security Act, bankruptcy, mediation, and 

negotiation with the lenders. 

 

In these tough economic times, we need to know our legal 

rights and obligations.  It is important because farm 

management decisions have legal implications.  Through these 

seminars we, the agriculture community, have a chance to 

better our knowledge on these issues. 

 

These seminars are open to the farming public to update 

themselves on the legal issues of financing.  And I urge people 

who are interested to look into their local papers for specific 

dates and locations. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan Awards 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would 

like to honour and congratulate the recent winners of the 5th 

annual TISASK (Tourism Industry Association of 

Saskatchewan) tourism awards.  The event, which attracted 

over 300 people to the Delta Bessborough in Saskatoon, was a 

night to let the Saskatchewan tourism industry shine. 

 

There were 14 awards with a wide range of categories from 

individuals to business to community organizations. 

 

The big winners of the night were Saskatoon tourism operators 

who captured seven of the awards.  The President's Award of 

Merit went to George Piotto, the long-time manager of the 

Travelodge.  Wanuskewin Indian Heritage Inc. won the newly 

implemented First Nations and Metis Peoples Culture Award 

sponsored by the Peace Hill Trust; WIHI represents all cultures 

in Saskatchewan and all 72 bands. 

 

Saskatoon's downtown organization, The 

Partnership, won the Spirit of Saskatchewan award for its 

ambitious hosting of the Great Northern River Roar.  The Great 

Western Brewing Company received the Corporate Tourism 

Partner Award, largely for their work in promoting its product 

via the Destination Saskatchewan campaign in conjunction 

with TISASK. 

 

The Western Development Museums were winners of the Gil 

Carduner Tourism Business Marketing Award; C95-FM along 

with its Regina affiliate Z99-FM shared the Saskatchewan 

Media Award; and the Tourism Rookie of the Year went to the 

operators of the Saskatoon Berry Farm. 

 

Other winners included the Prince Albert Tourism and 

Convention Bureau, Jim McKenzie of Jim Champs in 

Nistowiak Falls, Betty Bahuis of La Ronge, the city of 

Weyburn . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has run out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Multicultural Week 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As you are 

aware March 21st to March 25th is Multicultural Week in 

Saskatchewan.  This very important week stresses the need for 

people of all cultures to join together in harmony.  This is a 

time when people of all cultures should learn, understand, and 

become involved with other cultures as well as their own. 

 

In Saskatchewan we take Multicultural Week very seriously.  

In fact, a good many events are taking place around this great 

province this week.  In the way of education, we have a variety 

of events, lectures, and contests. 

 

In Yorkton, an essay contest was held for children's grade 7 to 

grade 9 with the theme, If You Don't Stop Racism, Who Will?  

A racism in the workplace symposium was held at the City Hall 

Forum in Regina, just to name a couple of events. 

 

Other attractions such as displays, art, and cuisine from all over 

the world play a large role in Multicultural Week -- small 

undertakings in an effort to bring about understanding for each 

of us.  I believe that racial discrimination, Mr. Speaker, cripples 

and limits the freedoms and opportunities of us all. 

 

So I ask all members of this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan to join with me to reaffirm our commitment to a 

society free of racial discrimination, a society whose citizens of 

every conceivable racial heritage have the opportunity to make 

the most of their gifts and their strengths as full members of our 

society.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

Judges' Salaries Recommendations 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, 

yesterday you stood before your hon. colleagues on both sides 

of this Assembly and issued a statement which indicated that 

your government was about to retroactively repeal legislation, 

break a legal contract, and overturn a legally binding decision 

by an independent panel. 

 

Mr. Minister, the issue today is not the decision made by that 

panel. The issue is the conduct of the highest officer of the law 

in this province.  Mr. Minister, you claimed in your statement 

yesterday that, and I quote: 

 

 . . . it is our view that the use of binding arbitration for 

determining compensation in situations like these must be 

reconsidered. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly why you have so 

drastically changed that opinion?  Can you tell us why you 

have broken your word? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, it ought to be obvious to all members of the 

House, including the member from Moosomin, as to why we 

would have serious second thoughts about this kind of process.  

This process produced a result with which we cannot live.  It 

produced a result of 24 per cent to a relatively high-salaried 

group of people and we just simply can't live with that.  It 

would be irresponsible for us to do that, particularly in light of 

the serious fiscal situation which the government faces.  It 

presented us with a proposal that was simply not acceptable, 

and that led us to the decision which I announced yesterday, 

which I think is the right decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, when you introduced this legislation last year, you 

had a great deal of confidence and pride in the process you 

were about to embark on. 

 

In your second reading speech on May 25, '93, you said that 

this process must be put in place, that the issue of judges' salary 

must be completely independent of political expediency. 

 

In fact you said that the independence of the panel must be 

guaranteed because the Supreme Court of Canada demands it.  

In an eloquent defence of this position you quoted from the 

Supreme Court which said: 

 

 The essence of . . . (judicial independence) is that the right to 

salary and pension should be established by law and not be 

subject to arbitrary interference by the Executive in a manner 

that could affect judicial independence. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you agree that your actions represent an 

arbitrary interference by your 

government and that you have destroyed the judicial 

independence you had held so dear and had sworn to uphold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member is seriously 

suggesting that the government should pay this award of 24 per 

cent, then I wish the member would simply say so and not 

come at it in such a sideways fashion.  Are you in favour of it 

or not?  We are not. 

 

Now the member mentions the second reading speech that I 

made a little less than a year ago.  And certainly that is a 

desirable goal to have achieved and we accepted that notion.  It 

is certainly in pursuance of a very high respect for the doctrine 

of judicial independence which is an important doctrine. 

 

I would remind the member though that every jurisdiction in 

Canada, every jurisdication in Canada keeps unto the 

government a decision about how much judges shall be paid 

and what their benefits shall be.  Many of them have a process 

which is not binding.  We tried the binding process in 

pursuance of the goal of judicial independence and it simply 

didn't work.  And so we make the statement that we made 

yesterday. 

 

But I do say if the member is arguing we should pay 24 per 

cent, let's be very clear about it and say so in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Today the 

judges of the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan have responded 

to your actions.  In their statement, they say that the issue, and I 

quote: 

 

 . . . involves two fundamental principles:  Is the government 

itself subject to law, and secondly, whether courts are 

independent and separate from the government.  If not the 

courts, who is there to protect the public and individuals from 

the power of government? 

 

Mr. Minister, we have seen your government break contract 

after contract, rewrite and change legislation like they were 

rules to Monopoly, confiscate the rights of individuals to 

redress in the courts, and ignore fundamental principles of law 

and democracy.  Mr. Minister, will you answer the judges' 

question: who -- if not the courts -- is to protect the public and 

individuals from the power of your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, it is implicit in the 

member's question that he -- and I presume he's speaking on 

behalf of his colleagues -- are arguing that we should pay the 

award, and if that's his position, I wish he had the courage to 

just stand up and say so, so it would be clear.  So it would be 

clear. 

 

Every government is subject to the law.  The rule of law 

governs all of us.  But there are some situations, and this is one 

of them, in which we simply can't stand by and allow this to 

happen.  It is just not consistent with 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

what we're trying to do in this province.  The member knows 

that. 

 

We have fashioned a consensus in this province around the 

necessity for restraint.  A lot of people have made a lot of 

sacrifices, and they've made them willingly, if not gladly, in 

pursuance of this objective of getting the fiscal affairs of this 

province back on track.  Judges must expect to do the same 

thing. 

 

And so the theory, the theoretical notion, which are very 

important ideas of the independence of the judiciary and those . 

. . and what flows from that simply has to give way to the fiscal 

realities of Saskatchewan.  And I would hope that the member 

would know that and not argue that the judges should receive a 

24 per cent increase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

you have thrown away valid legislation, you have broken the 

law, you have breached a contract, and you have broken your 

word.  The judges put it very succinctly.  Today they said, and I 

quote: 

 

 Contracts and laws appear to be of no effect if the 

government decides that they no longer suit their own 

purposes.  The whole principle of government under the rule of 

law, in our view, has been sacrificed on the altar of political 

expediency. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that not what this is?  Are you saying that you 

and your government are no longer subject to the laws of this 

province and country?  Are you, Mr. Minister, above the law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now that is the fourth question that the 

member has asked, Mr. Speaker, and each one of them carries 

with it the implication that the members opposite favour this 24 

per cent increase.  And if he doesn't stand up and deny that, 

we're all entitled to assume that that is their position. 

 

There's no secret here about why we've done what we did.  

We've nailed our colours right up there on the masthead and we 

did that after having paid great attention to the fundamental 

questions raised by the judges and raised by the members 

opposite. 

 

These are important principles, but they must give way to the 

dreadful situation in which this government and this province 

finds itself.  The consensus that we have managed to fashion 

around the principle of restraint is too important to risk, too 

important to throw away in a situation like this, and so with 

great difficulty and with a great deal of regret we have come to 

the decision we've come to.  We simply can't pay it. 

 

Now stand up, Mr. Member, and tell us whether you favour 

paying it or not.  And if you don't say anything, we're entitled 

to assume that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, a final question to the minister on 

this series.  Mr. Minister, you have broken the law; make no 

doubt about it.  The judges said that and I quote: 

 

 This is not a matter of the government changing a law, this is 

a matter of the government, having clearly broken the law, now 

passing another law trying to justify their breach. 

 

And I'm sure that sounds awfully familiar to the former 

minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, you response has been -- there is law and there is 

justice.  Mr. Minister, this is an unbelievable thing for the 

Attorney General of the province of Saskatchewan to say. 

 

We all know who the arbiters of the law are.  They are and live 

within the legal system.  Are you now saying you and your 

government are above that system?  Mr. Minister, has the 

Premier now appointed you the sole determiner of who is just 

in this society? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, at least I got an 

answer to my question.  Because I said in my last answer that if 

he didn't address this question of their position we would all be 

entitled to assume that the opposition favours the increase. 

 

I used the term "justice" yesterday because when I used that 

term I had in mind a lot of people who have made sacrifices: 

single moms, disadvantaged children, unemployed workers, 

youth of all kind, seniors, name it -- everybody has shouldered 

their share of the burden.  And it was in that sense, as the 

House will know, that I used the term "justice."  It is simple, 

human justice.  We cannot ask those people who have 

sacrificed so much to bear the burden of this award.  We wish it 

were otherwise, but it is not.  Fiscal reality is fiscal reality.  We 

had no choice.  But it is very interesting to know what the 

position of the opposition is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, when you appointed 

your friend to the position of Minister of Justice, he swore the 

following oath: 

 

 I, 

 do swear that I will be faithful and true and bear true 

allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her 

heirs and successors according to law. 

 

Mr. Premier, this province's judges are saying that your 

government and in particular your Minister of Justice has 

violated the law in direct contravention of his sworn oath.  Mr. 

Premier, your minister has broken his solemn oath by breaking 

the law.  How can you allow your Minister of Justice to violate 

his own law 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

and his oath of office?  How is that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that's an interesting tactic, Mr. 

Speaker.  We're now going to try and personalize the whole 

issue and try and make me the issue.  With every deference to 

the Leader of the Opposition, I am not the issue.  No single 

person is the issue.  The issue is simply whether or not the 

Government of Saskatchewan can pay to the Provincial Court 

judges of this province a wage increase of 24 per cent.  The 

answer, we say, is no.  The opposition apparently says yes. 

 

But whatever one may think of that issue, one thing is cut clear, 

and that is that I personally am not the issue.  Now you can try 

that tack if you like, but the Saskatchewan people are going to 

judge this issue in terms of whether or not this government 

should pay 24 per cent to judges.  It's as simple as that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I have 

here The Department of Justice Act.  Section 9 of that Act is a 

definition of the duties of the Minister of Justice.  Section 9(b), 

and I quote: 

 

 The minister shall: 

 

 see that the administration of public affairs is in accordance 

with the law; 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, the Provincial Court judges, men and 

women who know a little something about the law in this 

province, say that your Minister of Justice has clearly broken 

the law.  That contravenes the legal definition of his duties in 

The Department of Justice Act. 

 

What steps, Mr. Premier, do you plan to take against your 

minister for breaking the provisions of The Department of 

Justice Act? Or are you going to allow him simply to change 

that Act retroactively as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this gets more 

absurd all the time.  We announced clearly yesterday what we 

were going to do as a government and why we were going to 

do it.  The simple issue is whether or not you accept 24 per 

cent.  If you do -- and apparently that's the position of the 

opposition -- then you simply pay it.  If you don't, if you don't 

accept the 24 per cent, then you've got only one choice, and 

that is to change the law.  There is no other mechanism for 

doing it.  You just can't put your hands in your pockets and say, 

I ain't payin'.  You've got to go beyond that and you've got to 

change the law. 

 

Now how in the world that necessity leads you to a position 

where the member would ask the question he's just asked, I 

can't imagine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, in 

reading through the minister's duties in The Department of 

Justice Act, it's amazing how often 

the word law keeps popping up.  It gives you the impression 

that law is something that should be important to the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

But yesterday your minister told us, Mr. Speaker, that law and 

justice were two different things, and that he has the solemn 

duty to determine which laws he liked and then break those 

laws that he didn't like. 

 

It's funny, Mr. Premier, that I don't see that duty anywhere in 

The Department of Justice Act.  It just says things like, the 

minister should work in accordance with the law, advise the 

Crown on the law, and carry out his duties assigned by law.  It 

keeps talking about the law, Mr. Premier, and your minister has 

broken the law. 

 

Mr. Premier, do you think it is right for the Minister of Justice 

to break the law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is another one of 

those interesting situations where the opposition quite 

obviously don't listen to the answer.  Now I had expected more 

of my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, for whom I have a 

great deal of respect.  I would have expected him not to feel it 

necessary to work his way through to the bottom of that page of 

questions. 

 

The answer is simply this, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Member.  The 

issue is whether or not you're going to pay the 24 per cent.  If 

you're going to pay it, you pay it.  If you're not going to pay it 

-- and we can't -- then you have to change the law.  You have to 

change the law.  And the responsible minister is going to stand 

in this House and make the statement that the law is going to be 

changed, as I did yesterday.  That's the issue, Mr. Member.  

Now let's get real about this and let's not try to drag in red 

herrings that will somehow obscure the fact that it's the 24 per 

cent that we're talking about, not any individual. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you 

know, you know that the reason that these questions must be 

asked is because people in our society expect the Minister of 

Justice to uphold the law.  Your minister has sworn to carry out 

the oath of his office according to the law.  The legal definition 

of his cabinet post is to administer the public affairs in 

accordance with the law; the highest law officer in the land -- 

the protector of the rule of law by your government. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, as a former attorney general yourself and 

someone who knows that the position means you must obey the 

law, that someone in the position of attorney general is not 

above the law, would it not be reasonable, sir, that if that 

minister breaks the law he should and must resign, Mr. 

Premier?  Your Minister of Justice has broken the law, even 

though he doesn't think so.  I ask you, sir, as a former attorney 

general of this province, to do the right thing and ask for his 

resignation.  Would you do that, sir? 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition with a perfectly straight face, has ignored all of the 

answers and continues to ask versions of the same question to 

an empty chair. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think the Minister of 

Justice knows that that comment is out of order and he should 

refrain from . . . Order, order. 

 

I can't remember talking to the Government House Leader and 

if he has a point of order he should raise it after question 

period. 

 

Order.  I don't want to warn the Government House Leader 

again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'll say to the Leader of the 

Opposition with all of the kindness and the consideration that 

I'm capable of mustering in these circumstances, but with all 

respect I am hardly the issue.  I am a member of the 

government and a member of the caucus who have 

responsibilities to deal with the particular Act in question. 

 

The issue here, and I repeat this for I think the eighth time in 

this question period, is the 24 per cent.  You're either in favour 

of paying it or you're not.  If you're not, you've got to change 

the law.  If you're not, you're not going to follow the procedure 

that we set down in this House a year ago -- a year ago. 

 

We have decided that we can't pay the 24 per cent.  We came to 

that decision with difficulty and with regret, but reality dictates 

that we just can't do it.  And with that decision there is only one 

procedure available, and that is to change the law under which 

that award was given.  We wish there were another way.  There 

is not.  And so we will do what we have to do. 

 

And I challenge again the opposition to stand up and make their 

position known on this crucial issue of the 24 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower District Office Closures 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is directed at the minister in charge of SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Minister, a number of SaskPower district offices are slated 

for closure at the end of this month.  In Ponteix this will result 

in five jobs being eliminated.  When the Ponteix hospital was 

converted to a wellness centre, 23 people lost their jobs.  

Another 20 jobs will be lost shortly when the community's 

nursing home closes.  Collectively, these positions represent 

one-third of Ponteix's total workforce. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you acknowledge the economic impact your 

decisions are having on rural communities?  And will you 

please take action to correct this before more damage is done? 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to thank the hon. member for his 

question and I will take that under advisement.  The 

government is currently having a look at some of the issues 

which he brings up and we appreciate the concerns that exist in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank 

the minister for that response and can I have assurance in 

writing that the Ponteix office will then be left open and not 

closed as of March 31? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, you can't have that assurance. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

many communities depend on the services provided out of the 

SaskPower office in Ponteix.  The people of Glentworth, 

Ferland, Mankota, Aneroid, Hazenmore, Kincaid, Meyronne, 

Glenbain, Vanguard, Neville, Pambrun, Val Marie, Cadillac, 

they also rely on this office. 

 

Mr. Minister, a winter power failure can be much more than a 

minor inconvenience.  It can become a genuine emergency.  

Given the fact that response times for SaskPower crews could 

be now as much as 2 or 3 hours, can you explain what criteria 

you have established to have an adequate level of service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The government is currently looking at 

the criteria for level of service.  And that's why, as I said to the 

member in my opening statement to his question, is that the 

government is reviewing this situation.  And we're not about to 

stand by as a government and allow services to be degraded 

and not provide that service just so some offices could possibly 

be closed in areas.  So the level of service is very important to 

this government and the decision will be made very soon.  And 

we want to assure the public, through the member's question, 

that we have no intention of making sure that Saskatchewan 

people don't have an adequate level of service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

this decision to close the office is only one week away.  And 

today you tell me you can't give the Ponteix people the 

assurance that their jobs won't be lost. 

 

Mr. Minister, other communities have also expressed concerns 

about the loss of their SaskPower district offices.  A number of 

people in the community of Punnichy have signed a petition 

protesting a move.  This petition is apparently in the hands of 

the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood who has chosen 

not to bring it forward in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is it that these people are continually paying 

more for utility service yet they are receiving less and less 

service for their money? 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the member raises many questions 

in his preamble as well his statement.  I want to make it very 

clear that the proposal that was given to me does not eliminate 

any jobs because of the Ponteix situation.  There may be 

vacancies there that won't be refilled but there are no jobs ever 

contemplated lost out of the Ponteix office.  I want to assure the 

member of that.  So let's set the record very straight there. 

 

In terms of the member representing the Punnichy area, the 

member representing the Punnichy area represents his area very 

well and I don't know why the member opposite would make 

that kind of an accusation.  I'm sure that the member from that 

constituency feels fully and freely to come to me with issues of 

concern of his constituency.  And I'm sure that he would do 

that if he was in possession of such a petition.  And although 

the member says there's a week left, I'm not about to rush into 

making a hasty decision during question period here.  What I 

can assure the hon. member is, we will provide adequate 

service to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

people of Ponteix are saying you did rush in and make a hasty 

decision.  They're  telling us that the Ponteix office will be 

closed March 31.  And now you have said two things:  firstly, 

you have said you can't guarantee them or you can't assure the 

Assembly today that the office will be left open; and the next 

question you say, no jobs are going to be lost; the Ponteix 

office isn't going to be closed. 

 

Now can you give us a very clear understanding what will 

happen to the SaskPower office in the community of Ponteix? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, I can't give the hon. member that 

assurance here in the House this afternoon.  But I would ask the 

hon. member, do you want, based on the information that was 

given to me by SaskPower, what the decision would be on the 

Ponteix office?  If you're asking me to give that to you today, 

the answer should be very clear to you.  And if you push me for 

that answer, I could possibly give it to you in the House here 

this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: --  Before orders of the day, I wish to make a 

Speaker's statement.  Yesterday the member for Rosthern 

raised a point of order to question the role of the Chair in 

dealing with the discussion of sub judice matters, particularly 

in respect to questions asked by the member from Moosomin 

during oral question period on Monday, March 21. 

 

On that occasion I cautioned the member from 

Moosomin several times that in putting his supplementary 

questions to the Minister of Justice about the White Bear casino 

he must refrain from asking questions relating to court 

proceedings. 

 

The Minister of Justice had already declined to answer the first 

question which the member had put to him on the White Bear 

casino, stating that he could not answer the question 

considering that this matter is currently before the courts. 

 

My interventions followed when the member from Moosomin 

made it clear that he was insistent in putting his question to the 

minister in a violation of the sub judice convention.  It has long 

been the practice of this Assembly that matters before the 

courts are not to be discussed or debated by members.  The 

purpose of this convention is to protect the parties involved in 

the court action and to maintain respect between the legislative 

and judicial branches of government. 

 

I don't believe any member of this Assembly has any doubt 

about the objective of the sub judice convention and the need to 

observe it.  However the member for Rosthern raised a point of 

order yesterday because he felt the Chair had acted 

precipitously in intervening as I did. 

 

To support his case he referred to citation 323 on page 97 of 

Beauchesne's Rules and Forms, 6th Edition, and I quote: 

 

 Questions of order are decided only when they arise and not 

in anticipation. 

 

Further, the member stated the position that with respect to 

question period, and I quote: 

 

 . . . it's the responsibility of the minister to make the decision 

to answer or not to answer a particular question . . . 

 

While I can understand the member's position and generally 

sympathize with it, the Chair has procedural responsibilities 

that it must maintain.  Indeed I would say that the member's 

reference to Beauchesne is fitting.  Citation 323 does indeed 

state that questions of order cannot be decided in anticipation 

of their occurrence.  And it goes on to state that, and I quote: 

 

 The Speaker is bound to call attention immediately to an 

irregularity in debate or procedure and not wait (and not wait) 

for the interposition of a Member. 

 

That is exactly what happened last Monday.  In response to the 

member for Moosomin, the Minister of Justice explained that 

he could not answer the question because it involved evidence 

before the courts. 

 

In some instances the Chair is not aware of the status of a 

matter before the courts and cannot intervene immediately.  But 

on this occasion, the current nature of the case was clear.  

Indeed the member for Moosomin had acknowledged the status 

of the court 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

case in his preamble, which I quote: 

 

. . . last week in Carlyle Provincial Court, Chief Bernie 

Shepherd testified . . . 

 

And I quote.  The matter was also reported in the press.  It is 

also very clear in this case that comment by the Minister of 

Justice could clearly prejudice the outcome of the trial. 

 

My interventions were to warn the member that the Chair 

would not accept a breach of the sub judice convention. 

 

Contrary to what the member for Rosthern claimed, the 

Speaker did not anticipate any point of order.  Rather I took 

action to call attention to an irregular proceeding, as I am 

bound to do according to citation 323 of Beauchesne's.  The 

fact that the Speaker has an obligation and the authority to 

intervene in matters of sub judice is expressed by rulings of the 

Chair. 

 

On March 1, 1967, the Speaker stated that it is the role of the 

Chair to determine whether it is proper for members to make 

reference to matters before the court and whether the sub judice 

convention should be applied. 

 

On May 9, 1978, the Speaker ruled that the responsibility for 

upholding the sub judice convention was on the members' 

shoulders with, and I quote: 

 

the final discretion left up to the Speaker. 

 

In regard to question period, the Speaker ruled as follows, and I 

quote: 

 

I remind all members that during the oral question period, 

the minister of course has the right to refuse an answer on 

the grounds that the matter is or is about to be before the 

courts.  And I also reserve the right of the Chair to rule out 

references which I feel may constitute a real and 

substantial danger of prejudice to the pending trial of a 

case. 

 

(1415) 

 

In support of his claims regarding the application of the sub 

judice convention in this Assembly, the member for Rosthern 

referred to events that had occurred in late May, 1989: the first 

concerned the present Minister of Justice; and the second, the 

current Minister of Energy.  Both involve the issue of 

GigaText.  As the member correctly pointed out yesterday, in 

both instances, and I quote: 

 

the opposition member and the minister answering were 

both fully aware that the matter was before the courts. 

 

Moreover, and this is the member's principal point on those two 

occasions, and I quote: at no time was there any interruption or 

intervention from the Speaker. 

The member for Rosthern asserts that these events prove that 

the members can put questions on an issue which may be 

before the court.  The member is not entirely correct.  The sub 

judice convention, as it pertains to this Assembly, applies to 

courts that have relevant jurisdiction in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the case referred to by the member from Rosthern, the court 

case has involved courts of another province, specifically, 

Quebec.  There was little risk that the comments made in the 

Assembly would have prejudiced the court proceedings in 

Montreal. 

 

As well, in that case it is not apparent that a minister refused to 

answer on the grounds of the sub judice convention.  The 

events of 1989 did not violate the sub judice convention nor 

were they inconsistent with the actions I took on Monday.  The 

member does not have a valid point of order.  None the less, I 

appreciate the opportunity afforded me to explain further the 

role of the Chair and the application of the sub judice 

convention. 

 

I take great exception to the member's remarks, from Rosthern, 

and I ask the member to withdraw the statement and to 

apologize to the Chair.  I ask the member from Rosthern to 

withdraw the statement, that the minister wrote the Speaker's 

statement that I made today. And I ask the member from 

Rosthern to withdraw the statement and apologize to the Chair. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the statement.  I was 

obviously wrong, and I apologize. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act respecting Certified General 

Accountants 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the minister to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much.  Sitting next 

to me is the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright.  On my 

left is the Provincial Comptroller, Gerry Kraus.  Behind me is 

Susan Amrud, Crown solicitor from the Department of Justice.  

And at the back is Elaine Wood, analyst in the Provincial 

Comptroller's division. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

we have generally no objections to the Bill.  In fact, in our 

discussions with the certified general accountants, that they 

have been involved with the process, and I think that's a good 

idea. 

 

However, I just have some questions that I think we need to 

visit about.  And the first one deals with an item under one of 

the clauses that deals with the method of 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

appointment for board members.  And is this the normal 

method that we appoint board members for professionally 

recognized bodies?  Is this the same format that is used? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, it is. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under these recommendations the Lieutenant 

Governor, which is the cabinet, are assigned the responsibility 

of providing that the recommendation by the association, these 

members are appointed by Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

What are the circumstances that you would see where you 

would not go along with the recommendations of the certified 

general accountants?  And if there aren't, if they are solely upon 

their recommendations that you appoint these people, would 

you indicate that to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, there would be no 

circumstances in which we would not accept the appointment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Another question regarding the board.  In 

section no. 8(4) it talks about the individual not being able to be 

a part of the board if he no longer is a resident. 

 

Would you clarify the requirements for residency.  For 

example, a CGA (certified general accountant) be eligible to sit 

on the board if he maintain an active practice and a nominal 

residence in the province but has his usual residence outside the 

province. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that provision only 

applies to the government appointees and it's because they're 

representing the Government of Saskatchewan as appointees. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the certified general accountants' board of 

directors could have its appointments from outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan sitting on the board.  Do I take that 

as your indirect response? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is 

all appointees have to be residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that your inference in an indirect way 

earlier to the question was not quite accurate, and each person 

will have to live in the province in order to be on the board of 

directors.  Is that fair? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that's right.  You 

were talking about one section and the other appointees are 

under the other section.  But what I said about the one section 

applies to both sections. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Item no. 14(2)(o) says: 

 

establishing any committees that the board considers 

necessary and prescribing the manner of election or 

appointment of committee members. 

And this is the administrative laws pursuant to section 14 . . . or 

section 13, pardon me. 

 

Could you clarify this clause and explain its purpose.  The 

wording is somewhat confusing.  Would you mind doing that 

for me. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That provision establishes the right 

of the board or the association to establish subcommittees and 

to also establish the rules by which people are chosen for those 

subcommittees. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Clause no. 15, Madam Minister: 

 

The association shall file with the minister two copies, 

certified by the secretary to be true copies of: 

 

(the) regulatory bylaws; and 

 

any amendment to a regulatory bylaw together with two 

certified copies of the bylaw to which the amendment 

relates. 

 

Would the minister be able to clarify this clause and give 

examples of situations under which she would not approve 

by-laws?  Are there any circumstances that there are where you 

would not say yes, these by-laws are approved by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council?  And if you would be 

approving them anyway, why not state that in the legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the answer 

that I would give the member opposite is by-laws would not be 

approved if for some reason the by-laws exceeded the powers 

that the body had.  But under other circumstances the by-laws 

would be approved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If, for example then, Madam Minister, the 

by-law dealt with an infringement on the chartered accountants, 

provisions in their Act, or another Act in a similar kind of a 

profession, if those by-laws infringe on that other Act, they will 

not be passed. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a fair 

representation of the point that I was making. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  In section 25(8), is it normal for the 

Crown to grant professional societies the right of subpoena? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is 

yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And for what purpose would the government 

allow the body to subpoena a witness?  And would you give me 

kind of a definition or a situation where they would be required 

to do that or ask if they would be saying to a person in a 

disciplinary function that he should have a subpoena to the 

court or to this board? 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, an example would 

be, for a discipline hearing, witnesses could be subpoenaed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under 26(1): 

 

 Where the discipline committee finds a member guilty of 

professional misconduct or professional incompetence, it may 

make one or more of the following orders: 

 

Just to clarify, is it safe to assume that the orders allowed under 

this provision are not legally binding except as they relate to 

the person's ability to retain professional certification? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And what kind of opportunity is there to 

prevent a frivolous action coming forward?  Is there some 

response to the person that brings a frivolous action against an 

individual? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes there is.  There's 

an investigation first, and then the investigation will determine 

whether there's sufficient evidence to proceed to a hearing. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And if it's found to be frivolous, is there some 

response to the individual that brings a frivolous action forward 

to the board? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is there is 

no penalty against the complainant.  All that occurs is that the 

action has to be dropped. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If there is a frivolous action brought forward, 

would the person who the action is being brought against, 

would that person have a reason under a professional basis to 

bring some sort of recommendation to the board for action 

against that individual who brought a frivolous action against a 

person? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that avenue would be 

open if the person was another member. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In section 47 which says: 

 

 The association shall file an annual report with the minister 

in the form, with the contents and in the time prescribed by the 

minister. 

 

Is there a standard and prescribed format that you have for the 

association to bring its report to the minister?  If so, what is it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the government is 

developing guidelines to assist organizations like this in the 

establishment of their annual statements and reports. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that there are many associations -- we 

have the chiropractors coming up, 

the physiotherapists, and all of these.  Do you perceive that it 

can take exactly the same format for all of them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we're working to 

standardize the format. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And is there consultation with the association 

in doing that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes there is. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I'd like to ask the minister to 

introduce any new officials that may have joined us here. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again 

we have the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright, next to 

me.  Behind John is Len Rog, assistance deputy minister of 

Finance, and next to Len and behind me is Doug Lambert, 

director, revenue programs branch.  And at the back we have 

Mr. Rob Dobson, legal analyst in the revenue division. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I took the liberty 

of sending this Bill to a number of associations, Madam 

Minister, and I got support from the majority of them on their 

behalf, although they did take the time to say that there are 

some other things that we would like you to talk about.  And 

some had to do with insurance and some had to do with other 

statutes like The Education Act and The Tobacco Tax Act, and 

they took the liberty of doing that as well. 

 

But I do have some questions regarding this Bill.  And I 

understand this Bill is supposed to aid Saskatchewan's trucking 

industry.  Could you please outline how this would be an asset 

to them?  Would you explain that to us, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I'd be pleased to 

answer that question.  What this Bill does is it simplifies the 

process that truckers have to go through in order to report their 

fuel taxes.  There are 350 truckers in the province who will 

benefit from this change.  And I think it's part of our broader 

commitment to business to try to get rid of unnecessary 

regulation, unnecessary red tape, and make their lives easier for 

them by simplifying the process.  And that's essentially what 

this does. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you explain the process to the House 

for me, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What occurs is that truckers register 

with the government.  The cost is a $65 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

registration fee and a $2 decal fee.  Then they do not have to 

keep track of the taxes they owe to the many jurisdictions that 

they might travel through.  They report to us quarterly, we keep 

track of all of those details, and it means a lot less paperwork 

and time for the truckers involved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How does the process of remission of the tax 

occur?  That's kind of where I was leading to.  The process that 

they have to substantiate to the Department of Finance the 

miles that they drive within the framework of the province, and 

then they submit and remit back to the province those volumes 

of dollars in taxes.  And if there is anything more than that, I'd 

like you to explain that as well. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

has a good understanding of what the Bill does.  They remit 

everything to us and then we distribute it to the jurisdictions 

that need to be paid for the fuel tax. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So if trucker A fills up in Regina, he can fill 

up his whole fuel tank.  There will be no tax collected on the 

basis that the fuel is purchased here.  And if he drives into 

Manitoba, the tax will be paid and distributed by you as a part 

of the distribution to that jurisdiction for the volume of tax 

dollars.  Do I have that correct or is it different than that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no, that's not exactly 

correct.  He or she pays the tax in the jurisdiction in which he 

or she is driving the truck.  But the requirement is that the 

trucker has to pay the amount of tax equivalent to the driving 

done in that province.  So there is obviously often an imbalance 

where you actually are purchasing, say more fuel in this 

jurisdiction and paying more tax in this jurisdiction than you're 

actually driving in this jurisdiction. 

 

So it becomes a very time-consuming and bothersome task to 

keep track of how many miles you drove in that particular 

jurisdiction, how much tax did you pay in that jurisdiction.  So 

they pay the tax at the time but it's left to the government to 

sort out the distribution after the fact rather than the trucker 

having to do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then how do you assess how many miles 

have been driven and how much fuel has been consumed in 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba?  Manitoba will be doing the same 

thing for you.  Now how do you assess that volume of tax 

dollars that will accrue to you, let's say on a Manitoba truck 

that came through Saskatchewan and had the tax paid in 

Manitoba and had to deliver tax in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, when they 

report to us they have a log of their journeys so that we know 

the miles and then they also have the receipts of the tax 

purchased in that jurisdiction.  So in a sense what they're doing 

is they're passing all of their information on to us and we are 

dealing with the other jurisdictions, and I think doing a very 

important job of cutting the red tape involved and making it 

easier for that business to operate in our province. 

Mr. Martens: -- Does this same rule apply to Manitoba and 

Alberta and Ontario?  Is this an interprovincial agreement, and 

if so, do they all do the same?  I'd like to know that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- It applies only in member 

jurisdictions.  So that in the case of Alberta, yes, it would apply 

in Alberta because Alberta is a member.  In the case of 

Manitoba, it would not apply in Manitoba because Manitoba is 

not a member.  Alberta is a member, as are 26 other states. 

 

And I think that's one of the reasons it's so important for people 

of the province to be aware of what we're doing here, because 

we are the second jurisdiction in Canada to actually take this 

action.  And we believe that in a very short period of time all 

provinces and the vast majority of the states will become 

members. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is the difficulty in having this process move 

forward for an interprovincial agreement difficult because of 

the original . . . or the origins of some of the trucking 

companies?  Or is it to do more with the inability of the other 

governments to move forward on it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it shows 

that this government is just more dynamic in getting its act 

together, because there's no real problem.  Other governments 

could proceed the way we are.  It's just that they have not done 

so, and we expect them to follow suit. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you meet with a trucking association in 

the province to discuss this and bring this to this conclusion? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We certainly have, Mr. Chairman.  

We certainly have had consultations with the trucking 

associations in the province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is this something that the minister is looking 

at doing and suggesting to the other Finance ministers, that they 

bring forward this so that it helps our trucking industry in 

Saskatchewan to have the same impact and benefit accruing to 

them when they originate the supplies here and move it to 

Ontario, for example? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, we are 

encouraging other provinces to follow our example here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The Bill, Madam Minister, in section 25.2 

states: 

 

. . . the minister may: 

 

(a) participate in arrangements or programs respecting the 

interjurisdictional administration and enforcement of the 

tax or similar taxes imposed by other jurisdictions inside 

or outside Canada; . . . 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Just what sort of arrangement and programs is this clause 

speaking of? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the arrangement is 

the international fuel tax agreement. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are there any administration costs that the 

minister is removing from the truckers and placing it on the 

Department of Finance?  Is there any cost involved in doing 

this as a benefit to the trucking associations? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the estimated cost of 

this program is $100,000 for the administration of the program.  

The fees that we will be levying will recover about 50 per cent 

of that cost, so that the department is redirecting another 

$50,000 to cover the administration costs that are in excess of 

the fee for service. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you say 15 or 50? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, five zero. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Section 25.3(1) deals with a minister paying 

other jurisdictions inside or outside Canada, that part of the tax 

collected under this Act.  What happens to these revenues?  Are 

they held for a period of time until that jurisdiction requires 

them?  Is it paid quarterly, semi-annually, or what? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the fees are paid 

quarterly, so we keep track of the material.  And then every 

quarter we pay what we owe to the other jurisdictions as they 

pay what they owe us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On an annual basis, have you projected what 

the volume of dollars that will be sent to other jurisdictions will 

be? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, well as the member 

opposite would understand, seeing as this is the first time we've 

done it, we can't be absolutely accurate.  But the sort of 

estimate we'd be looking at would be, the high end, $2 million 

changing hands in one way or another. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do the other jurisdictions have a cost recover 

similar to yours in providing the funding to the Minister of 

Finance in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could you give a brief explanation to 

additions under section 25.4 (1) to (3), regarding the minister 

issuing licences to carriers and imposing any terms and 

conditions that the minister considers appropriate on a licence.  

Why is this necessary? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is 

the international fuel tax agreement is a standard agreement.  

All jurisdictions joining the agreement automatically put in 

place the regulations or the language contained in the 

agreement.  And that 

is just part of the standard language in the agreements. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to provide for the 

committee a list of the American states that have joined the 

agreement.  And I assume that Alberta and Saskatchewan are 

the only two in the agreement. 

 

In addition to that would you . . . I believe this is necessary to 

be done,  in fact I've thought this for a long time already, as a 

part of streamlining things.  My wife's family has been 

involved in the trucking industry across Canada for many, 

many years.  And in fact the tax structure originated, where 

each province is allocated their funding based on fuel and the 

volume of fuel consumed relating to the miles driven in a 

province, was probably somewhat originated by people in 

Manitoba, where my family worked.  And that is . . . it's 

interesting to note that Manitoba isn't a part of it at this point, 

and I find that really interesting. 

 

But having said that, I'd like to know all of the jurisdictions that 

are involved.  And has the minister encouraged the 

interprovincial stabilization or putting in a level playing-field 

across Canada so that our truckers in Saskatchewan have the 

same benefit accruing to them in other provinces, and 

encouraged other provinces to deal with that in a way that is 

going to give them a level playing-field? 

 

My concern in this matter is that the people in Ontario would 

perhaps get an advantage because many of the major trucking 

companies are out of Ontario, and they would or maybe do get 

an advantage the way they operate their business in relation to 

Saskatchewan, their independence and other things like that. 

 

So I wouldn't mind if you'd comment on a few of those things. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to answer some of 

the questions that the member opposite asked, yes we will 

definitely get you a list of the 26 states, and you are correct 

when you say that in Canada only Alberta and Saskatchewan 

are members. 

 

With respect to other jurisdictions, yes, we are encouraging 

them to standardize these sorts of procedures to make it easier 

for the trucking industry.  And we are in regular consultations 

with the trucking industry and other industries to see of ways in 

which we can smooth out their operations and streamline them 

for them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is this a matter that I should raise with the 

Minister of Highways as well, to have him in interprovincial 

discussions, deal with the issue? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I think that 

would be a very good idea. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, the Bill also states that you 

will be able to set forth duties, obligations performed by the 

carrier, the consequences, and any other matters that the 

minister considers necessary or appropriate. 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

Is that in the agreement that is among the 26 states and the two 

provinces? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes that is. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, under the explanatory notes 

under section 47(3) it lists the situations under which a person 

may be deemed liable.  We understand the last one, directors' 

liability, since that is what the majority of the Bill deals with.  

Could you go through and clarify other conditions and explain 

how they relate to other provisions of the Bill?  For example, 

failure to comply with a third-party demand, failure to account 

for amounts wrongly collected, and failure to obtain a clearance 

certificate. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is that this 

is a technical amendment or technical wording recommended 

by the Department of Justice to ensure that we can pursue our 

end here, which is the end of ensuring that we can collect the 

tax. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The directors' liability is there in certain 

circumstances, and I understand why that would be.  But in the 

failure to account for amounts wrongly collected, why would 

you want to have that circumstance, that the directors would be 

liable for that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I should clarify to the 

member opposite that the particular section he is talking about 

has nothing to do with directors' liability.  This is a separate 

issue. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What provision . . . what specifically, under 

the provision about failure to account for amounts wrongly 

collected, what is the procedure for determining amounts 

wrongly collected? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe the best way 

to explain that would be to give you an example.  The issue is, 

if in fact tax is collected on something that should not be taxed.  

Let's say that a tax is collected on children's clothing in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Without this provision, we have no 

authority to go in and say to the person who has collected the 

tax, give us the tax so we can give it back to the individuals 

who should not have paid the tax. 

 

So it gives us the authority to remit the tax that has been 

wrongly collected to the people who should have the money 

back. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under section 48(1), the liability is 

put back to the directors and they are only excused from that 

liability if due diligence is put forward by the directors.  And I 

understand that this is for many taxes collected.  It's not only 

for E&H (education and health), it's for liquor, and those. 

 

In dealing with this, and it deals with bankruptcy and 

liquidation of assets and all of those kinds of things, how do 

you go about proving due diligence? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe I should 

preface my answer by making one very strong point here, 

because I know that when you talk about directors' liability, 

this can cause concern. 

 

Directors are only liable if in fact the corporation has collected, 

say, the E&H tax.  So they've taken it from the consumer, they 

have it, and they have not passed it forward on to the 

government. 

 

Directors are not liable for any taxes the corporation may owe.  

Let's say the corporation gets into financial difficulty and the 

corporation owes taxes of another kind -- let's say income tax 

or whatever.  The directors are not liable for that.  They're only 

liable for taxes which they have collected from consumers in 

good faith and have failed to pass those taxes on to the 

government. 

 

Now with respect to due diligence, the criteria would be, have 

the directors taken any reasonable actions to ensure that they 

are informed of the operations of the company.  And if they 

have done that and they have shown that they have taken every 

reasonable action, then they would not be liable. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My question to you, Madam Minister, under 

which of the taxes that you're going to be collecting under the 

revenue Act, in all of these, which is the greatest amount of 

concern to the minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the education 

and health tax would be the one that is of major concern, 

because of the taxes collected by the province -- rather than the 

taxes collected by the federal government -- the taxes collected 

by the province, this is the largest tax that we collect. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Maybe I didn't explain myself quite right.  I 

was asking you which of the agencies that you . . . under the 

revenue Act, you have nine different tax Acts and you asked 

for compliance under this new Bill.  And in which ones of these 

do you or have you had the greatest degree of concern, not only 

in dollars, but in volumes of actions taken where you have had 

to deal with these? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer still is the 

education and health tax. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Fuel tax is a long ways down, and the one I 

was really thinking is the liquor consumption tax.  Is that not a 

significant one? 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, again the answer 

would be essentially the same.  It's the E&H tax way up by 

itself, and the other taxes are of lesser concern. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there a method or a hierarchy of taxes in 

which you collect first, or do you go after the whole gamut -- 

like we're talking about a bankruptcy or a liquidation.  Do you 

have a receiver involved?  Where do you put the assignment 

to?  And I would expect too, Madam Minister, that the 

penalties on some of these are different than others.  Or if that 

is not the case, would the minister explain that too. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no, we do not have a 

hierarchy.  When we collect the taxes we treat them all in a 

similar manner and the penalties are uniform. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The due diligence is a matter that I think is of 

utmost importance to discuss.  And due diligence on the part of 

the estimation of the Department of Finance may be different 

than the due diligence in relation to a corporation, especially if 

the corporation goes bankrupt and the directors are still liable.  

And would the efforts on one single individual to have the 

taxes paid in a corporation that has 10 directors, would that 

individual's due diligence be sufficient in order to offset the 

requirement by the corporation to have paid its taxes? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, it won't be left to the 

Department of Finance to determine what is due diligence.  

There is an adequate body of case-law there that establishes 

what due diligence is. 

 

But I think that the thing for the average person who might be 

concerned about this, I think there's two issues.  First of all, 

they will not even be considered as being liable unless they are 

in the situation in which their company has collected a tax like 

the education and health tax, taken that tax from the consumer, 

has held the tax, and has not passed it on to the government.  

So they have to be in that unique situation in order to even be 

concerned about this legislation. 

 

And I think the other general principle that should reassure the 

average person is in law, the principle is essentially what would 

a reasonable person have done.  And if they have taken every 

action that a reasonable person would have done to ensure that 

the tax that was collected from the consumer was in fact passed 

on to the government, then they should not have any problems 

here.  If in fact the corporation withholds the tax and the person 

has done, as a director, everything reasonable for a director to 

have done, they will not be considered liable. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's right.  You took an easy one and I'll 

give you the hard one.  Where you have a business that sells to 

a person or a group of people that are tax exempt on certain 

issues and then have a . . . you come in and do you prove to 

these people that first of all that they had a right to deduct the 

tax or have the individual pay on one hand and the other 

individual not pay? 

 

For example, you can go into a machine shop and if you are a 

farmer you can put your land number down on the piece of 

receipt and you can have . . . you don't have to pay the tax.  On 

many occasions these people have had a considerable amount 

of discussion as to whether the item that was sold to the 

individual who was tax exempt was in fact a tax exempt item.  

And under those circumstances, where does due diligence come 

in?  And that is the kind of question that I'm asking. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I will make two 

responses.  First of all, a lot of what the member opposite is 

talking about falls under the regular audit process, so when an 

auditor comes around, those issues would be raised. 

 

But again going back to the basic point, it is what a reasonable 

person would do in that particular situation. And somebody 

would not be deemed guilty . . . In order to be guilty, you have 

to know that you are committing an offence.  You have to 

understand that in your mind.  And if in fact the person was not 

aware that somebody was being exempted, that they'd really 

thought the person should not be paying tax and gave them that 

exemption, then they're obviously not guilty.  They've done 

everything reasonable. 

 

Or if you put it the other way, if somebody should have paid 

tax and didn't, or tax was collected from somebody that should 

have been exempt, the same principle applies.  Did they do 

everything reasonable to inform themselves?  And if in fact 

they thought that this was perfectly legitimate and legal, then 

they would not be liable. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, it isn't quite as simple as 

that.  A piece of steel cut in a machine shop, that is cut, has to 

have tax paid on the service provided; the steel is exempt I 

believe in certain areas.  So then what you have is you have a 

matter of discretion.  Was this steel cut when it was 

manufactured or was the steel cut by the individual?  Is the 

service provided tax exempt? 

 

Now that's what the dynamic . . . Now the business goes under 

and it's a bankruptcy.  You have people who have decided on 

the basis that this was exempt and this was not exempt; they 

collected the tax.  And then where does due diligence come in?  

For a member of the board of directors who are perhaps 

somewhat arm's length to this, where does due diligence on the 

part of the directors come in, in the liability that they are 

required to pay?  That's the question I have. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the example that the 

member opposite cites would not be covered by this Act.  This 

Act would do nothing to alter the scenario or to affect the 

scenario that the member opposite is talking about. 

 

All this does is it says, if in fact tax, the whole accumulation of 

the tax that a company collects on 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

behalf of the government from consumers, if that is not passed 

forward to the government and that the director should have 

been aware that this tax was collected, should have been aware 

that the tax should have been passed on to the government, and 

in that sense was negligent because did not take any action to 

ensure that occurred --  whole aggregate of the tax -- then that 

director is liable. 

 

But in terms of the details of the administration of the company 

and who collects tax on whom, this legislation does not . . . it 

does not cover that.  And directors are not deemed to be 

involved in the details of the company to that degree. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, I don't want to be 

difficult with this but I just want to understand this.  The matter 

is fairly significant because the majority of these small 

businesses are right across this province and they don't deal 

with big corporations. They deal with a husband and wife; they 

deal with a husband and a wife and a son or a daughter, and 

that sort of thing. 

 

So you have the dynamic that some of these people are making 

decisions about taxable items, non-taxable items, and the 

conflict that exists even in the department now in assigning 

them, is at times taken to court to get a resolution on how that 

exists. 

 

You take that situation and then you add liquidation and 

bankruptcy, and then you go to the next situation when that 

individual might have or might not have acted in good faith, 

and given reasonable evidence that he acted in good faith, and 

then you have an additional member of the board of directors 

who stands on the outside.  Is he also liable for the activities of 

the company, when the company did not even know for 

example that they were acting out of step with the rules and 

regulations of the Department of Finance? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  The answer to 

that question is that person is not liable for that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, then I have another question about 

liability.  If you have half a dozen people who are members of 

the board of directors, is one person held liable for the lack of 

due diligence or are they all equally held liable for a lack of due 

diligence? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  Not all directors 

will be held liable.  It depends on what the actions of the 

directors are.  Let's assume that you and I are both directors of 

a company, and we're both made aware of the fact that the 

company has collected the E&H tax and has not passed the tax 

on to the government.  I write a note to the president or the 

CEO (chief executive officer) of the company and say, it's 

come to my attention that this has occurred and I think we 

should do whatever to ensure that the tax is passed on, and you 

don't.  I think you would be in a position where you would 

probably be a candidate for being liable and I would probably 

be a candidate for not, because I took reasonable action when I 

was 

presented with reasonable information. 

 

So the standard will vary depending on what the actions of the 

directors are. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under section 48.1(8), this clause stipulates 

that payments made by directors may be applied according to 

the formula set out in the pre-existing section 86 of the Act.  

For the sake of the House, would you be able to explain what 

that formula is? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that provision merely 

allows us to take the receipts that we get and apply the receipts 

first of all to penalty, interest, and then to the principal. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the first part of the payment is to the 

penalty, then the next part is to interest, it's not prorated in any 

way?  It's penalty first, interest second, and then principal 

third? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the company is in receivership, is it still the 

same? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And how does the minister's office deal . . . or 

the department deal with uncollectibles under those 

circumstances? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a very good 

question because one of the concerns the province has is, 

because of recent changes made in Ottawa with respect to 

bankruptcy, the province's ability to recover has become more 

difficult.  And if we have difficulty recovering, eventually of 

course we end up having to write off the account. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there a process for this write-off or is it held 

in the books?  And is there an opportunity to go to the boards 

of directors of these and get the tax out of them? 

 

And if we want to go to a real big one, why don't we talk about 

something that's outside the province and go to Principal in 

Alberta where they're going after some of the principals in the 

company.  Are they then going to be gone after like we talked 

about before where there could be proven that there's no due 

diligence? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes.  If in fact we know that the tax was collected by 

the company, not passed on to the government, and we know 

there is evidence of negligence of some kind by the directors, 

that they were aware of this situation, that they failed to act in 

the situation, and that they were aware that they should have 

acted, yes, we will go after the 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

individuals involved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In these nine different taxes that are collected, 

what is the total volume of revenue that you would anticipate 

coming in through the actions you are going to take today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm assuming that 

what the member opposite is asking is all of the changes that 

are being made today, not just a specific one.  As a result of all 

of the changes being made today, we would expect to be 

collecting on an annual basis about $4 million more than we 

currently collect. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And each one of these will be . . . There'll be 

lots of numbers, you said, or lots of individual items or 

individual businesses that you'll be collecting from.  And you 

mentioned also that E&H was the largest one that would be 

collected.  And I would guess that there will be businesses that 

will do a lot of business and there'll be businesses that do a 

small amount of business. 

 

Your fines range from 5,000 to 25,000.  Is that reasonable in 

light of the volumes that . . . You were talking about $4 

million.  Is $25,000 fine reasonable under certain 

circumstances?  Under nine Acts that you're collecting money 

on and you're dealing with collectibles of $4 million, in 

anticipation of $4 million collected, is $25,000 fine in a 

reasonable category in relation to that volume of dollars? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, that $25,000 

figure we believe is reasonable, and I would cite two reasons to 

the member opposite. 

 

First of all it's a small minority of companies that are going to 

be affected; who are going to actually end up having to pay that 

sort of penalty.  Our estimate is about 1 per cent of all 

companies operating. 

 

The second point is that the $25,000 figure is comparable to 

what is occurring in other jurisdictions at this time.  So we feel 

that we are very much within the range of what is happening 

elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, you have the right to waive 

penalties and interest.  Can you give me some circumstances 

that are going to dictate to you, what kind of circumstances 

they're going to be, that you can waive penalties and interest? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes.  An example 

would be something like this:  the proper taxes were paid at the 

proper time, but when the information was made available, we 

found that in the company there had been a sickness that had 

affected some of the members and had basically meant that the 

company was not operating the way it would have if the 

sickness had not occurred. 

 

Some other disaster of that kind -- a natural disaster or tornado 

had come through and devastated the company and we were 

not aware of that when we said, you know, you owe us these 

taxes by this 

particular date.  So it's situations like that in which the penalties 

would be waived. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well one case where it might happen is where 

you have a fire that destroys a facility and inadvertently all the 

records are lost as well.  And those are the circumstances you're 

suggesting, I assume? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It then makes some adjustments as to when 

interest and penalty payments begin.  It goes back to the due 

date.  Can you give me an idea?  Is it the day that they're 

collected or that the day that they're to be remitted? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, it goes back to the 

day that they were to be remitted. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are all of the time lines on these nine revenue 

Act items of the same time line or are they all different? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, they're generally 

the same. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Section 65.1 says that this section allows the 

government to recover amounts collected under the false guise 

of being a tax.  Would this not already be covered by laws 

relating to fraud?  Could you answer that for me? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the member 

opposite is correct.  But what this does is it means that we do 

not have to go to court.  This gives us the statutory power to 

act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- To act to take the money, or to act in relation 

to fraud? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, no, the government would not be able to act with 

respect to fraud.  It would just allow us to take the money back. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There is another item under this Bill that 

changes the . . . the previous version of this section stipulated 

that third-party payments could be made to the minister or his 

designate.  And now it reads, the minister.  Why did you do 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

member opposite is that in the initial instance, minister or 

designate, it should have just been minister.  There should not 

have been "or designate" there.  So what we're doing by this 

change is ensuring that it is accurate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The last item I have deals with fax machines, 

and the section 83(1)(c) says this section broadens the methods 

by which a document or notice may be served to include fax 

machines.  We of course think that's a good idea.  But I just 

received a bill in my office from London, England, for 

1,200-and-some dollars for paper that I had bought some time 

earlier 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

on.  I've never heard of the company . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You should pay your bills more 

promptly, Harold. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the member from Churchill Downs wants to 

get into the discussion, you go right ahead.  But we were 

having a very good discussion here with the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sorry to interrupt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, you're not. 

 

Anyway, the fax can make some significant errors not only to 

providing information but to the wrong location.  The fax 

number was not accurate, but it was sent to the correct address.  

So then you have a bill that is assigned and delivered, and is 

assumed to be delivered when it goes to the wrong place.  In 

that way, I think that we have to be very careful how we deal 

with this in light of some of the circumstances that could exist. 

 

And I would ask the minister to explain to the Assembly how 

you're going to deal with the fact that the fax actually was 

received by the individual and that the individual was the 

correct person to have received it. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  I first of all would hope that whoever does owe 

$1,200, you remind them to pay the E&H tax on the paper. 

 

But to be serious and to answer your other question.  We will 

not be serving key documents by fax, because the member 

opposite is quite correct.  If in fact the information goes to the 

wrong party, then you can have somebody who should be 

paying or should be attending to a matter and they don't do it. 

 

So what we will do is, if it's an essential document that requires 

the attention of the individual, we'll send it by registered mail. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm glad to hear that.  I know that fax 

machines run out of paper as well, and you could get a notice 

that's from the Minister of Finance and not have any other 

information on the document and that could . . . I don't think 

there'd be too many people willing to phone you up and ask 

you what the message really was. 

 

So I want to say too, to you and to your staff, Madam Minister, 

I appreciate the opportunity to have had the discussion on these 

three Bills, and I look forward to doing other business with you 

in the very near future as it relates to interim supply.  And we 

will be seeing you again.  And thank you for your staff coming 

in. 

 

(1530) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, before I do that, I 

would like to take this opportunity to thank the officials, and I 

would also like to thank the member opposite for very good 

questions and a highly civil tone to the discussion. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act respecting Certified General 

Accountants 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Registered Psychologists 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand today 

to move second reading of The Registered Psychologists 

Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been working closely with the 

Saskatchewan psychological association on this amendment to 

the legislation.  The current Act allows masters degree 

psychologists working for government or the school system to 

use the psychologist title.  However, under a reformed health 

system, psychologists currently employed by Saskatchewan 

Health will be transferred to the health districts and under the 

existing Act would therefore no longer be able to refer to 

themselves as psychologists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment will resolve this situation by 

allowing masters degree psychologists employed by the district 

health boards to continue to refer to the psychologist title.  This 

title protection will also be extended to psychologists employed 

at the University of Regina, as it already covers psychologists 

employed by the University of Saskatchewan. 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

While the actual devolution, Mr. Speaker, of a psychologist's 

staff to the districts is still several months away, this 

amendment will help ensure a very smooth transition. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 

of this Bill, an Act relating to psychologists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, from the minister's comments, I 

would take it that this is more a Bill technical in nature.  

However, I think it appropriate that we take a bit of time to 

peruse the Bill before we enter into further discussion; 

therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Physical Therapists Act, 

1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to move 

second reading of The Physical Therapists Amendment Act, 

1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment will allow physical therapists to 

assess and treat patients without a physician referral.  A further 

amendment is proposed to improve public accountability by 

requiring the association to submit an annual report to the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government concurs with the Saskatchewan 

college of physical therapists and the Canadian Physiotherapy 

Association, that physiotherapists should be allowed to assess 

and treat patients without a physician referral. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a referral in certain circumstances is an 

unnecessary expense to the health system and in some ways 

denies the public access to primary health care.  Of course, Mr. 

Speaker, if required, the therapist can request that the client see 

a physician.  And in many cases the public will continue to 

seek a physician's opinion before beginning a physiotherapy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to note today that the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan and the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association both support this 

amendment.  This amendment, Mr. Speaker, is consistent with 

physiotherapist legislation in Prince Edward Island, Quebec, 

Ontario, Manitoba, and British Columbia, and with legislation 

currently being pursued in the remaining other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment complements current health 

reforms which are intended to increase the public's accessibility 

to basic health services in community settings.  This 

amendment will be an important component in restructuring 

and strengthening the delivery of physiotherapy services in the 

province. 

 

I am therefore, Mr. Speaker, pleased to move second 

reading of this Bill, an Act relating to physical therapists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would appear that Bill 

does have some significant change to it.  There's no doubt that 

physical therapists would be more than pleased with the intent 

of the Bill. 

 

The Minister has indicated that there's been ongoing discussion 

with the college and some of the medical profession.  I also 

think that the public in general, when you look at many cases, 

when you're facing physical therapy or needing treatment of 

that nature, may find that the process presently involved of 

seeking medical advice and then being referred, in a lot of 

cases, tends to delay that process and tends to delay the 

therapy. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be only fair for us to 

take a little more time as well, and my colleague, the critic, to 

review the legislation before we proceed further.  Therefore I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act respecting the Licensing and 

Operation of Medical Laboratories 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of The Medical Laboratory Licensing Act.  Mr. 

Speaker, this Act replaces The Medical Laboratory Licensing 

Act which received Royal Assent August 25, 1989. 

 

The original Act was supported on both sides of the House as 

an important measure to improve and maintain high standards 

of diagnostic laboratory testing.  This new legislation builds on 

those significant accomplishments and addresses administrative 

and organizational concerns that stakeholders have raised about 

the laboratory licensing process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing Act established a medical laboratory 

licensing board, with a mandate to license laboratories based on 

standards of quality and assessment of need.  This mandate 

made the board operations very cumbersome and stakeholders 

have expressed concern about the whole licensing process. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health and the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons, with input and assistance from 

many other stakeholders, jointly reviewed the laboratory 

licensing process and administrative structure.  This revised 

legislation reflects the consensus that was reached on how the 

laboratory licensing process can be best administered in our 

province. 

 

With this new Act, Mr. Speaker, the medical laboratory 

licensing board will be absolved and licensing of laboratories 

will be the responsibility of the Department of Health. 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

The legislation also creates an accreditation program to 

establish quality assurance standards.  The legislation then 

empowers the department to delegate the operation of this 

accreditation program to a third party.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to say that the College of Physicians and Surgeons has 

agreed to undertake this responsibility.  The college will 

therefore establish a standards of quality assurance, including 

standards related to qualifications of staff, testing methods, 

procedures and equipment, and accuracy and reliability of test 

results. 

 

With this legislation, Mr. Speaker, standards of quality 

assurance for laboratories will be developed by experts in the 

laboratory field. 

 

Criteria for licensing decisions pertaining to need will be 

developed in consultation with stakeholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this new Act will ensure the 

provision of quality laboratory testing and rational, 

cost-effective, and efficient delivery of all laboratory services 

across our province. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 

of The Medical Laboratory Licensing Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member for Moosomin, 

I do want to remind members, especially experienced members, 

that when the Speaker is in the Chair anything other than water 

is not permitted for members to drink.  And I do want to 

remind the member from Regina Churchill Downs of that fact. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as we 

reviewed the Act before us, The Medical Laboratory Licensing 

Act, it's interesting to note the ongoing debate that has taken 

place in the province over the last year and a half to two years 

regarding public and private labs. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, most people would certainly indicate and 

agree that it is only fair that we have proper and sound 

regulations regulating the licences of medical laboratories in 

our province, be they public or private.  And I think that there 

are a few concerns and ideas we'd like to discuss with the 

minister as we get into further speeches in the adjourned debate 

process and in committee. 

 

And therefore at this time I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting Chiropractors 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm again pleased to rise in 

my place today to move on this occasion second reading of The 

Chiropractic Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say that we've been 

working very closely with the Chiropractors' Association of 

Saskatchewan on a new Act for the last three years.  The 

current legislation governing chiropractors in Saskatchewan is 

out of date and lacks the necessary tools for the association to 

effectively regulate chiropractors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new Act is entirely consistent with newer 

health professional legislation in this province and I would like 

to highlight just some of the Act's features. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act provides the association with the power to 

make by-laws.  However, consistent with other regulated 

professions, by-laws that could affect the public will still 

require the approval of the Minister of Health. 

 

The Act clarifies the association's responsibilities with respect 

to investigation and disciplinary hearings.  The Act ensures that 

complaints of incompetence or misconduct are acted upon in an 

effective manner.  It establishes investigation and discipline 

committees which have the authority to investigate complaints, 

apply to the courts for subpoenas, and levy a variety of 

disciplined penalties including fines up to $15,000.  As is 

standard with other professional legislation, the chiropractor 

will be able to appeal disciplinary decisions to the Court of 

Queen's Bench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of provisions have been built into the 

Act to make the profession more accountable to the public.  For 

example, up to two public representatives may be appointed by 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council to sit on the board of the 

association. 

 

Discipline hearings will no longer be automatically held behind 

closed doors.  A public representative will be on the discipline 

committee.  And in addition, the person who laid a complaint 

against the chiropractor will be entitled to attend the discipline 

hearing and will be informed of the outcome of their complaint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by this legislation the association will also be 

required to submit an annual report on its activities with 

Saskatchewan Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important to note that no changes have been 

made to the registration requirements for members, and the title 

"chiropractor" will continue to be restricted to registered 

members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Chiropractors' Association of Saskatchewan 

has been consulted on the Act and fully supports it.  The 

College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, and the 

Saskatchewan College of Physical Therapists have also been 

consulted and are supportive.  The Act adheres to the standard 

format for professional legislation and contains no provisions 

which have a policy influence on existing programs. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 

of this Bill, an Act relating to chiropractors. 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, regarding 

chiropractors, I find it interesting as we stand here in the 

Assembly today that the minister continued to refer to the fact 

of ongoing discussions with chiropractors, and we're quite 

mindful of the debate that took place two years ago regarding 

the fee structure change.  And certainly in my constituency and 

many constituencies across the province of Saskatchewan, that 

fee structure change, Mr. Speaker, led to the elimination of a 

number of chiropractic offices. 

 

In our discussions and as we continue our discussion with the 

chiropractic profession, Mr. Speaker, we intend to not only 

discuss the implications of the Bill with the association, but 

seek some advice from those individuals who may still be 

practising out in our area as to whether it affects them 

adversely or whether or not their association has taken the time 

to adequately consult with them as members of that association.  

And I trust the minister has in his discussions brought out that 

fact that they want to know that they're really hearing from the 

chiropractic association in general, the membership in general, 

versus just the people who are in direct positions of leadership. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time, to allow for greater 

consultation, I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

welcome back to your staff.  When you and I finished up a few 

questions the other day, there was a couple of things that I 

would have liked to carry on with you.  So I think what I'll do 

is start there as near as I can remember what we were talking 

about. 

 

And you and I were going through the numbers of clients and 

the numbers of people on social assistance.  The number I 

wrote down, I think what you gave me was 78,993 clients.  And 

that is the total people on the welfare rolls.  Can you tell me, 

Mr. Minister, how many of those were Indians and how many 

were other? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We will have that -- thank you -- we will 

have that in just a minute for you if that's okay.  You're not 

talking about the new cases based on the federal offloading, but 

just the total case-load numbers of aboriginal background. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, while 

your staff are looking for those answers, would you then . . . 

could you tell me how many of your total are designated poor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well if you're going by the official, the 

three sets of poverty line figures that are 

generally accepted in Canada, I think it would be fair to say 

that all of them are considered poor, would fall below those 

poverty lines.  In addition, a number of people who are 

working, a number of farm families, would fall below the 

official poverty line stats. 

 

But to directly answer your question, all of them. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, what 

criteria are you using then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We're talking about the low income 

cut-off lines of StatsCanada. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister.  

That's what I was wanting to know, if you were using that or 

whether you were using the StatsCanada. 

 

Then could I ask you this question.  If you're using that to 

designate someone who falls under the category of poor or 

under the poverty line, do you have a differential if two people, 

one falls under that designation and someone does not meet 

that, is there a differential in the remuneration they get from 

your department, one who is designated poor under your terms 

and one that you may say is not poor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The answer to your question is no.  We 

look at needs versus income, based on the allowances that are 

determined. 

 

Could I answer your original question about the number of 

families from aboriginal backgrounds?  On our case-load, that 

is the 39,000 cases, there would be approximately 9,000 treaty 

Indian families, or it could be individuals in some cases.  And 

then when you include non-status and Metis families or 

individuals, it comes to about 14,500 of the 39,000. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

14,000 is clients -- and that's not numbers; that's the cases.  

Could you tell me then the numbers involved in those 14,000 

cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Approximately 30,000 of the 78,000 total 

beneficiaries. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Then 

I can just deduct 30,000 from the 78,000 and then I find out 

who falls under the category of others.  I think that's the way it 

would work.  Thank you then. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many of the total or what 

you would designate single employable people? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- There would be 21,000 out of the 78,000 

who would be single employable. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, could you split that between male 

and female for me, please? 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We do not 

have the gender breakdown at the moment.  We're working at 

it, and as soon as we can, we will get it to you if that's okay. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, that's 

quite acceptable.  You can pass that over or let me know when 

you get it.  We'll develop that a little further when I get those 

numbers. 

 

I want to go back to when my colleague was on his feet the 

other day, just to finish off this social assistance part of this.  

On Monday, the member from Souris-Cannington asked a 

number of questions of yourself regarding welfare abuse and 

made a reference to some abuse going on in his constituency.  

And at that time you stated, and I quote: 

 

 You have a legal obligation to report that under the Act and 

we would take that very seriously. 

 

And that was on page 1055, Hansard, March 21. 

 

Now in fact, members opposite accused my colleague of 

breaking the law because he did not report that abuse.  I want to 

ask you, Mr. Minister, as a cabinet minister, you supported 

breaking the law regarding the salaries of judges, yet in this 

House you warn him about upholding the laws.  How can you 

stand in the Assembly, Mr. Minister, and speak about 

upholding the law when you supported breaking the law?  Are 

you not kind of speaking out of both sides of your mouth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- First of all, to come back to the man and 

the women breakdown, we'll give you the specific numbers, but 

I'm advised it's approximately 60/40 -- 60 per cent men and 40 

per cent women from your previous question. 

 

I think if you recall the discussion from the other day between 

the hon. member from Souris-Cannington, which is my home 

area, we were sort of jesting a little bit about that.  I think that 

was the context and that's my recollection, that I would never 

accuse him of that.  We were in part joking a bit. 

 

When I said a legal obligation, I really meant a . . . there's no 

theoretical legal obligation, technically, in the same way that 

there would be under The Family Services Act.  I was meaning 

more of a moral obligation.  If you know that, give us the name 

and we'll treat that very seriously.  So that was the context as I 

recall. 

 

And I would never accuse the hon. member of breaking the 

law.  I want to make that very, very clear.  I've got a lot of 

respect for that member and he's very well regarded by my 

family down there.  And so I want to put that on the record very 

clearly. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. 

Minister.  I think my colleague will feel better, having your 

answer to that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to go from that into another 

section, and that is we're going to talk about New Careers and 

home repairs.  Now I understand you amalgamated New 

Careers with the . . . the Sask Works program is now integrated 

with New Careers. 

 

Could you tell me -- and I realize this does fall a little bit under 

Education and Training but I think it does come into your 

department to a certain extent -- is this program wrapped up 

and is it under way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, we really don't have any detailed 

information about the operation of New Careers.  As you know, 

they draw their pool of people requiring training in education 

and employment from people on assistance.  But I would 

suggest that maybe those questions be raised with the Minister 

of Education because we just don't have the information.  Sorry 

about that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

realize that, and I mentioned that I realize it.  But the program I 

think I'm talking about that does impact on your portfolio I 

believe is the home repair program under New Careers.  Is that 

program working yet or is it still being developed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We do not have specific information here 

with regard to the home repair program and New Careers.  I 

have some general information about New Careers that I would 

be happy to try and provide if you want, but I don't have 

anything specifically related to the detail you're asking for 

because we don't have anything to do with that program. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman.  

Mr. Minister, one more question in that context then.  In this 

program, what . . . does any of the funding for the home repair 

come out of your budget, or is it out of another department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- No, it all comes out of New Careers 

money. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  I just have one particular aspect that I want to follow 

up on following my colleague's discussion with you.  It's very 

simple for me to be sitting back here listening and at the 

appropriate time butting in this way, and I appreciate the 

member giving me this opportunity. 

 

Legal issues and breaking the law issues are an extremely 

sensitive point in this House right now, as you are well aware 

as well, Mr. Minister.  But a comment that you made, I want a 

little bit of clarification on.  And I know that you were not 

accusing the member from Souris-Cannington of breaking the 

law with the abuse.  I'm talking about the abuse that you people 

were talking about just now, and that prompted me to get up 

and ask you this question. 

 

You said, and I understood you to say, that just because he had 

not reported abuse as such, that that would not be breaking the 

law.  In my understanding, 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Mr. Minister, of The Family Services Act, is that it is 

incumbent upon every individual in society when he or she sees 

or suspects abuse, that it is your, not only as you suggested, 

moral obligation, but a legally binding obligation on every 

member of society to immediately report that abuse. 

 

It is my understanding that whether you are a legislator, as we 

are here, or whether you are a teacher in a classroom or a nurse 

or a doctor or a policeman, particularly people who are in an 

authoritative type of position, that we have not just a moral but 

a legally binding obligation to report that abuse, particularly 

with the protocol. 

 

And while you're answering that, Mr. Minister, perhaps you 

could give me an update on the protocol that we have in 

Regina, and I believe in Saskatoon, as far as reporting of abuse 

and obligatory notion that we do have that anyone suspecting 

abuse will report that, and is obligated, legally, to report that.  

Could you comment on that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I just want to thank you for your 

question.  I'm glad you raised that, because I want to make sure 

. . . I hope the record will show that I would make it clear that 

under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, the obligation would 

be a moral obligation.  You're quite right and I fully agree with 

you, it is very clear that under The Family Services Act, it's a 

legal obligation.  Abuse, financially in the one case; abuse 

against children in the other, which are very clear legal 

obligations.  So that's what I hope I said and I want to just 

reiterate that.  I think the record will show that.  I hope it will. 

 

But the protocol has not changed since the introduction of the 

Bill when you were minister, in terms of the investigations.  It 

was a very good protocol and is still the protocol.  And we 

evaluate it as best we can, and it is still working and in place, 

so I compliment you for your efforts in that regard. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd 

like to welcome your officials again this afternoon on behalf of 

the third party.  And I have a series of questions as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, these are going to be interesting times for social 

programs, as I know both levels of government will be working 

on new horizons for many of the programs we have been 

dealing with for years.  I'm interested in knowing just what 

interchange has gone on to this stage, and what your 

government's feelings are towards the approach that is being 

taken by the federal government with respect to reform of 

social programs. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you for that question.  You're right 

-- there certainly are going to be some challenging times but 

these are times for opportunities and we certainly were looking 

at a number of processes, evaluations that we've had underway.  

So in many ways we welcome, as I've said, we welcome 

the opportunity on this federal initiative. 

 

I've had the opportunity to meet with the minister privately and 

also with the Minister of Education, Training and Employment 

and our counterparts in Ottawa and we will be meeting again in 

April and in the fall.  We are awaiting some definition of the 

principles from the federal perspective as the minister foresees 

them.  And we have taken the approach in Ottawa -- and with 

Ottawa -- that any income security review, or any social policy 

review, has got to be done within the broader context of 

economic development, job creation, fair taxation policy, a 

good labour legislation, a good day care program, and all of the 

other support services that are required. 

 

It can't just be focused on UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) and social assistance.  It's got to be broad based 

and the time lines are tight.  We're a little concerned about that, 

but we want . . . we need a clearer definition from him as to 

what scope he sees.  So we're in frequent touch with his 

officials and we will be back discussing specifically our 

position in April. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you outline 

some of the directions your government would like to see 

happen in this interchange and reform of the system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I think the things I would say at this 

point, and I think we've made this clear too, we want to make 

sure that the most vulnerable people, families in our society, 

our province, our country, are protected.  And we want to make 

sure that we have a stable and predictable fiscal arrangement 

with the federal government.  We want to make sure -- and 

we're stressing the point -- that the reform cannot be just simply 

an offloading exercise. 

 

We want to make sure that the federal government -- and we 

would invite your assistance here -- we want to make sure that 

the federal government reassumes its responsibility for treaty 

families, which is what the treaty families want as well.  And 

we want to make sure that the communities are involved in 

articulating the principles and the values upon which social 

programs should be built or income support programs should 

be built.  Given those tight time lines, that's going to be a real 

challenge.  But those are some of the principles, as we see 

them, at this point. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

There were some changes to federal transfer payments under 

the past federal government which put some added 

responsibilities on the province with regard to payment of 

welfare to Indian people. 

 

Can the minister quantify for the record and for the 

understanding of our members just exactly what those changes 

were and how they have impacted on this year's budget for 

Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- To answer your question, the offloading 

that you refer to is results of the UIC 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

changes in April of 1993.  And secondly, the treaty offload, is 

the terminology we're using, has resulted . . . between those 

two initiatives have resulted in about just under 10,000 new 

cases coming on assistance in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the net cost to the province, the net cost to the province 

after cost sharing is $20 million.  Now of course we want to 

reverse that; we will be supporting first nations people to 

reverse that decision.  We need your help to do that. 

 

Now the other concern we have, which is a bigger offload that 

worries us, is with the federal budget.  Because unilaterally 

with the federal budget, a week after my trip to Ottawa, we've 

lost $40 million, $40 million to Saskatchewan people who are 

on unemployment insurance, by a reduction in the number of 

weeks that they qualify for benefits by an average of six to 

seven weeks, the northern half of the province, Saskatoon 

north. 

 

Now that is a big concern to us because it takes $40 million out 

of the Saskatchewan economy to start with; and secondly, that 

means that people will be coming on the provincial assistance 

case-loads earlier because their benefit weeks have been 

reduced. 

 

So that is twice the amount from the recent federal budget of a 

month ago than the treaty offload from last year by the previous 

administration that you referred to.  So we need your help as 

well in dealing with that because that has major implications 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Have you been 

in touch with the federal minister on this particular issue?  And 

if so, what sort of interchange has there been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, I did raise this.  I raised this with 

him privately; I raised this with the minister in the forum that 

we were in.  I tried to find out what their changes would be 

because the federal budget was coming down next week, the 

following week.  And I made it very -- as did other provinces, 

by the way -- and we made it very clear that this would create 

problems for us.  And obviously he was not free at that point to 

tell us what was in the federal budget, but we alerted him that 

this would be a major concern to us. 

 

And I think the way in which I raised it was that the goodwill 

that was established at this meeting -- that is the 

federal-provincial meeting, and there was a lot of goodwill 

there and desire to cooperate and form federal-provincial 

partnerships in redesigning programs -- I did not want the 

goodwill to be jeopardized by a surprise federal budget.  And 

we were a little bit surprised at the magnitude of the UIC cuts 

to Saskatchewan, to put it mildly. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  I guess what I was asking was: 

have you spoken with the minister or his department since the 

budget came down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I have not personally spoken to 

the minister.  Our offices have been in communication with 

each other though, as we're planning for the upcoming meeting 

in April, yes. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Can the minister tell us how much of the 

increased federal transfer payments that came from Ottawa this 

year are directed into the Social Services budget?  In effect, 

which of the increases in the budget come as a direct result of 

increased federal transfers; and which, if any, decreases are the 

result of changes to federal funding arrangements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just to clarify for the member, the way 

the system works there really has been no increased federal 

transfer funding.  There's not been an increase.  The way the 

system works is that we put in a cost-sharing claim and then 

we're reimbursed for 50 cents of that dollar.  For example, the 

treaty offload that we talked about earlier cost the province $40 

million, and we get 20 million of that back.  We put in a claim 

for that, get 20 million of that back. 

 

But overall, overall we've lost.  Because where with the cuts to 

the UIC program where the . . . you know from the UIC 

program, we're providing all those benefits, we will now have 

to pick up 50 per cent of whatever benefits that there are by 

those people coming on assistance earlier, six to seven weeks 

earlier.  So there is in fact a reduction from the federal transfer 

payments in this area. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So what you're saying is the $40 million you 

were talking about as offloading is really only $20 million 

offloading because you get 50 per cent of it back. 

 

But the question I was asking was, as I understand it, the 

federal government promised $90 million to maintain and make 

sure . . . that was the extra transfer payments for this coming 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, you're referring to the equalization 

program financing, and the details of that I think would have to 

be . . . the question would have to be directed to the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

We're really referring to the Canada Assistance Plan, which is 

the money that we're talking about under Social Services here.  

The money you're talking about is related to health and 

education. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I just 

kind of forget where we were when I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's okay.  Take your time, John, you'll 

figure it out. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Yes, okay.  But what I'm going to do, I have 

the report that you sent on the Forging Responsible 

Partnerships.  That report is finished.  It was started by the 

previous . . . the previous minister announced that the 

Department of Social Services would participate in the review.  

Forging Responsible Partnerships: Human Services in 

Review -- that's now done?  And that report that you gave me 

is the finished report?  Could you tell us how much that cost? 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Approximately $70,000. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

you could have put on a weekend party for your . . . I think 

that's what it cost the Crop Insurance people, 70,000 for a 

weekend. 

 

Now I understand, Mr. Minister, that the review is completed.  

Could you give us a report on that review at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, just to make a point here.  This was 

part of the social policy reform that we . . . and the evaluation 

of how we're delivering the services.  This was part of that in 

that, as you know, we contract services with a number of 

non-government organizations across the province.  And we 

thought it was time for, I guess, some reflection on whether or 

not the partnership between NGOs (non-governmental 

organizations) and the government was still appropriate, what 

the relationship between the various non-governmental 

organizations should be, and what kind of a process we could 

engage in that would ensure that we are able to make future 

programs relevant, responsive, efficient, and effective, and so 

on. 

 

So it was an act of opportunity to contract so that independently 

. . . an independent contract, so that communities and NGOs 

could feel free to reflect on services throughout the province.  

And basically the review has now been completed.  I think all 

members of the Assembly got a copy. And I got a nice letter 

back from your leader, appreciating that as well. 

 

The 70,000 includes the distributed copies, right?  We 

distributed a lot of copies and they're included in that cost, 

distributed to all the agencies and individuals who were part of 

the review.  And I have met with the task force who did the 

review.  We're going to have another meeting in the near future 

with the deputy minister, myself, and the task force just to kind 

of debrief from that and just to see where we go from there. 

 

But there are a number of recommendations that we're getting 

for you that are at the end of the report there.  We'll get the 

summary for you.  Although you've got the report there, I 

guess, do you?  I'd be happy to try and answer your questions 

regarding any of the recommendations if you'd like to, but 

we're now assessing how we proceed with those 

recommendations. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I 

have the report and I appreciate it.  I haven't had time to run 

through it, but there's a difference between running through it 

and studying it, and I haven't studied it at all.  It's quite a thick 

report and probably quite cohesive. 

 

You mentioned $70,000; in your opinion, did you get your 

money's worth for that report? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The short answer is yes.  The number of 

hours and thought and reflection and so on that went into that 

was many times more than that. 

 

But the key thing, I think, was that there were meetings around 

the province.  We can get you the numbers on those.  We'd be 

happy to provide you with that information.  But involving 

people across the province and major consultations and 

research and drafting and we believe that it was money very 

wisely spent and allows us to sort of plan for the future and 

make some supportive decisions around the future role for 

community-based services which is our thrust in the child 

action plan and our youth plan and our general preventive, 

early interventive and supportive services in that initiative. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

think I worded my question wrong.  I shouldn't have asked if 

you got your money's worth; I think I should have asked it a 

little differently.  Probably I should have said, did you like the 

report, more so than that. 

 

Anyway, I want to visit with you a little bit about a news item 

about social assistance recipients trashing their apartment.  I'm 

sure you're aware of the case in Saskatoon where recipients 

trashed the apartment they were residing in.  Can you tell us 

what action you're taking assisting the police's attempt to lay 

charges and handle that sort of thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just to finish up on the report, yes your 

last comment there, rephrasing your question the way you did.  

I think that there are lots of challenges for us in that report and 

we'll just have to continue the consultations and the 

partnerships with community groups to try and meet those as 

best we can.  So I think it's a good report but lots of challenges. 

 

And with regard to your referring to the property damage 

question of people on assistance, I guess what I would say, that 

is generally speaking, as far as we know, and I think this is our 

experience, that the relationship between landlords and people 

on assistance is by and large very positive. 

 

You know, in the few instances like you're talking about, this is 

very unfortunate, but we believe that this is the exception.  We 

do not condone the behaviour of anyone who damages property 

and who would do that in any rental property anywhere.  So we 

do not, from a starting point, we do not condone that. 

 

I understand the frustration of landlords when this occurs.  I 

think in situations like this there's always a rental agreement 

between a landlord and a tenant, whether people are on 

assistance or whether they're private arrangements in other 

ways. So there's no difference there for people on assistance.  

Social assistance clients, like anybody else, are responsible for 

the obligations that they take on, which includes their leases. 

 

It's the Rentalsman's office that deals with 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

landlord-tenant disputes.  And I would suggest that landlords 

need to pursue options there.  Secondly, they can pursue 

options with insurance companies, in terms of extra insurance 

and so on. 

 

So I guess that's kind of my position on this issue, that by and 

large, it works very well and landlords do have some options, 

as I've tried to point out. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

guess what I would like to know is, what do you do in a case 

like this to assist the police when they're faced with this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce to you and 

to members of the House a friend of mine from the Prince 

Albert area, as a matter of fact from north of Prince Albert.  

Gene Kimbley has been a person that I've known for a number 

of years.  He has been involved in forestry in the northern part 

of our province.  He's a great asset to the Prince Albert area and 

I'd like all members to join with me to welcome Gene to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like leave to introduce 

guests also. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also 

like to welcome Eugene Kimbley to the legislature.  He was a 

constituent of mine, and his family still is.  Eugene is a 

professional forester and also a former Chicago Black Hawk 

hockey player.  So I'd like to welcome him also. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, we 

would cooperate in any investigation with the police and do so.  

For example, they could subpoena information related to a 

name or an address or something like that, and we will 

cooperate as required. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

would these individuals still be on social assistance? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, I'm not really -- I hope the member 

would appreciate -- I'm not really permitted by law to divulge 

who is and who isn't individually on assistance.  So I can't 

really answer that question on an individual case basis. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

think you could because this . . . I'm asking for not the name 

and names here.  We're just . . . we're talking about people who 

trashed other people's property.  What I would like you to 

answer then, is there any penalty on people that do this sort of 

thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well we do not determine any penalties 

under the police charges or the court of law.  That isn't our role 

or responsibility, so we don't . . . It isn't our area of jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

realize that you don't have the authority to levy fines or 

penalties.  But I guess what I'm wanting to know, if a person 

who is on social assistance trashes someone else's property, 

would there not . . . wouldn't it be a good lesson, if nothing 

else, to that person for you to reduce their social assistance 

benefits so that it doesn't happen again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well it is not our responsibility to 

administer justice in the province of Saskatchewan.  It is not 

our responsibility, so I can't answer that question.  I mean I 

wouldn't take your suggestion, because I don't have the 

authority nor the inclination to do that, nor the inclination to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate your position and I believe that justice is a touchy 

subject right about now, so we are also wondering about who 

administers justice in this province. 

 

The question I would like to ask you is, Mr. Minister, how 

often would these trashings occur? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I tried to say in my opening remarks on 

this topic, very, very infrequently.  The vast majority of people 

on assistance have a positive relationship with their landlords.  

The numbers would be no different than any other part of the 

population. 

 

And I know you're trying to get information here and I'm trying 

to provide it as best I can, but I'm really a bit anxious about this 

line of questioning. And you've got a right to ask whatever you 

want to, but I'm only aware of this one case that you're talking 

about since I've been minister.  I'm sincere about that. 

 

I want to make it clear that I do not think this is a major issue 

and I hope that we're not sort of promoting that notion here. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If you're telling me 

that this is the only case you're aware of, could you ask your 

officials what numbers they are aware of over the years? 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well my officials have no different 

perspective on this.  We do not keep information on 

relationships between landlords and tenants; that is not our 

responsibility.  We do not do that.  So I don't have the 

information.  I wouldn't want to have the information -- it 

wouldn't be appropriate.  So sorry, I can't answer that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well then could I ask this question, Mr. 

Minister:  can you tell me how much it costs . . . how much 

does the department lose in these cases?  How much damage 

deposits do you lose in the cases of social assistance trashing 

the apartments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Again, that's really a tenant-landlord 

relationship, and that is between the two of them.  Now 

presumably this individual you're talking about would lose his 

or her damage deposit.  So that would be $125.  So I assume 

that that would be lost, but we don't get involved in that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Am I to believe then 

that out of the amount of money that the recipient gets, he pays 

the damage deposit?  That doesn't reflect on his remuneration, 

or do you pay that over and above what the recipient gets?  And 

then when something like this occurs he loses that or he pays it 

out of his social assistance cheque?  How does that work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well initially we would pay that, yes; the 

125 over and above the normal allowance rates.  Now that's a 

one-time grant, a one-time damage deposit.  If that were to 

happen once or twice, that would be an overpayment; the 

person would have to pay that money back which would be 

granted in order to get another suite.  But that would have to be 

paid back. 

 

If that happened two or three times, there is a possibility that 

the person would have to go in trusteeship.  But by and large, 

it's not a problem.  This is not a problem as far as I know and 

am concerned, and we do not continue to pay damage deposits 

for people to do that.  That just is something we don't do. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

glad to hear that.  So what you're telling me really is that the 

taxpayer is on the hook for only the one damage deposit that 

each of the clients make and after that . . . I guess from what 

you've told me, there hasn't been an after that, because you say 

there's only been one. 

 

So I guess I feel comforted when you're telling me that you'll 

only do it once and then there is some sort of a penalty for the 

recipient if he does it the second or, as you said, the third time.  

Is that the way it is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well what I was trying to say is that I 

personally am only aware of the one situation, and my officials 

are as well.  That's all that have come to our attention. 

 

Just to clarify -- and I need to make a clarification here 

 -- an individual would be eligible for a damage deposit within 

two years, if necessary.  So 24 months later you would be 

eligible, if necessary, for another $125 damage deposit.  

Beyond that you may be required to go on trusteeship or 

something like that if it was required again. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then am I to 

understand that if a person is on social services, you will pay a 

damage deposit for that person?  It has nothing to do with his 

normal remuneration.  That person gets a job, they move away.  

They collect that damage deposit back and keep it, and then 

they lose their job down the road a year or two and they go 

back on assistance, then you'll pay it again.  Is that the way that 

works? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well that's a rule that your administration 

brought in and we have not changed it.  You're right.  We have 

not changed that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wasn't concerned as to whose rule it was.  I was just trying to 

find out what the system is, because I did not know that.  And it 

would seem to me, it would seem to me that the taxpayer is on 

the hook for the first one.  And I think that you could maybe 

look at, in a case of this, and it must happen a lot of times 

because I'm sure there's people going on and off welfare as jobs 

become available, and I was wondering if you would take a 

look at maybe reclaiming that first deposit instead of allowing 

the recipient to put that in his pocket. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me remind you it's $125.  If the 

person gets it back, the 125, that means the person has looked 

after his or her property well, so it's an incentive to do that.  

Then if the individual moves and just starts a job, the 

presumption is that you need an apartment or a house 

somewhere else and you'll have to pay it there. 

 

It's always been the case that sometimes people need a little 

upfront seed money to get by till the first cheque or support for 

a move or something like that.  So you may get the damage 

deposit back from house A as you start your job and move, but 

you need to make a damage deposit on house B to wherever 

you move to.  So in a sense you really transfer it from there to 

there.  You still need a damage deposit elsewhere. 

 

So I think that's the way it would usually work. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I 

understand that.  But the point I think I'm trying to make is the 

original $125 belongs to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  You 

didn't take it out of his normal remuneration.  So then he went 

and got a job and he goes off social assistance but he's still got 

the $125. 

 

Now you're telling me that it's fair and right and generous and 

all those good things that he puts it down on an apartment.  But 

he's got a job.  Other people that don't have a job or don't have 

assistance and have a job, they pay it out of their pocket. 



March 23, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

So I guess all I'm saying is that seems a little unfair to the guy 

that's working full time and year round. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all I don't think the scenario 

you presented would happen very often, okay.  But I think that 

the rules of the program are, under the Canada Assistance Plan, 

that if you're in need you have a right to the allowances that 

meet that need.  It could be your damage deposit; it could be 

clothing.  If you get a job, you don't have to give your clothing 

back. 

 

So basically you . . . This is not a loan program where you pay 

back once you get back to work.  You basically . . . The 

allowances are not great.  They're not that great; you get what 

you need.  We've already talked about these levels all being 

below the poverty line.  We want to encourage and provide 

incentives and supports to become employed.  And the scenario 

you talked about, going from house A to house B, I think 

would be viewed by the average taxpayer as a supportive 

measure to the person becoming employed. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

it certainly makes me feel good to hear you say you're not 

going to take their clothes away.  At 40 below zero it would be 

a little bit cruel and inhuman. 

 

And I don't want to appear to be nit-picking, Mr. Minister.  I 

think I'm more trying to make a point rather than talking about 

the dollars, okay.  So we'll just leave that, and there's several 

things we can be doing. 

 

I want to develop . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder, does the members want to 

take a couple of minutes and finish this, or no? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Report progress. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  I think I will do that then.  

Unless there's some objection, I'll do that right now.  I move the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 


