






















































March 3, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 3, 1995 

 

 
603 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd be happy today 
to present petitions on behalf of the people from the Leader 
community in my constituency. Also from Sceptre , a few from 
Climax, and also Burstall. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these for the people from my 
constituency today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from the people in south-west Saskatchewan. The 
prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these people are from my constituency — 
Woodrow, Lafleche, Assiniboia, Gravelbourg area. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today with regards to firearms: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Leader, Pennant, Lancer, 
Burstall, Prelate area of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 
the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of member shareholders of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool petitioning the Assembly to require the 
directors of the Pool to seek the approval of the Pool 
membership by a vote before the proposed changes to 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act are enacted by the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, 
An Act respecting the Donation of Food, 1995. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, please 
allow me to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
a young lady who is in your gallery, who has come to join us 
this morning and is interested in the proceedings, Ms. Vicky 
Lissell. I would ask the members to join me in welcoming 
Vicky to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
great privilege this morning to do two separate introductions to 
you and through you to my colleagues in the Assembly. 
 
First of all, I would like to introduce in your gallery two women 
who are good friends and business women in Regina, and I'd 
like to ask them to stand, please: Rhoda Herring and Lee 
Bechard. They are successful business women in Regina; you 
might say they are in the recycling business. I support their 
business, as do many of my colleagues, and they've come here 
today to partake in the proceedings. So I ask members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — And also seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
there are 24 grade 12 students from Greenall High School. 
Greenall High School is located in Balgonie. And they are 
accompanied here today by their teacher, Patricia Gorius, and 
their driver is Rodney Cooke. 



March 3, 1995 

 
604 

Now it was my great pleasure to actually teach some of these 
children a long, long time ago. And it's wonderful to have them 
here today and I'm looking forward to meeting with them later 
on. And I would ask all of you to join me in welcoming them 
here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you very much. I want to 
draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, and the members of the 
House, to your gallery in which are seated two gentlemen who I 
want to introduce today. They took part in a very important 
announcement with myself this morning, which I think will be a 
very positive development for Saskatchewan. 
 
The two gentlemen are Mr. Ed Cowley, who is the president of 
the Provincial Building and Trades Council, and Mr. Sid 
Matthews, who is the president of the Construction Labour 
Relations Association. 
 
I want to, on behalf of the members here, welcome them here 
this morning, and ask members to join me in extending our 
greetings to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, someone that's seated in your gallery that's very 
special. My wife Carol is here today to watch the proceedings, 
and I would like all members to give her a warm welcome here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
echo the welcome of the member from Qu'Appelle Lumsden 
who introduced the two entrepreneurial women in our 
community, at least one who is a constituent of mine. And both 
women, Lee and Rhoda, have had an opportunity to help me 
look presentable in the chambers, Mr. Speaker. So I also 
welcome them and say thank you to them for the opportunities 
I've had when I've been in their shop. 
 
I'd also like to say welcome to the grade 12 students from 
Greenall School. The early teachings of Ms. Murray have stood 
them in good stead. It was last week I had an opportunity to 
visit with them with the hon. minister for the treasury of the 
province, and they asked many good questions. 
 
With them is Pat Gorius, and I know many members will 
recognize her as a strong woman who comes from a family with 
determination behind her, as she's also the daughter of Elsie 
Gorius. I'd ask members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
The other welcome I'd like to say is also welcome to Sid 
Matthews. I had the opportunity to serve with him in Wascana 
Centre Authority a few years ago, and we had many interesting 
times during the debate about issues that affected the centre. 

So I'd like to say welcome to all of the members present and ask 
everyone to welcome them with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Fire Prevention Awards 
 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer congratulations 
to a group of students from the Humboldt area who did 
remarkably well in a Fire Prevention Week contest. This contest 
is held every year, and the theme for the contest, which was 
held last October, was "test your detector for life." 
 
Phillip Crook, who is a grade 7 student at St. Augustine School, 
received $75 for his third place entry in the division 3 poster 
competition. Matthew Droneck, a grade 2 student at Humboldt 
Public School, won honourable mention and $50 in the division 
1 colouring contest. Ryan Dielschneider, a kindergarten student 
from Naicam, received $125 for his second place finish in 
division 1. Jess Talloder, a grade 2 student at Naicam School, 
placed third in that competition and received a $75 prize. 
 
There were two winners in the division 3 category from Bruno 
School. Justin Dauvin received $125 for his second place 
poster, and Carla Leuschen received $50 for honourable 
mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students did very well in this contest 
because they were selected from a total of 10,000 entries, so it 
is quite an accomplishment. The education these students 
received by participating in this contest is very valuable. Each 
year in Saskatchewan children are injured or killed in fires in 
their homes, and it's through education that we can help prevent 
these tragedies. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Nursing Home Needed in Shaunavon 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like members of this House to be made aware of an 
anniversary of sorts that is fast approaching. It is almost 13 
years ago that the current member from Regina Elphinstone 
signed a letter of intent for the construction of a new nursing 
home in the town of Shaunavon. It was stated at that time, and I 
quote from him: the new home will replace the present one, 
which is beyond renovation to meet today's standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the fact that these words were spoken 13 
years ago, I trust that the members of this Assembly, 
particularly the Minister of Health, would agree that 
construction of a new facility is long overdue. A community 
task force, after months of study, recently made a number of 
recommendations to the district health board, foremost of which 
is that a new nursing home be constructed for level 3, level 4 
residents, and I support that recommendation. 
 



March 3, 1995 

 
605 

On behalf of the pioneers and seniors of Shaunavon and 
surrounding area, I ask that this very important project proceed 
and that it ends being a political football. 
 

Abuse Forum at Regina City Hall 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to inform 
everyone of a very interesting and worthwhile forum that took 
place Wednesday night at Regina City Hall. 
 
More than 300 people met to talk about domestic violence and 
violence against women. This was not the first meeting to 
discuss these subjects perhaps, but what makes this one 
significant and what it makes it very worthy of imitation in 
other centres is that it brought together representatives of 35 
different organizations which face the consequences of 
domestic violence: police, women's shelters, social services, 
lawyers, government workers, and politicians. 
 
Each group had its own concerns. Perhaps they don't hear the 
other's opinions and problems often enough. As a representative 
of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) said, we the 
police end up in the front end of a lot of these cases so we have 
to know how to deal with them. And, Mr. Speaker, it is the 
directors of the shelters and the social workers who can provide 
the first responders with the background they need. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, we had people talking to people, experts 
sharing with experts so that hopefully a unified body of 
knowledge will emerge. 
 
The coordinator, Barbara Shell, is to be congratulated for 
bringing together these professionals, and in a public forum, so 
that not only professionals know what other professionals are 
doing. Now the public will be more aware of what is being 
done to counter domestic violence. This kind of public sharing 
of information can only have positive results for our 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Work Experience Partnerships 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased today to inform the Assembly about the growing work 
experience partnerships of schools, businesses, and community 
organizations in my Regina North West constituency. 
 
I'd like to congratulate the following work experience partners 
in Regina North West, including Acme Video, Cable Regina 
and Canada Safeway, Cheesetoast Restaurant, Co-op grocery, 
Michael A. Riffel High School, Miller Comprehensive High 
School also has some of my students working there; Mr. Lube, 
Mr. Mister Hair Distinction, Northwest Leisure Centre, the 
Saan Stores, Sherwood Animal Clinic, the Sherwood Credit 
Union, the Sherwood Village Mall, St. Angela School, and 
Vern's Pizza. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I presently have a second work experience student 
in my office and I encourage all Regina members to participate  

with the Separate School Board which has developed an 
extensive work experience program. I challenge them to enable 
other students to get some experience of the legislature and 
constituency work as well. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Two European Health Conferences 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, at the 
invitation of two European health conferences, I had the 
pleasant opportunity to represent Saskatchewan by speaking 
about health reform as it is happening in our province. 
 
First I spoke in Amsterdam at the four-country conference on 
health care reform and health care policies. People from U.S. 
(United States), Canada, Germany and the Netherlands were 
very interested in the highlights of the Saskatchewan 
experience. These countries are looking at our experience as a 
model in their own jurisdictions. 
 
I also had the pleasure of delivering the keynote address at a 
conference on primary care development in Belfast, Northern 
Ireland. At this conference several European countries were 
represented. The conference brochure, which has been 
circulated to leaders in the European Economic Community 
says: 
 
 Recent reforms to health care pioneered in 

Saskatchewan are at the leading edge of those 
undertaken in North America. 

 
They were particularly interested in the way we are combining 
modern information technology with health care to improve the 
delivery of necessary services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the authors of a recent book on health care in 
Canada said: something wonderful is happening in 
Saskatchewan. The leadership of many, many people working 
in health care throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, is being 
internationally recognized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, a year ago the 
official opposition brought forward the issue of Vicki Lissel 
and other Saskatchewan people who have contracted hepatitis C 
through tainted blood. At the time, you told us you were 
working with other health departments and that things were 
being done. 
 
More recently, the Krever Commission investigating the safety 
of Canada's blood supply made recommendations. The 
commission stated that although risks to Canada's blood supply  



March 3, 1995 

 
606 

will be low, that some deaths will result from the therapeutic 
use of blood. The Krever report recommends, and I quote: 
 
 A system that knows these consequences will occur and 

that brings them about has, at the very least, a moral 
obligation to give some thought to the question of 
appropriate relief for those affected by the inevitable 
events. 

 
Mr. Minister, your reaction to Mr. Krever's recommendation in 
regards to hepatitis C sufferers was to say your government 
intends to focus on treatment and prevention. Can you explain 
why your government has chosen to take the opposite approach 
of the Krever Commission's recommendations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 
question, and let me clarify for the member, if he has not seen 
the report, and for other members, that the comments that he 
quotes from Justice Krever's reports are not recommendations. 
They are not part of the 43 recommendations. They are part of 
his textual comment. 
 
I have, as we have over the course of the past year, been in 
touch with ministers of Health across Canada. The position 
being taken by ministers of Health across Canada in each 
provincial jurisdiction is that the most appropriate response to 
the condition and disease of hepatitis C is for governments to 
provide the best possible treatment and the best possible 
prevention measures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I'm sure for 
individuals such as Vicky Lissel that is a very comforting 
comment. You know that this disease is just as deadly as AIDS 
(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and people are four 
times more likely to contract hepatitis C than they are HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus). Yet individuals who 
contracted AIDS through tainted blood received $20,000 
immediately and 30,000 a year until they die. In addition, 
spouses get 20,000 at the time of death and 20,000 for four 
years thereafter. As well dependent children get 4,000 a year for 
four years. 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, is your government so willing to participate 
in a package for AIDS victims yet not willing to give the same 
compensation for individuals with hepatitis C who are ill 
because of the same tainted blood, Mr. Minister? Why are these 
people being discriminated against? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again for the information 
of the member and for the information of all members, hepatitis 
C and how hepatitis C is contracted is very different, very 
different than in the circumstance of AIDS. This is quite a 
different disease, in many cases with quite minimal outcomes 
for the individual. Mr. Speaker, it needs to be made very clear 
that this is quite a different condition and it's not near as  

possible to demonstrate with clarity that the disease had been 
contracted through a blood transfusion. 
 

Government Tendering Policy 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, your 
worst-kept secret of your government is finally out this morning 
and you finally admit that you have a union-preference 
tendering policy. And it's almost identical, I might point out, to 
the document that we presented for you back in January. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, your government talks about creating a 
positive business climate in Saskatchewan yet you bring in a 
policy that is universally opposed by the business community in 
our province. I have a list, Minister, of 260 construction 
companies from all parts of this province who oppose this 
policy and I have a copy with me today. Many municipalities 
have written to us to say that they oppose this policy, Minister, 
so will you table your list of businesses and municipalities that 
support this policy? Would you do that for us today, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to respond to the member's question on an issue which I 
happen to believe will be of great significance in a positive way 
for Saskatchewan in the construction industry. I want to say to 
the member opposite that this is no secret; it was announced at 
a press conference this morning which was attended by 
members of the trades and also members of the construction 
industry. 
 
The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement will ensure that 
there will be a fair and an open tendering process for 
commercial Crown corporation construction work, a process 
based on awarding contracts to the lowest qualified bidder. This 
is what business in Saskatchewan wants. This is what the 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan want, awarding of contracts to the 
lowest qualified bidder and that's what this agreement does. 
And how the member opposite could object to that, I don't 
understand. 
 
I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this agreement 
balances some very important objectives. It balances the 
objectives of obtaining the best value for money, of treating 
workers fairly which is something members opposite don't fully 
understand, and of maximizing the use of Saskatchewan local 
labour which has not always been the case in Saskatchewan but 
yet is an important factor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
you tried to keep your policy a secret, but we exposed you last 
January because your timing wasn't right until now, so you've 
held off. 



March 3, 1995 

 
607 

The truth of the matter is, Minister, you won't table your list of 
people that support you because you don't have one. This policy 
is universally condemned by Saskatchewan contractors because 
they know it's going to drive up labour costs. Mr. Minister, 30 
to 40 per cent of the costs of most construction projects goes 
into labour; you know that. The Melfort pipeline gave us a clear 
example of how union-preference tendering drives labour costs 
right through the roof. 
 
And that's bad for everybody, Mr. Minister. It's bad for you. It's 
bad for businesses. It's bad for me, and it's bad for the 
taxpayers, Mr. Minister, who will wind up paying these 
increased cost through higher utility rates. Now that's a fact, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how much will this policy drive up the 
construction costs in the Crown corporations? Will you table 
your study that you have done to evaluate this cost impact on 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me point out 
to the House and to the member opposite that this is not really 
breaking new ground. The member will very well know that this 
kind of project agreement has existed in Saskatchewan at 
different times since 1913. 
 
Let me bring some examples of more recent nature to the 
attention of the House. The Bi-Provincial upgrader construction 
project was operated under this kind of an agreement. Part of 
the Shand power plant project operated under this kind of an 
agreement. Cameco's Contact Lake gold mine project in 
northern Saskatchewan was operated under this kind of an 
agreement. Those corporations involved in the private sector 
did not think it was going to significantly or if at all increase the 
cost of construction, and I don't think that this agreement will 
either. 
 
It is an agreement that works across Canada in many 
circumstances; it's the kind of process that has worked in 
Saskatchewan in the past. It's going to provide balance, it's 
going to provide a level playing-field, it's going to provide a 
process to qualify will be lowest qualified bidder, and I think 
that that's a good policy. It does away with the kind of confused 
situation which used to exist, and that's why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
there's a couple of things that you have missed here. You 
compare these kind of contracts with the ones done in the past 
and there is no comparison at all except that they were both 
done on paper. The fact of the matter is, as I understand it, that 
these were open-site contracts in the past, where non-union 
workers did not have to pay union dues. So there's a significant 
difference right there, along with a whole lot of others. 
 
Mr. Minister, this policy is a disaster. The contractors don't  

want it. It's discriminatory. It's going to drive costs up, and you 
don't even know how much. You won't table your analysis or 
your studies of the costs because you don't have any; you 
haven't done any. You won't table any supporters because you 
haven't consulted with people and you don't have a list of 
supporters, except the unions. That's all you've got. 
 
This policy exists for one reason, Mr. Minister, and one reason 
only — to buy union support going into the next election. That's 
all it's for, Mr. Minister. Why should taxpayers have to pay for 
your NDP (New Democratic Party) political debt to the unions? 
Why don't you admit this policy is a mistake? 
 
Remove these discriminatory hiring quotas and let the 
construction people hire whoever they want — union or non-
union. Open it up. Let the best men win and the best women 
win the contracts on their own merit. Why don't you put the 
taxpayers' interests ahead of your own political agenda, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I often have thought 
that the Leader of the Liberal Party is the one that's confused 
here most of the time, but now I regretfully have to suggest that 
maybe the official opposition is just as confused. 
 
For the member opposite to say that nobody in the construction 
industry supports this is completely wrong because the 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, the agreement is signed by the 
Saskatchewan Provincial Building and Trades Council, 
representative of the trades, and it is signed by the construction 
labour relations association which is the representative of 
contractors. So for the member opposite to say that there is no 
support for this, I think goes beyond all reason. 
 
What the member refuses to comment on is the fact that this 
agreement provides all of the principles about making sure we 
have qualified tradespeople in Saskatchewan, making sure that 
the employment of Saskatchewan people is maximized, and 
making sure that the lowest qualified bidder gets the contract. 
 
Members opposite have argued for it in the past, but that's all 
they've done. We're putting it into place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Patronage Appointments 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the lead up to the 1991 provincial election, the Premier attacked 
the Conservatives for their patronage gone wild and rightly so. 
However, Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised the people of 
Saskatchewan that he was going to clean it up. The Premier 
stated that he was going to professionalize the civil service. 
 
On page 14 of your 1991 election platform document, it states, 
and I quote: 
 



March 3, 1995 

 
608 

 A New Democrat government will fight to eliminate 
patronage by strengthening the public service to ensure 
that the public service is competent and hired on 
qualifications and not political affiliation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to table today a list of some 10 or 11 
patronage positions involved in the management of 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority alone, a list that 
includes past party presidents, treasurers, election workers. 
 
My question is to the Premier: could the reason for all your 
problems in this department be the fact that your party 
affiliation and party loyalty was far more important to you than 
appointing experienced professionals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
respond to the member opposite because I have watched 
carefully comments of the Liberal Party with regard to 
patronage. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, and I want the member 
opposite to know, that the policy of this government is to hire 
people based on their qualifications. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — And if they are capable of doing 
the job, for a job for which they are appointed, it should not 
matter what political affiliation they have and therefore, on the 
basis of that, determine whether they should or should not get 
the job. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that's quite opposite to what Liberals 
do. And I want to quote to the member opposite what the Prime 
Minister has said about patronage, who said . . . the Prime 
Minister told Maclean's magazine in the year-end interview that 
he had no choice but to appoint people he was acquainted with. 
And that is how he gauges their competence, on the basis of 
who he is acquainted with. Or as he put it: 
 
 Guys you don't know, you don't know. Guys you know, 

you know. And that's competence. 
 
That's not the approach of the New Democratic Party or our 
kind of government, although that may be the approach of 
Liberals opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well obviously 
when you throw a rock in the dark and you hear a dog yelp, 
you've probably hit the dog. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the entire management team of Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming being nothing more than political 
operatives, the people of Saskatchewan must assume that all 
departments and Crowns are filled with party loyalists,  

and not professionals. 
 
My question is to the Premier again: are you prepared to table in 
this House a list of all the political patronage positions you have 
filled with your friends and party faithful, along with their 
qualifications, salaries, and benefits? 
 
And Mr. Premier, I don't mean just the obvious ones, such as 
Jack Messer of SaskPower or Don Ching of Crown 
Investments. I'm referring to all the party loyalists that you have 
stuck in departments and Crowns. Will you table that list today, 
and will you defend that list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all, let me answer directly 
the member's question. No, I do not need to table that kind of a 
list because the appointments to positions in the government, of 
this government, are not based on the basis of principle . . . on 
the basis of patronage. They are based on the basis of principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me repeat. Let me repeat that the appointments 
to the people in positions in the government are based on the 
basis of qualification and ability to do the job, and not based on 
the basis of principle. Quite contrary to the position of his 
leader, the member from Greystone, the Liberal leader, who is 
quoted in the News-Optimist of North Battleford not too long 
ago saying that she doesn't mean she wouldn't make partisan 
appointments. Unquote. 
 
Quote again: that doesn't mean that Liberals won't get jobs, she 
said. They're competent. If you have someone who is competent 
and has integrity, it doesn't matter what their political stripe is 
because they will do an excellent job. 
 
I ask the member opposite, first of all, how does he square his 
leader's comments about patronage, and then how is it that he 
sets one standard for the Liberal Party and another standard for 
an NDP government? Can he explain that to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Premier, since coming to power you 
have decimated rural Saskatchewan by displacing hundreds of 
health care professionals, nurses, teachers, highway workers, 
SaskPower workers, and on and on and on. These are the very 
people that make communities just that — a community. 
Instead, Mr. Premier, you chose to take jobs away from those 
people so that you could afford to give jobs to your political 
friends. 
 
I will table another list — some eight full pages, Mr. Speaker, 
that were passed on to me — with names, their constituencies, 
and where they were being slotted into the government. Names 
of past cabinet ministers, MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), party presidents, party organizers, along with past 
candidates, Mr. Premier. 
 
How can you sit there, how can you sit there and defend those 
actions when you have done so much harm to the ordinary men 
and women of this province? 



March 3, 1995 

 
609 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite again. I don't have to repeat what the policy of 
the government is, but I will, because obviously in some 
classrooms where I have been a teacher, rote learning was a 
very important way of teaching people. 
 
So using that principle, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member from Assiniboia that the people who get jobs in the 
Crowns and the Government of Saskatchewan get them on the 
basis of their qualities and their capabilities. 
 
Some of them are New Democrats and supporters of the New 
Democratic Party. I don't apologize for that. Fifty-one per cent 
of the people of this province, in fact, voted NDP in the last 
provincial election. And because of the achievements of this 
government, probably the same amount of people will vote for 
the NDP in the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — So our position is clear. But just to 
quote further from his leader, the Leader of the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan, she said on CKRM, I believe: I don't see any 
reason why we just don't clearly delineate what are political 
jobs and say this is how it's going to be done and make it 
transparent. Meaning that there is room for patronage 
appointments. She would do it, but she would do it her way. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, come on, let's get . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member was 
right; their position is clear. Because I've just tabled pages and 
pages and pages of names with political appointments. 
 
Mr. Premier, my role here isn't to try and embarrass you in front 
of your party or the people of Saskatchewan. What I'm trying to 
do is get through to you, Mr. Premier, that you had choices to 
make and you chose the wrong path. You chose to make rural 
people pay for the Saskatchewan elections of 1982 and 1986. 
 
Mr. Premier, you're soon going back to the people of 
Saskatchewan and asking them to re-elect your government for 
another term. Can you tell the people today if they should 
expect more of the same, or are you willing to admit your 
mistakes, stop your patronage, and stop your attack on rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting 
individual to be asking these questions. And I say this almost 
with some regret. But I think if the member wants to pursue this 
particular approach, I want to be very honest in the House and 
talk about his real approach. 
 
I recall the days before he moved over to sit behind the Leader 
of the Liberal Party, in which he brought lists and lists of 
people who he wanted appointed to people in the government. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having been told that people in the 
government are appointed on the basis of quality and the basis 
of expertise and the ability to do the job, maybe that's one of the 
reasons why he decided he was going to move to the Liberal 
Party because it would have greater opportunities for him to 
appoint his patronage appointments just in case the Liberal 
Party ever became the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare 1-800 Line 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to address a question to the party that is not 
based on principle, which was a stunning admission by the 
Deputy Premier. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to address a very 
serious development over the last couple of days coming from 
the Minister of Social Services who stated in this House that the 
Manitoba government paid $650,000 for the 1-800 tip line and 
recovered only 230,000. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the minister refused to table the 
document, when I got up on a point of order, that he claimed to 
be quoting from. And he said: 
 
 The reality is the information I have from the University 

of Manitoba — I'll give you the source — the research 
they've done is that they have not recovered half of the 
cost of those cheat lines . . . That was independent 
research I'm drawing on. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this has turned out to be bald-faced 
misrepresentation. There has been no research done by the 
university. In fact the professor that the minister said would 
verify the claim said, and I quote from the Leader-Post: 
 
 "I have not done a piece of research specifically on the 

tip line," Ryant said in an interview. 
 
In fact the professor said that he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member has to ask 
his question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact the professor 
said he was guessing about what numbers were based on. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I want the member to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, will you admit 
that your information was false, that there was no research, and 
that the figures you quoted in this House have absolutely no 
reliability, no credibility. Will you make that admission, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 3, 1995 

 
610 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite accuse me of misquoting a source. This is a problem, 
Mr. Speaker, that they should know something about — that 
they should know something about. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has been accusing us all week of 
turning down $7.2 billion Crow offer from Charlie Mayer. 
Charlie Mayer says today in the Leader-Post, and I quote: 
 
 (He says) . . . can't say he ever offered $7.2 billion to 

farmers . . . 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, let me say three things in reply to his 
question. First of all, we have one of the best systems in Canada 
for accountability for welfare prosecution and fraud — 30 full-
time workers, as reported in the Star-Phoenix today. 
 
Secondly, I spoke to Dr. Ryant myself last night. He confirmed, 
as I said in the House and as is in the Leader-Post today, that in 
his opinion the cost of the Manitoba tip line will exceed the 
amounts recovered. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I did make one mistake. I said in this 
House that the Manitoba program will spend $650,000 and will 
collect only 230, and I was mistaken in saying that. Those aren't 
the numbers for the Manitoba program. Those are the numbers 
for the last year of the Saskatchewan special investigations 
branch, run by the members in that opposite party when they 
were in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — The same article, thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Member, there is one and half million dollars 
annual savings, said Cindy Stevens out of the Manitoba 
department. 
 
Mr. Minister, on this entire matter you have been less than 
forthright. And that's painfully obvious to everyone except you. 
You sit in this House and you attack the leader, our leader, the 
member from Wilkie, with half truths and misrepresentation. 
You even attacked a fellow minister. You said and quote: I'm 
telling you that the Manitoba minister is misleading the public 
and so are you. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you have been found out. It is you that have 
been misleading the public, and it's you that doesn't have a clue 
what's going on. Mr. Minister, honourable people would 
recognize this perversion and rectify it immediately. You chose 
to defend the indefensible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I will now give you the opportunity 
to stand and apologize unequivocally to my colleagues, 
apologize to the Speaker and members of this House, apologize 
to the Minister of Social Services in Manitoba, and to apologize 
to the public who depend on ministers telling the truth. Will 
you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, I spoke to Dr. 
Ryant last night myself too, and the clip he refers to is only 
about one-quarter of the story, only about one-quarter of the 
story. 
 
I clarified my comment this morning; I admitted a mistake. I did 
that this morning in good faith. Will the Leader of the 
Opposition now get up and clarify his mistake that he made 
quoting Charlie Mayer, saying he's offered $7.2 billion. That is 
not true. Will he do what I did, get up and do the honourable 
thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
question no. 55, I would move that it be converted to motion for 
return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Convert to motion for return (debatable), no. 
55. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Assessment 
Appraisers 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 26 introduces The Saskatchewan Assessment 
Appraisers Act. I'm pleased to introduce legislation for a new 
profession Act governing assessment appraisers. This Bill 
follows from decisions made last year relating to the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency and reflects 
this government's commitment to ensure the provincial 
legislation responds to the local government needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill was initiated at the request of the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers Association. It was 
developed by the association using a model for professions 
legislation provided by the Department of Justice. For the most 
part it contains standard provisions to appear in all new 
professions legislation. 
 
Standard provisions providing protection and accountability to 
the public include public appointees to the association's council, 
approval of the association's by-law by the government, 
publicly accessible disciplinary committee meetings, 
submission of an annual report to the legislature. 
 
(1045) 
 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers Association was  



March 3, 1995 

 
611 

established in 1959. In comparison to other professional 
associations it is a relatively new association. In order to give 
the association time to draft by-laws that accommodate the 
association's new rule as a publicly responsible body, the 
association's by-law will be approved by a regulations review 
committee and cabinet instead of the minister responsible 
which is a standard practice. 
 
Recent amendments to The Assessment Management Agency 
Act have broadened the responsibility of the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Appraisers Association in setting province-wide 
property and business assessment appraisal policies and 
practices. For example, representatives of the association now 
sit on the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) board and on other SAMA advisory committees. 
 
Recent amendments to The Assessment Management Agency 
Act also provided municipalities with the option of using 
SAMA's in-house field services or hiring someone who is 
certified by SAMA to provide the same services. 
 
The Assessment Appraisers Act proposes to give the 
association the authority to certify its members who are persons 
regularly involved in the valuation and re-evaluation of property 
and business for assessment purposes. This authority competes 
with SAMA's present authority. 
 
In order to disentangle the responsibilities between the 
association and SAMA, some consequential amendments to 
The Assessment Management Agency Act will be required. The 
nature of the amendments to The Assessment Management 
Agency Act will be to continue SAMA's authority to establish 
and maintain educational standards and professional 
competence for municipal assessors only, but no longer for 
assessment appraisers. 
 
As well, amendment to The Assessment Management Agency 
Act will provide a scope of practice permitting certified 
members of the association to perform assessment evaluations 
and re-evaluations. The Assessment Appraisers Act provides 
that similar education experience of others, for example, those 
involved in real estate property appraisal, be recognized by the 
association, and that these individuals be given credit towards 
certification as a SAA (Saskatchewan Assessors' Association) 
member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new legislation accomplishes a number of 
objectives. It will raise the profile of the association and 
provide more credibility to its activities by recognizing the 
association. A province-wide standard for certification of 
assessment appraisers will be regulated by professionals 
working within the area. As well, this legislation will recognize 
the activities of the association in conjunction with SAMA. 
 
In addition, local governments choosing to opt out of SAMA's 
field services will be able to do so with the assistance of 
qualified assessment appraisers. It is anticipated that this 
initiative could stimulate more demand for self-employed, 
locally based assessment appraisers. 

Least but not last . . . last but not least, Mr. Speaker, this 
legislation does not impose any additional requirements or 
broaden the sphere currently regulated. It will simply reallocate 
responsibilities for recognizing certified assessment appraisers 
from SAMA to the Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers' 
Association. 
 
Assessment valuations for tax purposes are already subject to a 
number of procedural requirements directed by SAMA, and 
they are to be carried out by certified assessment appraisers as 
certified by this association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to support this 
legislation, and I move second reading of Bill No. 26. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice the minister was 
already shaking her head when I started rising to my feet. I'm 
not sure what that meant, but I'd like to make a couple of 
comments before I move adjournment though. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAMA is certainly an agency that has taken a lot 
of criticism over the past number of years, and assessors in 
general. And I would also like to acknowledge that there are 
many people across this province who are having great 
difficulty in understanding what it means to have an assessment 
done, especially in regards to taxes. And I've approached the 
minister's office on a number of occasions, especially with 
small properties where individuals may be running a business 
and some of the problems they're running into. 
 
The minister talked about public accountability, public 
accessibility, and I'm not exactly sure all the details what the 
minister was referring to, but I think that's what the public in 
general are looking for as well. And possibly assessors and 
appraisers want to have more of an opportunity to talk to and 
meet with the public to address how they set assessments, how 
assessments are approved, and where we go from here. 
 
I think one of the biggest questions out there was regards to 
small properties out in rural Saskatchewan, where people are 
beginning . . . or have been assessed for a period of time based 
on the value of buildings on the property versus the land values. 
And I think there is areas in that regard that need to really be 
addressed, especially when you look at individuals who are 
paying more in taxes than if they would have purchased a house 
in town and a lot in town. 
 
So I think there are a number of questions, I believe there are a 
number of questions that we need to address, we need to 
review, and see whether or not some of these concerns can be 
addressed and will be addressed through the piece of legislation 
that the minister has just given second reading on. 
 
So therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
adjournment of debate on this issue. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



March 3, 1995 

 
612 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984, and to make a Consequential Amendment to 

The Municipal Board Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 27 amends The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. This 
Bill is part of the government’s ongoing program of municipal 
legislative renewal intended to keep provincial legislation 
pertaining to municipalities up to date and to ensure that it is 
responsive to evolving local government needs. 
 
Since elected, this government has introduced an extensive list 
of changes to the three municipal Acts, passed new innovative 
legislation relating to local improvements, made significant 
changes to SAMA's governance and funding, restored the ward 
system to the urban municipalities, and amended The Local 
Government Election Act prior to the last round of urban, 
municipal, and school elections. 
 
There is also a review of The Tax Enforcement Act currently 
under way that will lead to introduction of amendments to 
streamline this process at a future session of this legislature. 
 
Preparation of these amendments and the others I have referred 
to has involved consultation with municipalities and other 
affected organizations. The amendments were also prepared 
parallel to and in the context of efforts by the task force of 
urban government renewal established by the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association. 
 
This Bill makes several changes that will expand local 
municipal authority autonomy. These include a new approach 
that will permit municipalities to develop and implement their 
own standard inspection and enforcement procedures to apply 
to a number of property maintenance and public safety 
provisions already in the Act. 
 
Saskatoon has had to suggest that we standardize these 
provisions in the Act. This approach permits each municipality 
to tailor their procedures to local needs, subject to certain legal 
requirements to protect individual property owners. 
 
Another change will expand municipal authority to set and 
collect fees for services provided by the municipality to the 
public or to the property owners. To date, authority in the Act 
for fees has been limited to a few selected areas. 
 
This amendment will give councils a discretion to decide 
whether to use a user-pay approach or to support services from 
the tax base. This authority to set fees will extend to services 
provided to tax exempt properties such as provincial property, 
provided they are treated consistently with other properties. The 
provision responds directly to the concerns raised by SUMA's 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) task force on 
urban government renewal. 
 
A third amendment will give municipalities broad authority to 
participate in commercial ventures for economic development 
purposes. Municipal legislation in this province has limited this  

potential. Recent amendments to The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 began to open the door by permitting share ownership by 
municipalities. This change which was also made for the rural 
and northern Acts, continues this process. 
 
This amendment basically says we are prepared to trust elected 
municipal councils with the decisions whether to participate 
financially in an economic development initiative. Some 
councils will prefer not to do so and to stick to traditional 
municipal services, but they will all have the option to make 
their own decisions. 
 
A fourth change will provide the opportunity to the four largest 
cities to undertake long-term borrowing within overall 
borrowing limits set by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, but 
without going to the SMB (Saskatchewan Municipal Board) for 
individual approval of each and every new borrowing. 
 
Regina has suggested this; while this change offers opportunity 
to reduce administrative overhead, it is limited to the four 
largest cities at this time, based on their in-house legal and 
financial expertise. This should enable these cities to meet 
financial and statutory requirements for debenture issues 
without SMB supervision if they choose to do it this way. 
 
This Bill addresses other matters such as providing protection 
on liability for fire-fighters, particularly volunteer fire-fighters 
performing a wide variety of fire and emergency response 
services on behalf of the municipalities. This change responds 
to a number of requests. These expressed concerns that 
volunteers would not be as willing to make their services 
available to their communities if a perceived increase in legal 
risk resulting from court decisions elsewhere could not be 
offset. Parallel amendments are being made in the rural and 
northern Acts as well. 
 
The amendments also respond to a number of municipal 
administrative concerns. These include: waiving financial 
receipts for payments made to municipalities through third 
parties; adding local council's discretion on the limits of 
amounts of cash held in municipal offices; authority to borrow 
to participate in intermunicipal agreements; clarification of the 
SMB's supervisory powers where a municipality is placed under 
its financial supervision; more flexibility relating to the 
exchange of debentures; authority to prorate tax payments 
among taxing authorities; removal of some ministerial 
approvals relating to forms; and resolving an administrative 
dilemma created by the requirement to assess all businesses, 
when for many home-based businesses it simply is not 
practical, by permitting licensing instead. 
 
Finally, these amendments also provide municipalities with new 
tools to help manage the tax impacts of reassessment in 1997. 
Specifically, the existing provisions in The Assessment 
Management Agency Act permitting municipalities to phase in 
new assessments following a re-evaluation are enhanced. 
 
The changes are to reduce the administrative burden of new 
assessment notices in every year of a phase-in, provided full  



March 3, 1995 

 
613 

information is provided in the first-year notices, and to address 
a problem of potential tax shifts among municipalities within a 
school division  are related to the levies of other taxing 
authorities  created by only some municipalities to choose to 
phase in their assessments. 
 
This is done by permitting the municipality to adjust the mill 
rate set for other taxing authorities based on the full new 
assessments, in order to raise an equivalent amount of revenue 
for the taxing authority based on the phased-in assessment. This 
is modelled on the British Columbia legislation. 
 
Additional authority is given for municipalities to adopt a tax 
phase-in plan, instead of phasing-in assessments. This reflects 
approaches used in Manitoba and Ontario following 
reassessment. Under such a tax phase-in plan, the municipality 
could adjust the tax impacts over up to three years, essentially 
as a transitional provision. 
 
The objective of both of these provisions is to better position 
municipalities to respond to reassessment. More work will be 
done on other aspects of this in a review of the local 
government tax policy that is to be undertaken in the upcoming 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe all of the amendments in this Bill can be 
supported by the members of this legislature. They are in the 
interests of the municipalities and their residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 27. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I was 
listening to the minister, there's obviously a number of changes 
that the Act is bringing into force. And we're going to need 
some time to study the comments that were made by the 
minister and take a closer look at the Act. 
 
I just gather that where the minister was talking of giving other 
powers or opening up the ability to collect fees, I'm sure a lot of 
municipalities are looking for that, have been bringing forward 
a number of suggestions in that matter — in the manner of how 
they collect fees, and certainly how they set taxes in view of the 
taxes that accumulate where people renege on paying their 
taxes. 
 
The long-term borrowing ability, I'm not sure how many 
communities would really be looking at that. I guess that's a 
matter that a lot of communities have been raising in view of 
the fact that their funding from the senior level of government 
has decreased and they need ways of trying to assess and trying 
to build for capital expenditures. 
 
But I, as well, understand this Bill addresses one major concern 
in Saskatchewan, especially rural Saskatchewan, and that has to 
do with volunteer fire services. And it's an issue that I know has  

been brought to my attention. I'm sure that members on all sides 
of all parties in this House have had that issue brought to their 
attention. And it's something that we look forward to discussing 
with the minister as we get into further debate and committee of 
workings regarding the Bill. 
 
However at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of a Bill to amend The Northern Municipalities Act, 
Bill No. 28. 
 
Urban municipal government did not come to the majority of 
municipalities in northern Saskatchewan until 1983 when The 
Northern Municipalities Act was proclaimed in force. 
 
The northern Act is legislation setting out the powers, duties, 
and responsibilities of our northern municipal governments. 
Although northern municipalities are still in relative infancy 
when compared to the 90 years of experience of many of our 
southern counterparts, they have over the past 12 years taken 
great strides in improving their abilities to manage their local 
government operations. I wish to compliment the many elected 
and appointed officials who have served their communities 
during the course of the past 12 years for their efforts and their 
dedication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general terms The Northern Municipalities Act 
contains provisions that are identical or very similar to those 
that exist in The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. When first 
proclaimed in 1983, The Northern Municipalities Act contained 
provisions that closely paralleled those in The Urban 
Municipality Act. 
 
There were, however, certain provisions in the northern Act that 
to varying degrees differed with those in the urban Act to 
address both the newness of northern local government and to 
recognize certain unique facets of the North. 
 
Over the intervening years, amendments have been made to the 
northern Act to keep it in sync with amendments that have been 
made in the urban Act, and as northern municipalities have 
matured and developed, to slowly eliminate some of the 
differences between the two pieces of legislation. 
 
Many of the amendments contained in this Bill are primarily of 
a housekeeping nature, bringing provisions of the northern Act 
back into conformity with their counterparts in the urban Act 
that have earlier been amended by The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984, which was passed by this House last session. 
 
I do, however, wish to comment on certain of the provisions 
contained in this Bill that are unique to the northern Act. When 
the northern Act was first proclaimed it was not anticipated that  



March 3, 1995 

 
614 

any of our northern communities would ever cease to exist. This 
thinking resulted in the northern Act failing to contain 
provisions to provide for the dissolution of the northern 
settlements which are the first and basic level of northern 
municipal structures. 
 
The concluding of the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework 
Agreement that provided entitlement bands with funding to 
purchase properties throughout the province has altered this 
thinking. Negotiations are presently under way that could result 
in some northern municipalities being partly or entirely 
designated as Indian reserves. 
 
Dissolution of these northern municipalities would occur in 
some cases. The amendment to provide for the dissolution of 
northern settlements will enable the process to occur where 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another provision of this Bill that I wish to 
comment on briefly is the provision designating the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board as having authority, if 
requested to do so by the minister, to financially supervise the 
operations of any northern municipality that is experiencing 
financial difficulties. 
 
When The Northern Municipality Act was first enacted, the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board, then the Local Government 
Board, had very little knowledge or exposure to the conditions 
and situations under which the northern municipalities would 
first begin to operate. 
 
At that time responsibility for financial supervision, when and 
if warranted, was placed in the hands of the minister 
responsible for the northern Act. Over the past 12 years the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board has had occasion to deal with 
some northern municipalities on other matters. 
 
Northern municipalities are much more aware of the role of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board, while board members and staff 
are more familiar with the conditions and factors affecting 
northern municipalities. The Saskatchewan Municipal Board 
has authority under both The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and 
The Rural Municipality Act, 1989, to supervise the financial 
affairs of rural and urban municipalities where the situation 
warrants such action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the time has now arrived where it is desirable to 
bring about consistency with those other two municipal Acts by 
giving financial supervision authority to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board with respect to northern municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not take up further time in discussing the 
other amendments contained in this Bill. I am sure that the 
members of this House are familiar with the nature and intent of 
these other amendments, from having either dealt with them in 
last session in the consideration of the Act to amend The Urban 
Municipality Act or in consideration of amendments before 
them in this session. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I respectively request all members to join with me 
in support of this Bill which will further enhance and improve 
the development of our municipalities in northern 
Saskatchewan. I move second reading of a Bill to amend The 
Northern Municipality Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened 
to the minister's comments and certainly there was a fair bit of 
information in the second reading speech that the minister gave 
us. I gather from the comments that were raised that a number 
of the changes that the Act is bringing about are changes that 
basically are bringing the Act more up to date and giving a lot 
of the northern communities access to the same type of 
information and opportunities that some of the large urban 
centres in our southern communities have had. 
 
And on that basis I don't see where there is a lot to look at 
opposing or even standing in the way of, but certainly there are 
some areas we'd like to discuss a little further and have the 
opportunity to address for a little more clarification or 
understanding. And I think to allow the time to review the 
statements by the minister and review the piece of legislation, it 
would be only appropriate to take some time to do that. And 
therefore I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Rural 
Municipality Act, 1989 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 29 amends The 
Rural Municipality Act, 1989. This is one of several Bills in the 
government's program of municipal legislative renewal. The 
purpose of this Bill is to keep rural municipality legislation up 
to date and responsive. The government is committed to this 
program of pragmatic modernization of municipal legislation 
and has pursued it since the government was elected. 
 
The municipal legislative renewal package for this session 
includes these Bills placed before the House today. This Bill 
forms part of a broader package which includes the urban and 
the northern Act as I've already spoken about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the election, the government has taken a 
consistent approach to local government legislative changes. As 
a result, Saskatchewan's municipal legislation has been kept at 
the forefront of municipal law in Canada. For example, at the 
last legislative session, the government made a number of 
incremental but important amendments to The Rural 
Municipality Act. 
 
In last year's renewal package, rural councils in organized 
hamlets were given more flexibility in negotiating hamlet 
financial arrangements. This reform gave rural residents an 
alternative to the formation of small, non-viable villages. It 
permits small communities to remain within the RM (rural 
municipality) structure. In this way, it strengthens the rural 
municipal system in Saskatchewan. Last year, we also included 
new authority for rural municipalities to provide fire protection  



March 3, 1995 

 
615 

and we gave rural councils new tools for emergency response 
services. 
 
In this session, we have a Bill that makes more extensive 
reforms. I want to deal with some of these highlighted in this 
new Bill. But first, I must make it clear that we are not making 
these changes alone. We have a strong and productive 
relationship with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, and the Rural Municipal Administrators' 
Association. The changes are in response to SARM's 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) resolutions 
or direct discussion with the SARM's board of directors. 
 
This Bill contains a number of changes that will expand rural 
municipal authority and autonomy. It provides liability 
protection to volunteer fire-fighters, Mr. Speaker. In rural areas, 
volunteer fire-fighters have always provided an invaluable 
public service that rural communities simply could not support 
in any other way. 
 
However, there have been increasing concerns that legal 
liability risks for volunteers may lead to reduced fire protection 
for lack of volunteers. This amendment should assure rural 
residents of continued fire protection from these public-spirited 
volunteers. 
 
Another key amendment will give rural municipalities broader 
authority to participate in commercial ventures for economic 
development purposes. Yet another amendment provides rural 
councils with expanded authority to finance local public works 
through levies on benefiting property owners under local 
improvement procedures. 
 
This Bill also permits the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency to establish the percentage of value for 
assessing rural improvements, including buildings and other 
improvements. This change and a parallel one being made in 
The Northern Municipalities Act will provide consistent 
legislative provisions in this respecting all municipalities across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Tax policy changes are included that parallel the amendments 
the government is making in this session to the urban municipal 
legislation. We are providing rural municipalities with new 
tools to help manage the tax impacts of reassessment in 1997 or 
earlier if needed. Municipalities will be able to cushion the 
effects of reassessment through either tax or assessment phase-
in. 
 
Rural councils will have more financial elbow-room under a 
new provision that will permit rural municipalities to license 
home-based businesses. In many instances it is not practical to 
assess the growing number of businesses conducted out of the 
home or farm premise. 
 
This change will help resolve the administrative dilemma 
created by the requirement to assess all businesses by 
permitting licensing if municipalities so prefer. The licence fee 
for home-based businesses will be limited to the cost of the  

municipality for administration and regulation of that licence. 
This Bill eliminates many ministerial approvals, requirements 
for forms, notices and receipts, thus giving rural councils more 
autonomy to determine their own administrative practices. 
 
Many administrative improvements to rural municipal election 
procedures are included in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. These 
amendments parallel some early amendments to the local 
election law for urban and school elections that are appropriate 
to rural municipalities. For example, Canadian citizenship will 
become a requirement for voting in rural municipal elections. It 
has been a standard feature throughout Canada in elections at 
all level of governments. 
 
In another amendment to improve election procedure, rural 
municipalities will be permitted to use cardboard ballot boxes 
for greater efficiency and less expense. Also rural election 
officials will be permitted to combine advance poll ballots with 
those from regular polls, ensuring secrecy of voting in advance 
polls where the voter turn-out is small. 
 
And finally in line with health reform, RM councils will be 
empowered to restrict smoking in public places. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the amendments in this Bill advance 
municipal renewal in Saskatchewan and I therefore urge all 
members to support this Bill. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 29, a Bill to amend the rural 
municipal Act. 
 
 (1115) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in lieu of 
the fact that the Minister of Community Services has a number 
of Bills just giving second reading on today, I can see where 
we're going to have a fair bit of discussion and an opportunity 
to quiz her on a number of issues, including The Rural 
Municipality Act. 
 
Now I have no problem with us basically bringing amendments 
and keeping legislation up to date and addressing some of the 
issues. I think a couple of issues though, the minister's talked 
about, are . . . will be of major concern to rural residents. 
 
The fact that this Bill, as the minister had indicated, is going to 
allow for a greater ability . . . may make it easier for 
municipalities working together with small hamlets in providing 
government or providing local government versus forcing 
hamlets to take on a village status, I think is very good. Because 
I know we have a couple of communities in my constituency 
that operate that way and operate very well, receive excellent 
services. 
 
The fire protection portion is an issue that again comes to the 
forefront, and certainly for rural municipalities is something 
that they will really appreciate and will be very interested in, as 
the minister alluded to in her comments and discussion with 
SARM. 



March 3, 1995 

 
616 

One area though that I think we'll continue to have some 
concern, will raise some concern, will be basically a red flag in 
rural communities, is the issue of assessment based on rural 
improvements. And I think the concern, as I've brought forward 
just a minute ago and didn't elaborate on, is the fact that even 
just adding a garage onto a building, or building another 
building on your property, is going to allow the rural 
municipalities to change the assessment rate and possibly 
increase that, and increase the taxes. 
 
I think the biggest concern in rural communities and how their 
assessments are operated is we have an assessment rate that 
looks at buildings but it forgets about the fact that rural 
residents provide their own water, provide their own sewer, and 
a number of these other issues. And when they look at their 
taxes versus the urban centres, they find that they feel that their 
taxes are just too high. And I'm not exactly sure if there are 
issues in this Bill that address some of those concerns, but I 
know they will be some of the issues that will be coming to the 
forefront. 
 
And we look forward to discussing and debating this at a later 
date, as we get into further review of the Bill, and certainly as 
we get into committee and go clause by clause. 
 
However to facilitate the process of reviewing and making sure 
all the issues are dealt with and we're ready for committee work, 
I move at this time to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Assessment 
Management Agency Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill amends The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. 
 
Over the past year, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board has 
struggled to address assessment appeals with fairness and 
equity in the context of assessment policies and practices that 
are out of date and have become unfair because of it. We have 
watched an independent assessment management agency also 
struggle to respond to the consequences of these appeal 
decisions when they would rather get on with the 
comprehensive reassessment that has been deferred repeatedly 
because of municipal reaction to anticipated tax shifts. 
 
We have seen the courts reverse a significant appeal decision 
and a confusion resulted from it. My own office has been 
besieged with representations to roll back the decisions of this 
board or that agency and calls for retroactive legislation to limit 
taxpayers' appeal rights and protect existing assessment rules. In 
the end, it has often come down to different perceptions of how 
best to achieve a reassessment and concern about public and 
media reaction to changes in tax burden that will result once we 
have it. 
 
It seems politicians at both the local and provincial levels fear 
this, based on past experience. Past experience and reaction has  

been in response to past practices into which Saskatchewan has 
again been slipping. Long periods of delay between 
reassessments of course mean that reassessment becomes out of 
date and that there may be significant tax shifts when they do 
come to change. SAMA's previous proposals to reassess have 
been put off just for that reason. 
 
In the debate about assessment that has occurred over the last 
several months, two things have become apparent. First, it is 
time to get on with reassessment. With each year that passes, in 
the Court of Appeal's words, the more artificial the assessment 
values become. A consensus has emerged that reassessment 
must proceed by 1997. Whether you ask SUMA or SARM or 
SAMA or the city mayors or the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, the answer appears to be the same; they want 
reassessment in 1997. With this consensus in place, and in 
order to remove any uncertainty, this Bill amends current 
legislation to require a comprehensive reassessment to be done 
and to take effect at the beginning of 1997. 
 
Second, what has also become clear is that we must break the 
pattern of delay with respect to reassessment. We must have 
assessments kept more up to date to reduce the magnitude of 
any tax shifts that may occur following each reassessment. We 
must not permit communities or taxpayers to again to be placed 
in the position in which we find ourselves today. This Bill 
addresses the issue by implementing a new three-year cycle for 
reassessment starting in 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 30, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of all the 
Bills that the minister has brought forward this morning, I think 
this probably is the one that will catch the attention of most of 
the general public out there. The other Bills deal with specifics 
and certainly there will be interest from the general public, but 
more of that interest will be based on the legislators or the 
officials involved in, whether they're urban or rural or northern, 
in the government. 
 
This Bill hits each and every one of us directly. The minister 
talked about the fact about what this Bill is going to do is 
basically eliminate the 10-year reassessment process and cut it 
into a margin of three years. And while I think that is good and 
would be appropriate, I'm beginning to wonder if we couldn't 
design a program that basically sets out a standard for 
assessment that would be an ongoing process rather than always 
working through and having a board redesigning an assessment 
process or assessment rules on an annual or a biannual basis. 
And I think that's one of the major concerns that people have. 
 
I believe the minister talked about the fact that this Bill also 
brings into play an appeal process or enhances that appeal 
process, and it's something that we certainly look forward to 
discussing. There are a number of issues regarding assessment 
and certainly people have, through the years, not been very 
happy with how the assessment process has worked. 



March 3, 1995 

 
617 

They have not been very pleased with how SAMA has operated. 
I think SARM and SUMA are right in suggesting that it's time 
we got on with it and actually implemented and had a full 
assessment form, make sure that takes place rather than putting 
it off. 
 
But I would suggest that the end of the day, once this new 
assessment is in place, that we look at a way that basically sets 
out some guidelines that will deal with assessments on an 
ongoing basis that will bring it up to date, that will deal with 
. . . make sure that assessment is based on fairness and certainly 
be accountable to the taxpayers across this province of which 
each member in this Assembly and you and I, Mr. Speaker, are 
part of that process that affects every one of us. And so we look 
forward to further discussion. At this time however, I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 8 — An Act 
to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. Protection Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a 
significant day in the history of the saga that relates to the heavy 
oil upgrader or the upgrader here in Regina. I want to say at the 
outset that it has a history of being a benefit to this province and 
I want to point that out in my remarks here today. And I want to 
point out a number of things about the history of this that need 
to be said, and we will deal with that. 
 
From the beginning the NDP's approach has been to take a good 
deal from the previous government and take credit for it. And 
how could they do this, Mr. Speaker? How could they take a 
deal that was made prior to 1991 and turn it around and say, oh, 
it was a bad deal and we just made it better. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government 
have tried to do that on a number of projects in this province, 
and I would say they tried to do that with the pulp upgrader in 
P.A. (Prince Albert). They tried to do that with Millar Western 
in Meadow Lake. And what we have, Mr. Speaker, is all of 
these megaprojects contributing to the economic development 
of this province in a very major way. 
 
What they tried to do is they tried to reinvent the project so it 
would be considered theirs. And that, Mr. Speaker, was the role 
that they took and that was the reason why they did it. 
 
We all know the long-held resentment that the NDP have held 
for the upgrader, how they blamed the 1986 loss of the election 
on that, and they even blamed the Federated Co-op for some of  

the losses that they had in 1986. And that is why, I believe, that 
they even resented them to the place where they tried to make 
them look like the scapegoats in all of this. 
 
They have long tried to typify the upgrader — they typified it as 
a bad deal, a white elephant. And here are a couple of quotes 
from a piece of literature distributed to the NDP Party members 
at the time of the original dispute with FCL. The piece is 
entitled, and I quote: Another of Devine's bad deals. And what 
that goes on to say is how the member from Estevan went out 
and negotiated with Federated Co-operatives Ltd. a deal to put 
together an upgrader so that their facilities at the refinery could 
be enhanced by the fact that they had an upgrader in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the area of the province that I represent, this 
upgrader and its relationship to the refinery have been an asset 
and a benefit to the oil patch in the south-west part of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, the people of the south-west 
part of the province have long been suppliers of an oil that had 
a high degree of sulphur in it, and it was medium heavy. And 
what happened in this whole scenario in the south-west is they 
had to pump all of their oil through to refineries and upgraders 
in the United States. And in order to accomplish some 
economic benefit for the oil in the south-west part of the 
province, we had to find a place where we could upgrade this 
oil, so we could refine it for use in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what that did, Mr. Minister, it set a pattern for a large 
volume of the oil in the south-west part of Saskatchewan to be 
brought into Regina to be upgraded and then run through the 
refinery at Federated Co-op. 
 
Another statement that is made regarding the deal that the 
member from Estevan and the premier at the time . . . and I 
quote, it says: Devine was so desperate to win the election that 
he ignored the recommendations of his own officials who 
advised him not to sign the agreement because it was such a bad 
deal. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members of this 
Assembly, in speaking to individuals in Federated Co-op, that 
the deal for Federated Co-op today is better for them and 
tougher for the taxpayer than it was when the member from 
Estevan was the premier and negotiated the deal for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I read in the paper yesterday — or was it 
the day before? — how Federated Co-op is setting record after 
record for high volume of retail sales in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And my best guesses are, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the members of this Assembly, that some of that money is due 
to the fact that the refinery is contributing a very significant 
portion to that. 
 
The piece concludes: The NewGrade deal is not in the public 
interest, and something must be done with it. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, was what these people attempted to do in setting up  



March 3, 1995 

 
618 

this Bill. This Bill has to be very selective in its facts to make 
its point. The worst quote they could find from the Gass 
Commission on this topic was: At present the province has an 
investment which is not performing up to its original 
expectations and which could hold future financial risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any time anyone does anything in business, there 
is financial risk. 
 
(1130) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is not an unusual thing. It might be an 
unusual observation or a reflection by a socialist, but for people 
in business they are always taking risks with their money and 
with the money that they make in an investment. Whether it's a 
business they work in, whether it's a business investment that 
they don't participate in in a work fashion, they are always 
taking risks with their money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to have economic development 
in the province of Saskatchewan on major projects, you have to 
have the cooperation of individuals who will supply the 
expertise and will allow for a development of an industry where 
you have very significant dollars involved. And we have 
projects like that across this province. There are projects in 
other provinces in Canada that have exactly the same thing. 
 
The interesting thing, as I took and made note of some of the 
things that had been said in setting up this Bill in the first place, 
this Bill that we're repealing today was a Bill that was set up to 
hold a club over the Federated Co-op's head. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it was the initiative of the opposition at the time in the last 
session, it was the initiative of this opposition through the 
initiative of the Federated Co-op that this government decided 
to renege on some of the things that they had attempted to do in 
their Bill. 
 
One of those things is they passed a Bill in this House. They 
broke a contract with Federated Co-op. They passed a Bill in 
this House and then they used that as a club and said, if you're 
not going to do what we say and how you put your membership 
forward in discussing this Bill, how we're going to negotiate a 
settlement, you said, the members of this Assembly and the 
government members said, we are going to hold this club over 
your head and you're going to do exactly as we tell you or we 
will implement this Bill which will give us absolute control and 
authority over this upgrader and in fact, Mr. Speaker, will 
control the refinery itself. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was Federated Co-op who could not 
initiate enough reason into the government to have them settle 
without the Bill. So when they introduced the Bill, this 
opposition said, we're not going to have anything to do with 
that sort of thing. We were going to fight it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members of Federated Co-op executive 
and all of the people in Federated have told us that not only did 
we do what we are supposed to do as a good opposition, but we 
held the government accountable to even slightly adjust their  

plan and not implement and proclaim the Bill when they could 
easily have done it. And, Mr. Speaker, it's due to the fact that 
Federated Co-op were strong in their position. 
 
We said at the outset that the NDP government is again using 
the opportunity of this Legislative Assembly to break a contract. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what they have consistently done 
through their history. This Legislative Assembly's session will 
be noted, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that this government has 
consistently broken contracts through the whole of their tenure 
in this Legislative Assembly. And they have done that 
consistently. 
 
That tells me that the law means nothing to these people. 
Integrity is a foreign word. Ethics are non-existent. And if 
nothing else, the NDP government is consistent. They will 
break a contract regardless of the impact it is to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — As long as it serves their political 
purpose. 
 
Mr. Martens: — And as the member from Souris-Cannington 
has said, as long as it serves their own particular purposes — 
absolutely accurate. 
 
They consistently use legislation to break deals of the former 
administration, and, Mr. Speaker, they consistently do it. And, 
Mr. Speaker, now we have everybody starting to brag about 
some of these things that are going on. The Lloydminster 
upgrader — now they're starting to brag about it; it's a good 
thing. 
 
In fact the royalties that come in from the two upgraders . . . I 
asked the question earlier. How much money comes in from the 
royalties on the upgrader? And the member from Elphinstone, 
the House Leader, deferred answering that question. He 
deferred answering the question because in fact, Mr. Minister, 
and Mr. Speaker, they are significant to the benefits of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And they are earning, Mr. Speaker, 
as I read the other day in the paper, the upgrader in 
Lloydminster earned $1.2 million. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is very significant in establishing an 
opportunity for, number one, Mr. Speaker, for people to work, 
for investment opportunity, and also for people to have, for the 
first time in Saskatchewan's history, not one upgrader, Mr. 
Speaker, but two upgraders — two upgraders that are making 
money, Mr. Speaker. And that is very important. 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the government side 
wanted to do these redeals and these new deals with all of these 
agencies and investments that were made in 1982 to 1991 is 
they wanted to discredit the former government, and they then 
conducted inquiries and established commissions in order to do 
that. And that's, Mr. Speaker, the reason for it. 
 
In fact the most damaging statement that they could come out 
with was some incidental things that Mr. Estey wrote about  



March 3, 1995 

 
619 

how the deal was made. And in that he said it was not as bad 
. . . it was complicated, but it was not a bad deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here as throughout this process, the government 
has exclusively focused on the negative aspects of the upgrader, 
particularly as they relate to the debt structure. The government 
has consistently and deliberately ignored the many benefits the 
NewGrade project has provided to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The province achieved savings of upwards of $700 million over 
the cost of erecting a standalone project. Mr. Speaker, this has 
been passed aside as well. It's kind of not really very important. 
But the province of Saskatchewan, together with the people 
who participated in the construction of the upgrader here in 
Regina, saved in the area of $700 million in setting up the 
project in conjunction with Federated. And people in this 
province say that well that's . . . people in the government say 
that is incidental and that's not very significant. 
 
What has it done? What has this upgrader done for the financial 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan? The upgrader has a 
capacity of 50,000 barrels a day. The upgrader generates a 
minimum of 35 million a year for revenue to the Department of 
Finance — $35 million a year. Mr. Speaker, that's $100,000 
every day that this upgrader, through royalties on every barrel of 
oil transported into the upgrader, provides $100,000 a day 
directly to the Consolidated Fund. That money goes directly to 
the government's budget, and while the problem areas of the 
upgrader remain in the Crown sector. 
 
Now what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that the Crown sector is 
taking advantage of the upgrader providing royalties to the 
people of Saskatchewan. This does not even begin to touch the 
enormous benefits that the project has provided in jobs and 
spin-offs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the demand for oil has gone up. The demand for 
this kind of oil has gone up. And so what has happened in the 
south-west part of the province, Mr. Speaker, is that the oil 
activity in the south-west has increased due to the fact that there 
is opportunity for them to sell and market their oil products. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what it does is it markets that oil and 
markets it to FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.). FCL refines it 
into useful products that the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan use. 
 
We are not dependent on some foreign market in order to 
determine the opportunity with Saskatchewan's oil. What we 
were doing, Mr. Speaker, we were exporting this oil to United 
States because nobody here could refine it. What we were 
doing, Mr. Speaker, is importing oil from Alberta in order to 
have the refinery in Regina here upgrade it to diesel fuel and to 
gasoline. And, Mr. Speaker, we were exporting our own, 
importing for use. 
 
And today what we have, Mr. Speaker, we are using our own 
oil, upgrading it, refining it, and using it for our own purposes. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that in itself has an absolute secure market 
because of the way the people of Saskatchewan need to have  

the oil and gas for their work. And as we start the spring season, 
that is fairly obvious to the people of Saskatchewan how much 
a volume of energy that we consume. 
 
Likewise, this selective briefing sent to NDP (New Democratic 
Party) constituency executive portrays the Estey report as 
harshly condemning the report. Estey said this: that he was 
unable to find any legal flaws in the package, Mr. Speaker. And 
further, that the upgrader is an operating success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's what Judge Estey said. Now the people say, 
well it was a bad deal; it was a bad deal. Well the judge says he 
was unable to find any legal flaws in the package, and the 
upgrader is an operating success. And that's on page 13 of his 
report, if you want to read it and find out for yourself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that he said: delays and expenses 
incurred in the start-up or launch phase added to the total cost 
of the upgrader. And I quote, Mr. Speaker, from his report, and 
that's on page 5 if you want to bother to read it. And these 
technical problems, Mr. Speaker, were not anyone's particular 
fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one is denying that the increased debt caused 
by the fires during the start-up phase would have had to be dealt 
with, whether it was by this government or another. However, it 
was of course impossible for the NDP to deal with this matter 
in a reasonable manner since they had backed themselves into 
an ideological, rhetorical hole on the subject. 
 
In the aftermath of the Estey report, the government did not 
even try to negotiate with Federated Co-op. After all, to 
negotiate would imply that the original deal had some validity. 
Instead they turned to heavy-handed tactics of putting in a Bill. 
They passed Bill 90 to give them control of the upgrader  
absolute, total control. They had the right to dictate the board of 
directors, who the board of directors could be. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, they used this to negotiate; in that 
framework they used it to negotiate what they consider a better 
deal. And then they did not proclaim it, which is exactly what 
we said in dealing with this issue to start with; you're going to 
use this as a club to make them do what you want to do. 
 
Perhaps the ministers involved had seen the movie The 
Godfather once too often — talk about an offer you can't 
refuse, Mr. Speaker. They might as well have threatened to 
break Vern Leland's legs if he didn't sign, Mr. Speaker. And 
that's the kind of tactics these ministers of the Crown use in 
dealing with Federated Co-op. 
 
In any case, Mr. Speaker, a deal was signed, and arrangements 
have been made to deal with the debt problems of the project. 
This is obviously a positive thing. What is not positive is the 
method by which this deal was struck. Here, as with so many 
other contracts, commissions, and laws, the NDP have shown 
that due process and negotiation in good faith are foreign 
concepts to them. If anyone stands in your way, just pull out the 
big club of, one, nationalization, or we will bully our way  



March 3, 1995 

 
620 

through the Legislative Assembly  a broken contract, and 
then we can do whatever we want. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, does not create a positive climate in this 
province for the relationships between business and 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, this government and its 
ideology and its former administrations have done this through 
the history of the province of Saskatchewan. How can you trust 
someone who has shown such willingness to force you at the 
point of a gun or at the drop of a hat to accept its terms? 
However, as I noted at the beginning of my speech, this is 
typical of what these people do. 
 
Now the NDP have gotten what they want. Now they believe 
that the upgrader is a good project. Now they can go before the 
public and pretend they that were the ones who added the 
economic benefits of the upgrader to this province. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall various election promises that were made 
as early as 1978 about an upgrader that could possibly go in 
Moose Jaw, an upgrader that could possibly go in Lloydminster. 
And then the communities started discussing how this upgrader 
would benefit those communities. But, Mr. Speaker, what did 
we have in 1978 after the election? Absolutely nothing because 
the people in government at the time, who were the NDP of the 
day, did not have the ability nor the courage to do anything. 
They didn't because, Mr. Speaker, they're not builders, they're 
not builders — they don't know how to build. And that's the 
reason why they have a problem with this project and that's why 
they had to renegotiate it. 
 
So now the NDP come up with this Bill to take away the club 
that they used to beat Federated Co-op into submission. And 
now they try and say, oh well, this was a good deal for 
Federated. Well, Mr. Speaker, is it a good deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan to have contracts broken? I say not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This project right from its outset was the right thing to do. Mr. 
Speaker, it was a negotiation between parties, the federal 
government, the provincial government, and Federated. It was 
negotiated. It reached a settlement. And what we had in the last 
session was a serious attempt by the provincial government to 
take all of those things and say, we'll shake them all together 
and put them in a hat and we'll draw what we want to have, and 
the rest can go. Because this Legislative Assembly had the club 
that they used to put over their head. 
 
And we, Mr. Speaker, recognized the efforts of the government 
on that and we want to say that we condemn the politics that 
they had, the rhetoric, and the bullying that they had to do to get 
this through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are lots of things that are yet to be said on 
this issue and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — An Act 
respecting Private Vocational Schools be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak on an issue that is very important in this province — 
that's the education of our children and how they're allowed to 
participate in the education system and how they're protected, 
Mr. Speaker, protected from some of the vagaries that can 
happen when the system is not clearly outlined and not clearly 
in place to protect them. 
 
This Bill brings forward the certification and curriculum for 
private vocational schools, and it's under close scrutiny and 
regulation of the Department of Education. It requires that the 
school submit an annual financial statement, Mr. Minister, and 
that is very, very good. Because, Mr. Speaker, up until this 
point that has not been forcefully projected enough to ensure 
that the vocational schools that have operated in this province 
are financially sound and provide the proper protections for 
students who attend those schools. 
 
In the past we have seen too many of the schools that have for 
whatever reasons, Mr. Speaker, failed. They have dissolved for 
financial reasons, that they weren't viable, or they have gone out 
of business for other reasons; or even, Mr. Speaker, at times 
there has been changes in the structures of the schools, in the 
ownership of the schools, and that has caused problems, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But when we're dealing with the financial statements of these 
schools, one of the problems that comes forward with it is the 
verifying of those financial statements, and no place within the 
minister's legislation are these financial statements verified. The 
minister accepts the financial statement from the institution, and 
I'm assuming that those financial statements are audited by 
someone for that institution. But there's no verification 
procedures within this legislation to determine whether or not 
those facts and figures as presented by the vocational school are 
accurate, Mr. Speaker, and this can lead to problems down the 
road. 
 
The new thing that this legislation . . . it's not new, Mr. Speaker, 
but it continues the practice, Mr. Speaker, of the operator 
posting a bond to protect the students' tuitions. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that's already in place under the current legislation. 
But the question that comes into play here is what happens 
when there's a claim against that bond? 
 
As I understand it, Mr. Speaker, the minister's department 
makes the determinations whether or not an appeal against that 
bond is valid and whether or not it should be paid out to the 
creditor that is making the claim. As long as the school is viable 
and operating, then in all likelihoods those claims will be 
settled in some manner or other. 
 



March 3, 1995 

 
621 

But the real problem arises, Mr. Speaker, whenever that 
institution is insolvent, whenever they've declared bankruptcy; 
then you have a whole list of creditors. And where in that whole 
long list of creditors do the students place themselves? Are they 
classified as secured creditors? Are they classified as unsecured 
creditors? 
 
And the minister has excluded that from her new Bill. It doesn't 
say in there where they fit into the picture. And I believe that's 
one of the areas where the minister's Bill is very deficient. 
 
Because certain groups will be deemed to be secured. Banks 
will be secured; other businesses which have a contractual 
arrangement with assigned financial requirements, they'll be 
secured. But where do the students fit in? Where do the other 
businesses, the suppliers of paper, whatever else that the school 
might use, where do they fit into the picture? And do they take 
precedence over students or do they take precedence after 
students, Mr. Speaker? And that's the area in which there is a 
great deal of problems within this particular piece of legislation. 
 
The minister will take these funds, this bond that is being 
posted, into what's called a training fund, to which the minister 
and the department have access to those funds. And the minister 
can invest them or do whatever it is she wants to do as the 
regulations permit and outline. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have already seen in this House that that 
system doesn't work very well, Mr. Speaker. The teachers' 
pension fund of old, the teachers put the money into a fund 
which the government then turned around and used in the 
Consolidated Fund and we ended up with a $3 billion unfunded 
liability, Mr. Speaker. And that's unacceptable. 
 
If there's a need for the students to call upon this bond, Mr. 
Speaker, it's imperative that that money be in place, and that the 
money hasn't been spent by the minister on some other project. 
The money should be in place, in a trust, specifically designed 
to handle the bond of the vocational schools. The minister can 
invest it in investment vehicles, instruments, but not to spend it 
outside of that area, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion. And I think 
that the legislation needs to be tightened up very much in that 
area. 
 
If the student has a dispute with the school as to whether or not 
their tuition has been refunded, whether the money is in place 
to protect that student, what can the minister do? Well the 
minister can appoint a mediator, and that mediator and all the 
mediation expenses are paid for out of that bond fund. 
 
What we'll see, Mr. Minister, is a bond that is put in place of a 
certain amount and then it's continually eroded as students 
make claims against it, if there is reason for that. And it won't 
be an erosion of the monies paid to the student, if that takes 
place, but an erosion by the monies that are paid out to the 
mediator and the mediation process. And I believe that again 
will be a very serious flaw in this piece of legislation. 
 
There's no new money, Mr. Speaker, or assurances, or  

assurances that the tuition fees will be paid back to students. 
We've seen examples — I've brought them up in the House — 
where students have left an institution prior to the completion 
of their courses, in fact shortly after starting their courses, and 
those very same students, Mr. Speaker, have not received their 
tuitions back. Their student loans have not been paid back. 
 
The vocational schools take the student loan at the beginning of 
the session, and if the student drops out early, they are to pay it 
back to the institution from which the funds were borrowed. It's 
not happening, Mr. Speaker, in some circumstances. And that is 
causing grave problems for those students, because those 
students are still on the hook to pay those student loans, even 
though half of the student loans should have been repaid back 
by the vocational school to which they had attended. And it's 
not being done. And it's causing a great deal of concern, a great 
deal of hardship for some students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the good parts in this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the minister has the new power to refuse 
certification of schools in which there's any questions of their 
financial solvency. Well that's very good. Because I think the 
students need to be protected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when the department takes that power unto themselves, 
they also have to look at what is the past record of the 
principals involved in that new vocational school. What is their 
history of operation with vocational schools, perhaps in the 
past. And if they have a chequered past, Mr. Speaker, I think it's 
incumbent on the department to very carefully scrutinize 
whether or not they're going to allow that group of principals to 
start up another vocational school. 
 
And they need to go one step further, Mr. Speaker. They need 
to look at not only who the principals are, but who is going to 
be the actual operator of the school. And when they look at that, 
Mr. Speaker, they're going to have to be very careful also that 
the people who are going to operate the school themselves don't 
have a chequered past in dealing with vocational schools. 
Because that has come forward, Mr. Speaker, as a problem also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to actual substance for the students 
within this piece of legislation, there's very little new here. 
There's very little added to this to provide any protection for 
students who do run into problems, particularly in the cases 
where schools become insolvent. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, there is no new money within this 
program to assist students. And there's very little being done to 
help the students retrieve money back from an institution that 
becomes insolvent, that goes bankrupt. Their only recourse, Mr. 
Speaker, the only recourse that the students have when a 
vocational school closes because of insolvency is to take civil 
action, to go to the courts and say, I have a claim against them. 
 
As long as the school is operating, they can go against the bond. 
But once bankruptcy results, then they are at the mercy of the 
system, the same as every other creditor is, Mr. Speaker. And I 
believe that students should receive some better  



March 3, 1995 

 
622 

protection in this legislation than what they're already 
providing. 
 
Indeed because of the minister's opportunity to access that 
money, to spend it in whatever manner the minister deems 
appropriate, through regulations, it in fact weakens the bond 
that's already in place for students, because that money may not 
necessarily be in place when a claim comes forward against it, 
and it may have been eaten away by the mediation process. 
 
The mediation process, Mr. Speaker, is good to a certain extent. 
It does bring the parties together. But it's mediation without 
teeth. There is no manner, Mr. Speaker, in which the mediation 
process itself results in a completion of the complaint. At the 
end of the day, if the operators of the school simply say no, 
there's no teeth in the Bill to proceed beyond that. And if you're 
going to have mediation, if the government is going to get 
involved in this, then they need to be able to complete it, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is not part of this. 
 
So as I said earlier, the requirement for financial statements is 
well and good, Mr. Speaker, although those financial statements 
need to be verified. And also that the minister can refuse a 
certificate to anyone who is suspected of financial weakness is 
also very good. 
 
But you have to also look at the principals involved in it and 
who will actually be operating the schools. Because what's 
happened in the past is some schools have gone out of business 
and have simply reorganized themselves, put different 
principals' names on their list of directors and gone back into 
business with the same old problems. And that's unacceptable. 
That only hurts the students of this province, and it hurts the 
whole concept of vocational schools because now all of a 
sudden all of our vocational schools become suspect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the whole, this Bill provides little that would 
prevent situations such as those at the Reliance College that 
happened last year. So, Mr. Speaker, we have taken this Bill 
and some of the concerns that we have to the stakeholders, and 
we're expecting and we have received some responses back 
from them. We also expect more to arrive because the students 
continue to have some concerns with this particular piece of 
legislation and how it's going to affect them and their education. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1200) 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Renaud that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation and 
to enact a Consequential Amendment be now read a second 
time. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk a little 
bit today about the Bill 22 which is an Act to establish the 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation and to enact a 
Consequential Amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill approves the old Newtonian principle of 
motion. Bodies in motion tend to stay in motion unless acted 
upon by another force. Now we have the opportunity to be the 
other force today that acts on this unnecessary Bill. Mr. Newton 
and I go back a long ways. I recall his teachings being delivered 
to me while I was in school many, many years ago. And of 
course this is not necessarily the law of equally opposing 
forces, but it is certainly the law of motion. 
 
And we have here as the minister has repeatedly admitted in the 
press releases and even in his speeches, Mr. Speaker, the initial 
reasons this Crown was created has disappeared. The fact of the 
matter is that initially this Crown was to provide the framework 
for a federal-provincial joint venture on highways. 
 
Now as of last December of course as you all know, the federal 
government backed out of this commitment. It was a very great 
disappointment, especially for the people in south-west 
Saskatchewan where we had sincerely thought that the 
government of the province had a commitment and a deal that 
would initiate the commencement at least of the building of the 
double-laning of No. 1 Highway where we've had so many 
tragic fatalities and so many terrible costly accidents over the 
years. 
 
But why waste a precious Crown corporation, it seems to be the 
tone of the government saying, when you've already got the 
legislation drafted, even though you now don't need it. The 
Crown corporation initially, to put together this three-way 
partnership, obviously has no benefit and no need once the key 
player, the federal government, dropped out of the program. 
 
So the government seems to be taking the attitude, why waste a 
perfectly . . . six-member board, when you've got a whole group 
of patronage people lined up just around the corner, or down 
the block some place, banging at your doors to get some kind of 
board position, so recognition for having supported a political 
party. 
 
Now we've heard the member from Shaunavon allude to this 
this morning, a great huge list of people that are demanding to 
be recognized for their support of this government during the 
past election. And of course with one just around the corner 
again, obviously the people have to be paid off in order to get 
them to campaign once again for the government. 
 
So it looks, from our position, that if you have a Crown 
corporation being developed, a new one that isn't needed, the 
only obvious excuse that you could have, the only motive you 
could have, would be to give some jobs and positions and 
rewards to those folks that you owe in terms of outright partisan 
politics. 
 
Now with the federal government out of the picture, the  



March 3, 1995 

 
623 

mandate for this Crown corporation is very obviously cancelled. 
To paraphrase, this Crown is just set up in case someone in the 
private sector feels like giving the government some money to 
build roads, just in case they get that urge. 
 
Well given the outrageous and unprecedented levels of taxation 
faced by the businesses in this province, I very much doubt that 
they will be terribly anxious to fork over still more money to 
pay for a public service, especially now with another cent and a 
half added on to their gas tax by the feds. 
 
The minister is yet to provide this House or the public with a 
rationale for why a business would want to build a public road, 
other than, of course, the very human concern, Mr. Speaker, for 
life and for the cost of the accidents that occur on our roads. 
And we all have that kind of concern and I know our business 
people and all of them have those very real, human concerns. 
 
However if the minister has in mind granting special access, 
special privileges of some sort, to groups that provide funding, 
now that might make sense. I don't think the public would agree 
with it, but at least you could see how that could happen. 
 
Now if the minister intends, for example, to set up toll roads 
and splitting the revenues with the co-investors, he has not 
indicated such a thing to us. But if he were planning that, that 
might make some sense then to go ahead with this Crown, but 
nobody has said that that is an intention. 
 
Again if all the legislation does is to take gifts from the private 
sector for road work, the government doesn't need a Crown 
corporation, Mr. Speaker, to do that. We could simply do that 
through the department of holidays . . . pardon me, the 
Department of Highways. I'm sure it would work just as well if 
the government just offered to put co-sponsors' names on 
highway construction signs and give them the credit in that 
way. 
 
Now there's no reason why the Department of Highways then 
couldn't handle this whole production as it is now unfolding. 
Without a plan for enticing businesses to invest in roads, one 
has to wonder if the government is maybe thinking of other 
methods of arranging participation, like an extortion of some 
kind. The words, for example, could go along the lines: are the 
roads in your area falling apart? Well the Department of 
Highways is really strapped these days, but maybe if the people 
of your community would like to cough up the dough, we could 
see our way clear maybe to do something about fixing your 
roads. 
 
So that amounts to of course forcing people to contribute that 
otherwise wouldn't want to or shouldn't have to. 
 
Now given this government's preoccupation for hidden taxes, 
this is a pretty easy scenario to picture actually, Mr. Speaker, 
because downloading has become a total, complete way of 
operating in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The principle of momentum with this corporation continues  

when you look at its funding. It is supposed to get $50 million 
over the next five years. And that amount was initially selected 
in order to qualify for the aborted federal highways program. 
Now in the absence of the qualifications for an outside 
program, why 50 million, has to be our question. Why not, Mr. 
Speaker, 10 million? Why not 70 million? Why not perhaps 
zero? Or why not the $210 million from the oil and gas leases 
that came in over and above budget last year. Or why not the 
$188 million from the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
program that the provincial government clawed back out of 
farmers by breaking their contracts? Well why wouldn't we use 
one of those figures? 
 
The funding level simply no longer has a rationale. Yet the 
government apparently thought it was just too much effort to go 
back to rewriting this legislation, so apparently they just left it, 
Mr. Speaker. And it shows to me that somebody in the 
departments is awfully lazy or else really doesn't care what 
happens, other than the fact that we provide a patronage outlet 
for some people to get some cushy jobs. 
 
On the whole, this Crown can be seen as a part of a trend with 
this government to develop a shadow government of Crowns, 
agencies, and commissions, Mr. Speaker. We have already a 
huge line of agencies that prove that this is the direction that the 
government is going. We have, for example, the new tourism 
agency, we have the new trade agency, we have the new health 
boards, we have the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, 
and we have the gaming commission — and the list goes on — 
all outside the examination of the Provincial Auditor, I might 
throw in here, all outside the scrutiny of this legislature. 
 
Now the government seems determined to turn every 
department into a Crown. The family of Crown corporations is 
swiftly becoming the clan of Crown corporations. Of course 
one of the greatest benefits of having at least a portion of a 
department's business handled by a Crown is that the Crowns 
do not have to play by the same rules as departments. And this 
is very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their spending is not as transparent as a department's. Expenses 
can be more easily buried, staff can be freely hired and fired 
without anybody's scrutiny. Also, as has been pointed out in the 
House already, Crowns are not required to abide by the 
government's tendering regulations. They do not even need to 
pretend to look for the lowest bidder on any of the tenders. 
 
So not only is it easier for the government to put its own people 
on the boards than to staff the Crowns, it is also easier for the 
government to do business with its friends through the Crown 
corporation. In other words, your buddies can get jobs and 
contracts without anybody scrutinizing it. 
 
It's no longer surprising to see that the experience in British 
Columbia precisely demonstrates this, Mr. Speaker. The B.C. 
(British Columbia) Crown that was created to assume 
Department of Highways' responsibility, very quickly went with 
a union-only contracting policy. The consequences of this, 
according to the Vancouver Board of Trade, was that labour  



March 3, 1995 

 
624 

costs on projects rose by as much as 37.6 per cent. It is amazing 
after the débâcle with the Melfort water project that the 
government would still be pursuing its agenda to bring in union 
preference in its tendering policies. 
 
I suppose however though, Mr. Speaker, that the political debts 
still do have to be paid for this government. And it is clear from 
this legislation that the NDP are continuing to try to do through 
the back door what they are clearly too timid to do through the 
front door — bringing in a regime of union preference for 
government work. This agenda will only further strangle job 
creation in our province, Mr. Speaker. There is no question 
about that. 
 
It may re-elect the NDP to government but it will destroy the 
possibility of Saskatchewan growing in numbers or ever having 
an expanded tax base. In summary, Mr. Speaker, this initial 
reason for this legislation has, very simply, long since 
disappeared. Its rationale is very weak and certainly not worth 
the effort or expense of setting up a new Crown corporation. 
 
The government has not presented this House with a clear plan 
as to how or even why this Crown should succeed or how it 
could succeed or why it should exist. Like other similar 
ventures by this government, this Crown unnecessarily 
duplicates the work of the ongoing Department of Highways 
and other departments that we already have in existence. 
 
This, like the other agencies the government has recently 
created, reduces the accountability of the government and opens 
up all kinds of potential abuses such as patronage, hidden taxes, 
and offloading to local communities in one way or another. 
Further, the corporation gives the opportunity to pursue agendas 
such as union preference without having to bother with 
legislation or the public examination of this House. 
 
It is very key to the process of our democratic process, Mr. 
Speaker, that the auditor have access to what happens in our 
province. This is not going to happen in this process. Given 
these numerous and serious danger areas of this legislation, we 
have every reason to believe that the members opposite should 
reconsider this piece of legislation. 
 
(1215) 
 
It's not too late to throw it in the area of things gone by. It's not 
too late to trash this whole program and this whole idea. And I 
strongly suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
should consider not putting this piece of legislation through, not 
forming another Crown corporation. There just is not any 
evidence to justify having it. The costs are too high. The results 
of its work are not necessary. There is no need for it. It is purely 
a politically partisan attempt at patronage allocation to people in 
order to get them onside for the next election and to pay off past 
debts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to go to the stakeholders to consult 
with them to see if in fact we can find any glimmer of light any 
place that would justify having this Crown in place and having  

that job ahead of us. We would suggest that we take a little time 
to go and do that. And as a result of a need to talk to the people 
who are directly going to be affected by this — the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and the construction industry and the Department 
of Highways area — I move that we do now adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
 
The Chair — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have sitting to 
my right, Mr. Marv Hendrickson, who's the deputy minister of 
SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat); 
just behind me here, Mr. Ernie Lawton, assistant deputy 
minister for Indian Affairs; Mr. Donavon Young, assistant 
deputy minister for Metis Affairs; and Mr. John Reid, executive 
director of policy and planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 
minister and her officials. Mr. Minister, the last couple of years 
it's been my pleasure to have the responsibility of dealing with 
the issues regarding Indian and Metis Affairs in our province. 
And I've had some very interesting discussions with the former 
minister of Justice and certainly with officials, although not 
directly as I don't get to quiz them directly, but certainly through 
the minister. And I look forward to the same type of workable 
relationship in addressing a number of the issues that are out 
there. 
 
Madam Minister, there's no doubt that there are a number of 
concerns across this province in regard to our native people, our 
native community, and one of the major concerns is certainly 
the land claims and taxation. That's something that your 
department, your officials, will be quite well aware of and that 
sometime we will be discussing even in a little greater detail 
than maybe just immediately. 
 
There are other issues of concern, and the concerns here aren't 
just related . . . or brought forward by the white community in 
our province, but native people themselves have some very 
deep questions regarding the expansion of gambling in this 
province. And not only in the province in general, but the fact 
that a number of reserves will possibly have the ability to 
expand, or allow gambling on their reserves. And that's an area 
that certainly we will want to take a look at and address. 
 
And in regard to that, it comes to a question that was presented 
to the Minister of Justice the other day as to the reasoning for 
the department to continue with an appeal regarding the White 
Bear Nation on their casino that was shut down by the former  



March 3, 1995 

 
625 

minister and by the RCMP, and the fact that this comes out 
after we've already entered into an agreement with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations regarding 
expansion of gambling in the province. 
 
And what I'm basically reiterating is, the question arises, is it 
feasible? Is it a responsible action to enter into an appeal or to 
go ahead with an appeal process when we have an agreement in 
place? And I realize the minister indicated, well there really was 
no alternative, at least that's . . . The minister's response was the 
option was there for the province to appeal the decision made 
by the judge at that time, regarding the . . . I guess the case that 
was raised against White Bear Indian Reserve. And I can 
appreciate that fact. But at the same time, there certainly . . . 
and I guess the big question there is the jurisdictional factor, 
who has responsibility, whether the native community. 
 
And so as I say, there will be a number of questions arising out 
of the whole gambling issue, regarding the appeal and other 
issues. 
 
But let me take a moment, Madam Minister, to just bring a 
couple of questions regarding the audit of the Metis Nation's 
books, and the fact that as a result of an investigation . . . and I 
think there are a number of people within the Metis community 
who are very concerned, had some concerns with regards to the 
funding that was being allotted to the community and whether 
or not that funding was reaching the sources or the Metis people 
in general, or the concern that a lot of this funding was not 
necessarily getting out to help all of the Metis community. 
 
An update on the course and to date the results of the audit 
investigation of the Metis Nation's finances would be 
something that I think people would be interested in. 
 
And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you could . . . Maybe 
I'll give you about three questions that you could take the time 
to look at, not only in giving us an update on the course and the 
results, but why the RCMP recently decided not to charge the 
Metis nations. And could you tell us why this decision was 
made, and are there any attempts being made to allocate . . . or 
to locate or recover public funds that were expended without 
supporting documents? 
 
And as I indicated, it's not just . . . I see an inquisitive look on 
one of the members' faces, or the department officials. Are there 
any attempts being made to locate or recover public funds that 
were expended without supporting documents? 
 
And certainly this is a question that arises. And it doesn't just 
arise, as we've seen, with regards to the Metis Nation. It's arisen 
on many occasions with public funding, regardless of whether 
it's a situation of welfare or whether it's in regard to even, say, 
elected representatives, ourselves. We're all accountable, and 
anyone who receives public funding is accountable. And that's 
basically what people are asking and inquiring about. And I 
might add that this question isn't just something that would be 
tied to the white community in our province, but it's coming 
from the Metis nations themselves, and I think most people  

even in the Metis Nation would want to be seen as being 
respectable and hardworking citizens. 
 
And I would appreciate it if you could give us an update on the 
number of these questions I have asked, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member for his 
question. Just a couple of initial comments regarding the 
accountability of third-party funded groups. As governments 
devolve more and more responsibility to communities and as 
community groups, in many instances, have larger revenues to 
work with than they did in the past because of delegated 
authority and responsibility, I would agree with you that right 
across the piece we have an issue of accountability that has 
maybe not been pursued as much as it needs to and might be the 
topic of discussion for the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
I certainly have had in my work as an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) people who have come to the 
constituency office who are members of many different 
organizations in the community and have had concerns 
regarding expenditures of funds, hiring practices, etc. So I'll just 
say that I think there is a generic kind of issue there that we 
might want to, in a different context, explore a bit more. 
 
The other one is on the particular issue of the Metis Nation. We 
have never core funded this organization. We do occasionally 
provide funding specific to an activity, for example, 
involvement in the tripartite process, and we did provide some 
funding to facilitate this, and to date this is going very well. 
 
Now the experience with the financial audit did indicate a 
number of bad bookkeeping practices but no actual illegalities. 
It was more in the nature of paper trails not being as complete 
as they could be or invoices not being done in a systematic way 
— that kind of issue. 
 
But there was an action plan developed. And if you'd like, I'll 
just summarize a bit of what happened there. Deloitte & Touche 
was appointed as financial manager-adviser to the MSS (Metis 
Society of Saskatchewan), and this happened. They were to 
update the financial records and assess financial liabilities; 
that's completed. 
 
The federal and provincial government was to assess findings 
of Deloitte & Touche in terms of the Metis Society financial 
viability. This is completed. 
 
They were to develop a deficit recovery plan, including 
compensation of creditors. This has been done. 
 
The federal government was to release 143,000 in frozen funds 
to Deloitte & Touche to commence paying off external creditors 
from 1993-94, and this is occurring. 
 
The Metis Society was to prepare and submit a detailed 
application for its 1994 and '95 funding to the federal 
government. That's done and is under review by Heritage 
Canada. Again I'm just emphasizing that that's federal. 



March 3, 1995 

 
626 

The MSS was to apply to federal and provincial governments 
for tripartite funding. And there is some hold on this until the 
Metis Society's capacities and priorities are determined, based 
on a reduced core budget. 
 
And federal and provincial governments were to evaluate the 
role and consider the possible extension of the Deloitte & 
Touche contract. And Deloitte & Touche has advised both 
levels of government that, based on their information, the Metis 
Society is fiscally salvageable. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So I can read then 
from your answer in response to the questions at, number one, 
the province of Saskatchewan really isn't involved in any large 
way as far as funding of the Metis nations; that most of that, if 
not all of the funding, comes from the federal level. And so 
therefore it would be the federal government that would pursue 
that matter if they wished to pursue it. So we don't . . . As 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan, we're not directly, through the 
provincial government, funding and having our tax dollars go 
into the MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan) society. 
 
However on the other hand taxpayers in Saskatchewan, through 
federal taxation . . . that process does take place. So I'm 
wondering, maybe you'd like to respond to that, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I'll mention that we did provide 
some funding to facilitate the tripartite process of discussion. 
And also individual departments, it'll be reflected in their 
estimates that they do have arrangements for educational or 
other types of activities. But that doesn't come through this 
area; those are direct arrangements with the departments that 
are involved in those things. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
and I might be diverting just a little bit, but over the past while 
we've had some discussions with the Minister of Social 
Services regarding welfare and welfare rolls in this province, 
and I believe the minister has commented about the fact that 
some of the responsibility for social . . . or welfare recipients in 
the native community has been placed on the back of the 
province. 
 
I'm wondering if indeed that is factual, that that responsibility is 
there. Is the province also being asked to become more involved 
with some of the upfront funding to associations like the MNS? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just wanted to be clear that you were 
directing your question particularly to Metis Society because 
the federal government never has funded that particular portion 
of the population. Their obligations for that level of service 
have been primarily with the treaty Indian-first nations 
population. So they never have paid for this particular portion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then basically, where do they receive their  

funding then? Am I to gather that the funding is allocated to the 
native population through treaty rights and that the Indian and 
Metis nations then allocate to the MNS — they would get a 
portion out of the treaty funds that are allocated to this 
province? Or how do they receive their funding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, what's causing a little bit of 
problem is the confusion in the status of the various peoples in 
the province. The first nations relationship is directly with the 
federal government on reserve. And so the funding there would 
flow from Indian Affairs to providing those services. When it 
comes to Metis persons, their relationship for the purposes of 
social assistance is with the province. So these groups both 
have a different status and a different legal standing with the 
federal government although both groups are in discussion 
regarding self-government with the federal government. They 
do have different legal relationships and different structural 
relationships with the two governments. 
 
And it is complicated and I can appreciate the difficulty, 
because I'm having to come to grips with all the differences 
myself. But it is complicated and does vary depending on the 
particular item you're discussing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So basically what 
you're saying, there are a number of variables as to the funding 
as it comes from Ottawa and how it's distributed to the different 
organizations whether in this province or any other province. 
 
You also mentioned, Madam Minister, that there was an 
independent committee appointed to review the books and 
come up with methods whereby the Metis Nation could look at 
how they would manage their books and how they would do 
their accounting, to make it a lot easier for them to establish 
funding and let people know how the funding is taking place, 
how they're approving it. And I think that at the end of the day 
the Metis Nation will be more than happy to have had received 
and had this input and had some involvement in how they 
would design and develop their books so that not only are they 
more accountable, but people would feel more comfortable with 
the fact that the money is being allocated and funded and 
accountable for. 
 
And I'm not taking away from the Metis community or our 
native community, period. Certainly every one of us needs to at 
times sit down and take a look at how we run our books and 
how we set our books up so that we can keep track of the 
finances that go through our hands. And I think that certainly 
was an appropriate method in working with the community 
rather than creating a turmoil. 
 
You also mentioned that the federal government released a sum 
of money at the time, and I would gather that they were 
withholding this money while a review was taking place, and 
you've indicated that there was a release. And what I'm 
wondering, when that money was released, was that money then 
allocated directly to individuals or businesses that were affected 
and had outstanding bills, or would that have been allocated to 
the MNS themselves and they were to then pass it  



March 3, 1995 

 
627 

on to these . . . on any of outstanding accounts? I wonder if you 
could comment on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for his question. 
The federal government only released money after the final 
audit report and that took place in December. Now Deloitte & 
Touche together with the Metis Society will help manage the 
money until March 31. And this money was specifically for 
payments to creditors. And Deloitte & Touche and the Metis 
Society worked together on developing a priority list on 
payments to creditors. So this is a very defined use of this pool 
of money based on fairly strict criteria. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister, because that was 
another question I was coming to in how you perceive the MNS 
and its operations today now that an independent trustee has 
been installed. The MNS emphasizes that this relationship is 
cooperative and I take it from your comments that they have 
been working quite willingly with the Deloitte & Touche in 
addressing a number of these concerns. 
 
And I'm wondering if you can describe the decision-making 
structure with reference to the use of funds with the trustee in 
place. I think that would relate to what you just indicated about 
the funds being released and Deloitte & Touche having some 
involvement with the Metis nations society in how the funds are 
allocated to those who have outstanding accounts. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The relationship is really being done 
very cooperatively and the Metis Society board still makes 
decisions. But there's a co-management model where Deloitte & 
Touche provides financial advice and then they move forward 
to decide what the best decision would be. 
 
They do have a subcommittee on finance of their board and the 
procedures that Deloitte & Touche has put in place are endorsed 
by the Metis Society. And I think it's very important to 
recognize that they're as interested and committed on having a 
good financial accountability, as Deloitte & Touche and 
themselves have agreed to over the course of working on this. 
 
So I'm optimistic that everything is going to go along very well 
in the future developments with the organization. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, when the independent trustee, 
Deloitte & Touche, was asked to or encouraged and the Metis 
nations were encouraged to have a public trustee work with 
them, was that a decision that was something that basically 
came from the province? Did you have some involvement? Or 
would that have been basically a federal appointment or a 
federal matter where they would have asked Deloitte & Touche 
to be involved as an independent trustee? 
 
And also in view of the fact when this process was taking place 
a number of organizations, affiliated organizations such as 
SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program) and the Gabriel Dumont college had their funding 
frozen for a while there, and a number . . . We've had people 
actually contacted us last year regarding this freezing of these  

funds. And I'm wondering if you could as well tell us how these 
institutions were affected by the freezing — if they suffered any 
long-term damage from the withholding of these funds over that 
period of time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As you did, I also received calls on this 
question at the time, having worked with some of the people 
who were involved in these various institutions over the years. 
 
And I'll just go back a little bit on the history. Heritage Canada 
did a compliance audit which is really a part of regular 
procedures to ensure that contracts that governments have with 
third-party bodies are complied with, so this was a normal type 
of activity. And in the course of that activity there were some 
problems were revealed. The federal Privy Council and SIMAS 
then, based on the problems that were revealed, decided that it 
was necessary to take the further steps that we've been 
discussing. 
 
I might add, as far as the implications for the third parties, that 
very little money was actually involved and that the problems 
existed for other reasons that had some history within those 
individual institutions, just as far as available funding, those 
kinds of normal operational things. 
 
The problem that we had was that the relationship between the 
Metis Society and these organizations was not as clear as it 
might have been in terms of management and funding. So there 
was some attempt at that point to sort those relationships out. 
And last June we acted quickly to ensure that the educational 
programs weren't affected and would proceed and that the 
students would not be negatively affected by the other activity 
that was going on. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
have a question that basically goes beyond the Metis nations 
society that really comes into play with our Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. And I'm just wondering what 
businesses do when they're left in a situation where they have 
outstanding bills. And I'm not sure if the province has any 
ability to . . . You really probably wouldn't have any 
jurisdictional opportunity to give direction, but has the province 
made representation to the federal government as to how some 
of these issues should be dealt with in view of the possibility, 
and I've got one business in particular that has a substantial 
outstanding account that they're trying to get some funding out 
of. And a small business in rural Saskatchewan — well not just 
even rural Saskatchewan, any part of Saskatchewan — any 
outstanding account of any kind creates a problem for a small 
business. 
 
And is there any opportunity for the province to raise these 
matters at the federal level? Because I take it that's where they 
possibly are handled; you don't really have any involvement. 
And is there anything being done to your knowledge by the 
federal department to address some of these concerns which I'm 
sure many of your colleagues have had raised as well, in how 
we encourage the federal department to deal with these issues to 
make sure that many people aren't left on the hook as we've just  



March 3, 1995 

 
628 

discussed with the Metis nation society? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm just going to clarify that we've 
switched over to talking about the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) now? You mentioned the FSIN. 
Is that . . . (inaudible) . . . Okay. 
 
That being the case, you're right that the issue is exclusively 
federal although we do urge resolution of issues that affect the 
province and people in the province. We do check to see 
whether the federal government is in fact co-managing the 
particular project that might be in question thereby even 
enhancing their responsibilities in that area in providing a little 
more leverage to get some resolution. 
 
And the second recourse is civil action. I could talk a little bit 
more maybe about analogies in the business community, but 
maybe I'll just leave it at that for a moment and see if you have 
other questions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I guess one of 
the concerns that I have, and certainly the business community 
that have talked to me, is that they have . . . it seems that they 
have felt like they've exhausted all avenues and nothing has 
really come about. They haven't had a resolve to the issue. 
 
And one of the last resorts that most business communities go 
to is through collection agents. And of course collection 
agencies do cost some money to try and collect them and there's 
no guarantee that at the end of the day, they're still going to see 
this unpaid amount basically being recovered. 
 
And I think that's a concern, and what I was asking and just 
wondering is what the province is doing to address this matter 
with the federal department and the federal government as to 
how we could handle a situation such as this in a more 
forthright manner. Because I think what happens; it becomes 
quite drawn out. There's so many legal loopholes a lot of times 
to follow through and it can be drawn out. 
 
And if the department has made any representations to the 
federal government regarding similar circumstances whereby 
we can come out with a more simpler and a straightforward 
method of collection and payment of funds. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The answer to your first question of 
whether we have done anything to try and resolve this, the 
answer to that is yes; over the years we've made several 
attempts. But there are a few problems in the area that stem 
back to really the fact that the first nation peoples who are 
trying to move forward on a number of developments including 
financial, economic, social, etc., are caught, as we are, in an 
outdated Indian Act. 
 
And one of the things that's happening, and it happened recently 
in Manitoba, is the federal government is devolving Indian 
Affairs responsibilities directly to first nations people  

and to the band level. And so that means there's much less 
involvement by the federal government and it's really a matter 
of independent band management at that point. 
 
Another provision of the Indian Act that's, I'm sure you're aware 
of, been a problem for years is that Indian bands can't use their 
land as an asset when they go to the bank. So in a way if there is 
a problem, banks can't take the normal recourse. 
 
Now as far as individual business people go, I guess as business 
practice goes, they would do as they do with any other 
customers and follow good business practice and try to prevent 
whatever problems from happening that could. 
 
But I, certainly in my discussions with the chief of the 
federation and other chiefs, sense a growing desire and concern 
on their part that all of this be handled as well as possible 
within that framework. So I think we all share the same 
objectives on this. It's just a question of how to get there as 
quickly as possible and stay there because, of course, within our 
own government systems and what not, there's no guarantees 
that everything always moves along the way it should. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister, in regards to those 
comments, I would just like to reiterate the fact that yes, it is 
difficult. And I think even members of the native community 
realize some of the problems they face and the fact that, number 
one, they are unable to use land as security. And I think that can 
be pointed to the fact . . . and I am reminded of an incident. It's 
just brought to my memory of an incident locally where a 
machinery dealer went to recover some of his losses, and of 
course it was . . . he didn't find he was received very well. 
 
And so I can see where a number of Indian and Metis 
communities in our province would like to do things or build 
projects or develop ideas or develop some means of 
employment on their reserves. Lenders, regardless of whether 
they're equipment dealers or machinery dealers or car dealers or 
even the banks, in view of what's taken place in the past may 
have a difficult time in the allocating funds. 
 
And I guess this is something we need to work together with the 
native community in developing, if you will, a sense of trust in 
being able to work with them. So could I use the term that they 
are treated as equals? I think many in the native community 
want to be treated, as I've indicated, by using the term equal, so 
that when they go to the bank, they have the ability to become 
progressive and active citizens. 
 
And certainly I'm sure they must face some difficulty at times 
themselves within their own community in dealing with some 
of the matters that arise. And again I bring forward just a 
personal experience where, in talking with a person from one of 
our local reserves . . . indicated to me that he felt he was 
discriminated more against by his peers and by the people on 
his reserve than he was by his neighbours around him and the 
business community in the white community. 
 
So I think we need to work with our native leaders, and I trust  



March 3, 1995 

 
629 

that Chief Favel is certainly looking at some of these options to 
come up with ideas whereby we can all work together. 
 
Because I think the community in general and throughout our 
province — and when we look at the taxation issue as we'll get 
into it on another day; and when we look at the fact of treaty 
and land entitlements; when we look at the monies that go to 
reserves; people are saying . . and what I see in my own area, 
that the amount of acres that are being tied up through land 
sales that are being purchased by the native community — 
people are saying, well it's maybe time that our native 
community as well paid taxes and paid their way. 
 
And like I've indicated earlier, I believe that feeling is on both 
sides. And so I think, Madam Minister, we need to work 
towards methods whereby we all respect each others’ rights and 
responsibilities. And maybe I'll leave you with that as we . . . 
rather than getting into another area of debate at this late time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just a minute. I'd like to thank you for 
those comments. But I do want to add a few comments just to 
tie up this end of the discussion. This isn't so much . . . well it's 
becoming a problem for first nations, but this really is a federal 
problem. And the problem has been their continuing 
unwillingness to deal with the jurisdictional question even 
though they certainly pay lip service to it. And we would be 
quite happy to have you support us in encouraging them to get 
on with it and resolve some of this stuff. 
 
What we've done at the provincial level recently, and have just 
met recently to talk about strengthening the process, is to set up 
a round table with SUMA and SARM to help direct community 
relations in the province. 
 
And on the question of equality, I guess if we have equality of 
obligation we also need some equality of opportunity, so we've 
been working on those fronts as well. 
 
Approximately 1 per cent of provincial lands are involved in the 
additional lands required to resolve outstanding treaty land 
entitlements, so where as it may be very pressing to the people 
who are directly involved, in terms of total land mass in the 
province it's a relatively small proportion of land. 
 
And I thank you for your measured questions today, and we'll 
be back. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 
 


