






















































March 2, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 2, 1995 

 

 
571 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
I'm bringing forward today from a lot of my constituents and 
people of the south-west part of the province. The prayer is as 
follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most of these people are from the Coronach, 
Rockglen, and Assiniboia area of the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy this 
morning to present petitions on behalf of people from the Gull 
Lake, Eastend, and Tompkins area. I will read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table those for the folks back home today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
 And of member shareholders of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool petitioning the Assembly to require the 
directors of the Pool to seek the approval of the Pool 
membership by a vote before the proposed changes to  

 he Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act are enacted by the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would draw your attention and that of the members to a group 
that are seated in your gallery. This is a group of 17 grade 10 
students from Miller High School in Regina. 
 
They're accompanied by their teacher, Shawn Pearce. I look 
forward to meeting with them after the question period, and at 
this time I would ask the members to join with me to make 
them feel welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Eulogy for Murray Cotterill 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A week ago today, 
Canada and Saskatchewan lost one of our last links with the 
1930s, a decade that arguably was the taproot of much that is 
good and progressive and lasting about our society today. 
 
I speak of Murray Cotterill, Mr. Speaker, a man who 
contributed very significantly to the lives of the working people 
in my constituency. 
 
Murray was a long-time trade unionist and labour relations 
specialist, first with the old Canadian Congress of Labour, now 
the Canadian Labour Congress, and with the steelworkers’ 
organization. 
 
In the 1930s, '40s, and '50s, Murray was at the centre of the 
great social movement to establish the rights of working people 
in the industrial workplaces of Canada. These were times of 
tremendous struggles as the history books will attest. It was 
through the efforts of people like Murray Cotterill and his 
colleagues that the right to organize and the right to bargain 
collectively were won and got a toe-hold in Canada. Working 
people today are in his debt. 
 
Those of us on this side of the House owe him something as 
well. He was active in the youth movement of the original CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) at a very early stage, 
and then worked with J.S. Woodsworth, Stanley Knowles, 
David Lewis, and Tommy Douglas to bring about social justice 
to all Canadians. One man and two very big hats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
After he retired he moved to Saskatchewan where he worked 
for two years in the Blakeney government. He spent his last 
active years working for the rights of retired union members, 
finishing his life as he began it, by promoting the social welfare 
of his fellow working people 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join me in celebrating the  



March 2, 1995 

 
572 

life of my friend, Murray Cotterill, and in expressing our 
sympathy to his wife, Kay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Telemiracle Radiothon 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everybody knows 
that Telemiracle telethon will be again raising money in just a 
few days. What many people probably don't know is that in my 
riding, the town of Meadow Lake and the surrounding 
communities have the dubious distinction of being the largest 
per capita contributors to this worthwhile cause. 
 
For the past 18 years, Meadow Lake Kinsmen Club has held a 
radiothon which is always broadcast live on CJNS Radio. Again 
this weekend the radiothon will be held at the Meadow Lake 
Civic Centre featuring a wide variety of local talent during the 
20-hour event, which runs during the same hours as the telethon 
on TV. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community on average raises about $28,000 
every year for the Telemiracle from area residents. This figure is 
remarkable if you consider the small population base from 
which we draw. The good thing about raising all of this money 
from the radiothon is that the community gets much needed 
services in return, and financial assistance for people who 
require life-saving medical care. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the hard work and dedication of 
the Kinsmen and Kinettes in the Meadow Lake region, and as 
well, the efforts of the staff at CJNS Radio. I extend my best 
wishes to all communities with fund-raising events for 
Telemiracle and urge residents of Saskatchewan to give 
generously to this cause. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hockey Rink Energy Efficiency Audit 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, mention the words community 
rink, and what images arise? Winter carnivals with figure 
skaters, youth emulating superstars in high-paced hockey 
games, and curling bonspiels involving youth to seniors, or 
parents huddled in the bleachers hoping their kid is the next 
Stoikjo, Clark, or Peterson. 
 
But starting this year, Mr. Speaker, rinks will also be the focus 
of something different. A new five-year program will help more 
than 250 community rinks in Saskatchewan achieve energy 
efficiency. Rinks will be offered energy audits, financial advice, 
technical training and engineering support. 
 
The program will help to educate rink staff, management, and 
suppliers, enabling them to make better decisions about how 
their energy budgets are spent. Overall energy savings are 
expected to be $4 million, and another $16 million through 
installation of energy efficient equipment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, such communities as Foam Lake have already 
benefited by implementing energy efficiency. There the rink 
saw its energy costs drop 36 per cent with savings of $10,000. 
Many of the communities in my constituency are actively 
looking into this program. 
 
Four government departments will combine their services to 
provide the program, which was developed in consultation with 
Saskatchewan Municipal Government and the Saskatchewan 
Recreation Facility Association. Another example, Mr. Speaker, 
of how the cooperative spirit makes Saskatchewan a better 
place to live. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Return of Migrant Canada Geese to Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
report good news to the Assembly today. We all knew that 
Pennsylvania has its groundhogs and Capistrano has its 
swallows. But Saskatchewan has its Canada geese. And during 
the last week of February the geese had arrived in south-west 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. If the members wish to 
carry on that debate on this side of the House, I wish they'd do 
it outside of the House while the member is giving his private 
statement. Member from Indian Head-Wolseley, sorry for the 
interruption. 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A number of 
people reported geese returning to our province in south-west 
Saskatchewan during the last week of February. And yesterday 
the first migrant geese had arrived in Regina, with a number of 
people out to view the birds and to feed them as well. 
 
Spring migration is a very exciting time in Saskatchewan, as it's 
the end of another winter. And from now until into June, birds 
will continue to arrive from the South. So it's my pleasure to 
report this good news today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crow Benefit Elimination 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Saskatchewan's history there 
has been a crop failure in the middle of the winter. But instead 
of drought or frost, the culprit has been the feds and the reds. 
The NDP Premier of the province saw fit to pilfer nearly $200 
million from Saskatchewan farm families, while the Liberal 
Prime Minister of this country has seen fit to take up to 
approximately $300 million more. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Agriculture: Mr. Minister,  



March 2, 1995 

 
573 

Sask Trends Monitor estimates net farm income in 1995 to be 
approximately $440 million. We have calculated the cost to 
producers as a result of the elimination of the Crow benefit to 
be approximately $15.92 per tonne, for an extra cost of over 
$300 million on exports of 19 million tonnes of grain. That will 
nearly wipe out the entire net farm income in 1995. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that your changes to the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) program and your ill-advised 
and bull-headed stance on the Crow are directly responsible for 
this disastrous situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, Mr. Speaker, the answer to 
that question is quite simply, no. If the member had been 
listening for the last six to eight months, or even a year from 
now, they would have heard myself and the Premier telling the 
federal Liberals that $300 million will be half of our net farm 
income for next year, and they shouldn't do it. Obviously they 
didn't listen to that case. 
 
The member opposite, who supported reductions to the Crow 
benefit under the federal Tories for the last 10 years, is now 
saying, oops, did you know you're going to lose a bunch of 
income? We've been aware of that for a long time and have 
been fighting very hard to keep that income. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 
understand that the Premier is down in Ottawa meeting with the 
Prime Minister over the last day, again probably conspiring 
against Saskatchewan farmers, as he's done in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals may have killed the Crow, but now 
it's the NDP (New Democratic Party) who is eating the crow all 
across this province. 
 
New question to the minister: the Premier has recently admitted 
that he screwed up the GRIP program, and his friend, Jean, is 
now taking full advantage of that. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you call the Premier in Ottawa and get him to 
ask for the hundreds of millions of dollars in GRIP premiums 
that he and the Prime Minister have taken away from farm 
families across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again the opposition 
can't have it both ways. In the first question he says we're being 
bull-headed and pigheaded about this and we should have 
negotiated. In the second place he's saying we've negotiated 
away the benefits. So I don't know how he can have it both 
ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two opposition parties in the province are 
probably the only people in the world who want to go back to  

'91 GRIP program. I think the farmers . . . if you polled the 
farmers of this province they will tell you that that was a 
program that paid farmers to do a poor job of growing the 
wrong crop; that was more expensive than the provincial budget 
could possibly have afforded; that we have a new safety net; 
that we are heading into the next century. We are helping our 
farmers, and we are still spending 10 per cent of our income on 
farm families. We negotiated the best safety net we could with 
the federal government and we are working and supporting our 
farmers. 
 
When something happens and farmers are devastated by a hit in 
the federal budget, suddenly the other two opposition parties 
wake up and say they're suddenly supporting farmers. Where 
have they been for the past 10 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have just 
seen the Minister of Agriculture admit that they're abandoning 
one sector of Saskatchewan society. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, Saskatchewan gun owners are tired of waiting for 
your government to do something. Firearms owners have 
already acted: they've gone out to the rallies; they've written 
letters; they've circulated petitions, which we have presented to 
this House. And now they're waiting for you to show some 
leadership, Mr. Minister, but nothing is happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, we think we've waited long enough and that's why 
our caucus is taking some action. Later today I will be 
introducing legislation to protect Saskatchewan gun owners by 
entrenching property rights into the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code. Mr. Minister, will you support this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much for that 
question. I have not . . . no member of this side of the Assembly 
has seen that Bill, so to that extent we must reserve our final 
statement until after it's given first reading. 
 
Let me say that we do not . . . we have very serious concerns 
about entrenching property rights in the Human Rights Code. 
This was debated in 1980 when the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms was passed. It was not included in the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms, we think with good cause, and we would 
be very concerned about it being included now. 
 
I also want to say, before I take my seat, that it will do nothing 
to buttress the constitutional position of the province. There is a 
doctrine called paramountcy which says federal legislation has 
paramountcy over provincial legislation where the two conflict. 
 
We therefore cannot occupy a field and prevent them from 
doing so. The feds can do that but we can't, so your tactic is of  



March 2, 1995 

 
574 

little use in buttressing our constitutional position, and it gives 
us grave concerns on a number of other fronts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Property 
rights is a provincial responsibility outlined in the Canadian 
constitution. But property rights have never been formally 
recognized by a provincial government. Recognition of property 
rights would give the province the right to decide whether or 
not to register firearms in Saskatchewan. This would effectively 
allow us to opt out of a national registry. It would also protect 
firearms owners from confiscation without compensation. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to support this type of 
legislation? And if not, if you're not prepared to support the 
firearms owner in this matter, what is your government 
prepared to do in a legislative manner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I want to thank the hon. member for 
that legal opinion. It's highly valued and much studied. I want to 
try to repeat for the member opposite. 
 
There is an entrenched doctrine called the doctrine of 
paramountcy. Federal legislation takes paramountcy over 
provincial legislation where the two conflict. We therefore 
cannot occupy a field and so prevent the federal government 
from doing so. This matter is within the jurisdiction . . . at the 
moment it is within the jurisdiction of the federal government. 
 
It is to the federal government that you must address your 
entreaties. At this point in time there is really very little we can 
do except hope to persuade the federal government to abandon 
their course of action. There really is no effective way that I 
know of whereby we can stop them from proceeding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is indeed 
a paramountcy here. It's the fact that the provinces have 
exclusive jurisdiction of property under the Canadian 
constitution. Your government is in opposition, states it's in 
opposition, to the Liberal gun laws, but yet you've done 
nothing. We know that your party is ideologically opposed to 
property rights but it seems that you would prefer to maintain 
your ideology rather than support firearms owners in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you really do support Saskatchewan gun 
owners in this fight against the federal Liberals, would you put 
aside that ideology and support us in passing this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Not, Mr. Speaker, that's there's any 
room for improvement on the member's legal opinions, but I  

really would be curious whether or not you have any other 
reputable legal opinions which suggest that entrenching 
property rights in the Human Rights Code is going to do very 
much to affect the federal government's constitutional position. 
My understanding is that it will not accomplish the objective 
which you seek to pursue. 
 

Welfare 1-800 Line 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is 
to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, yesterday there 
was some figures quoted on both sides of the House about the 
cost effectiveness of a 1-800 tip line in Manitoba. The 
difference, Mr. Minister, was that we were able to substantiate 
our figures, and you were not. 
 
In fact according to CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
radio this morning, and I quote: 
 
 Bob Pringle's office refused to provide any proof of the 

minister's claim. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you're so sure of your figures, why did you 
refuse to give them to the media? And will you table the 
University of Manitoba study now, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, when those figures came 
out from the Leader of the Opposition yesterday, I knew that 
they were wrong. I knew that they were wrong and we have 
proven that today. Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba, the figures he 
gave in Manitoba . . . You know what they do in Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker? They don't factor in the staffing costs in that line. That 
is a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what they do, Mr. Speaker, they cut 
people off immediately upon the complaint. They cut people off 
immediately upon the complaint. There's an ethic of a human 
rights issue there, if you ask me. Well I said to CBC — and if 
they're going to put it the way they did that's not my problem — 
I said I want to get permission from the professor who gave me 
the information. Today we have it. 
 
It's Dr. Joe Ryant at the school of social work, and he is quite 
prepared to get called. But, Mr. Speaker, the question is, it's an 
illusion of savings. They gave false information. Manitoba is 
giving false information, and they should apologize. Mr. 
Speaker, that group there . . . I released two pages of controls 
yesterday. We will want to be more accountable, not more 
punitive. 
 
That group there couldn't run a popcorn stand when they were 
in opposition. They didn't use the scrutiny they should have 
used when all their friends were lining up for megaproject free 
money, Mr. Speaker. They're misleading on this issue and 
they're incompetent and I believe that they're doing it 
deliberately just like their friends in Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 2, 1995 

 
575 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
still don't know where you're getting your figures from. But the 
fact — you accuse me of not using facts — the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Minister, that the Manitoba hot-line cost less than 
a hundred thousand dollars. You quoted $650,000. And it's 
already received, it's already . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There are just too many 
interruptions. Let the member ask his question. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I say, Mr. 
Minister, it's already saved over a million dollars. And if you 
don't believe me, Manitoba's Social Services will verify those 
figures for you. Mr. Minister, nobody is saying that everyone on 
welfare is abusing the system. Nobody thinks that every hunter 
is breaking the law, but you still have a 1-800 number, tip 
number for poachers. The point is to make it easier to catch 
those who are abusing the system. 
 
Will you call, Mr. Minister, will you call Manitoba Social 
Services and discuss this program with them and at least give it 
fair consideration? Why are you so afraid to do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all he's got to 
understand the system in Manitoba. They have three systems — 
one in the city of Winnipeg administers social assistance; one in 
Brandon; one in the province of Manitoba. You know that not 
any of those three systems are integrated with the computer, 
with each other. People can go back and forth between systems. 
 
We have one system. That can't happen here, Mr. Speaker. We 
have 31 verification workers that stop cheques from going out. 
We do the audit before the cheques go out. They have three. 
They've got a higher case-load, and they have three. Give us 
some credit for that accountability measure. We have 12 
measures that they don't have. Why don't you look at those 
seriously if you're really interested in accountability? You're 
interested in beating up on unemployed people, low income 
people, and don't say you're not. That is your only motivation. 
 
We already get 500 calls around the province from MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) offices and our regional 
offices. Manitoba gets 325 calls. We get more than they do 
already, and you know that in 20 per cent of the cases the 
people aren't even on assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one last quote here from the Free Press 
today in Manitoba. It says, by Frances Russell: 
 
 This fraud shames all of us (she says). The province's 

anonymous welfare snitch line is more about saving 
Tory seats in the next election than about saving money. 

 
Well it's not the welfare abuse tip line savings is so paltry as to 
be ridiculous; it's abuse of human rights and it's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's interesting to 
know who done the survey. The Manitoba social services 
branch — well what a self-serving survey that would be. Would 
you table that today, Mr. Minister? Table that survey that you're 
quoting from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I'm telling you that . . . as I said in 
the press yesterday, I'm talking about the information, the 
source, being the University of Manitoba school of social work. 
Out of courtesy to the professor, I wanted to get permission to 
use his name. 
 
I now have permission to use his name, It's Dr. Joe Ryant who's 
a credible researcher, Dr. Joe Ryant. Give him a call. I'll give 
you his number. I'll give you his number. Dr. Ryant isn't here. 
I'll give you his phone number. You can call him and get the 
information yourself. I'm telling you that the Manitoba minister 
is misleading the public and so are you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Contingency Funds 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan have really done their part. Ordinary 
people have emptied their pockets and those lucky enough to 
have personal savings are using them just to survive. 
 
On Monday, Mr. Speaker, the federal Finance minister told the 
people of Canada what he's keeping as a cushion in the federal 
piggy bank in case interest rates go up. He said if the money 
isn't needed, that it'll go directly to the deficit. 
 
This is considered a responsible approach and people respect 
the federal government for explaining what's in the piggy bank 
and what it's going to be used for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of Finance 
today. Madam Minister, your government also has piggy banks. 
The difference is, nobody knows what's in them, and you aren't 
saying. How many provincial piggy banks are there and how 
much money is in each of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
answer on behalf of the Minister of Finance who, as the Liberal 
leader well knows, is away today in Toronto meeting with some 
of the people who are important to Saskatchewan from the 
point of view of the money we borrow in order to pay for the 
debt that the former administration incurred on behalf of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan and future generations. 
 
I also want to say to the Liberal leader, Mr. Speaker, that her 
question, I think, in the face of what Liberals have done in 
Ottawa, points out very much the kind of governance that 
Liberals provide. They talk about reducing the deficit, Mr. 
Speaker, but in the next two years will add 59 billion to the 
debt. 



March 2, 1995 

 
576 

They talk about not raising taxes, but in fact have this year 
added well in excess of $1 billion of new taxes on the people of 
Canada. 
 
They talk about not raising taxes, Mr. Speaker, and then the 
federal Minister of Finance says — and I suspect that the 
Liberal leader in Saskatchewan is now covering up for him, 
because she has become clearly the apologist for the federal 
Liberal government — then the federal Minister of Finance says 
recently, well he didn't really have to put the one and a half cent 
of tax on the people of Saskatchewan, but he's just going to 
raise that money just in case he needs it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House and I want to say 
to you and I want to say to the Liberal leader, that's bad 
government. No responsible Minister of Finance raises taxes 
just in case he needs it; he raises taxes, or she should raise 
taxes, because that is appropriate management of the finances 
of a country or a province, just as been done here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
most interesting indeed that the Premier of this province, who's 
the tax king of Canada, would have his Deputy Premier stand 
up and accuse the federal government of people who are 
gouging the taxpayers of the country. Little do they admit that 
they indeed added to the debt of this province under their 
administration as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taxpayers are fed up with governments that have 
secrets and play games with their money. All we're asking is 
that the Minister of Finance and the Associate Minister of 
Finance bring all the money to the table, all the profits, all the 
windfalls from the VLTs, everything that is not needed for 
Crown corporations, Crown operations, and that these profits 
go into a fund to pay down the debt and to be there for rainy 
days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question again to the Associate Minister of 
Finance: will you create a real fund, a contingency fund that can 
be monitored, where all extra Crown profits are used to pay the 
debt in the Crowns and the debt of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, Mr. Speaker, in response to 
the Leader of the Liberal Party who seems to be continually 
confused by what is before the House and what is happening in 
this country and this province . . . and I say confused, Mr. 
Speaker; either that or she does not do her homework. But I 
would invite her, I would invite her, Mr. Speaker, to become a 
little more responsible. Because after all, she is going around 
the province suggesting to the people that she might want to be 
the Premier some day. 
 
And it's because of this kind of lack of responsibility that the 
people of Saskatchewan are now saying, are you kidding? She's 
got candidates around the province who now are saying they're  

going to campaign and they're not going to include the Liberal 
leader's name on their brochures. 
 
I say to the Liberal leader, read the audited financial summary 
statements that the Provincial Auditor has presented to this 
legislature. Read the budget. This isn't the 1980s any more. 
Every single cent of revenue, every single cent of expenditure, 
is identified in the new, reformed process of providing budgets 
in Saskatchewan. Read them. They're all there just as easily for 
you to find out as it is for anybody in this House or any 
taxpayer in Saskatchewan. 
 
That's new. That's different than it is in Ottawa. That's different 
than it was in the 1980s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I say two words: VLT (video lottery 
terminal) revenues, Mr. Speaker. The fact is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's more than two words. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — That's VLT as a word, yes. Video lottery 
terminals. If you want . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — If you want to indeed call VLT three 
separate words, that's fine with me. The fact is there is an 
election around the corner. The fact is the government could be 
tempted to spend money that people haven't been told about to 
get itself elected. I'm not saying they will; I'm saying they could, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier and this minister are very free with their criticism 
of the federal government, but one thing that the federal 
minister has done is to state that there is a $3 billion 
contingency fund that has been set aside to use in case interest 
rates go up or if deficit targets cannot be met. People know how 
much it is and what it will be used for. 
 
Mr. Minister, you continue to say simply, trust us. Why don't 
you offer Saskatchewan taxpayers the same protection by 
setting up a fund where all the extra profits are declared 
publicly? We're talking about transparency here, not the 
mounds and tonnes of paper that you sent to the media and all 
the people to find the needle in the haystack . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. There are so many 
people who love to answer questions. The questions and the 
answers are getting much, much too long — much too long. I 
want the member to put her question directly. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
apologize for the length. 
 
Why don't you offer Saskatchewan taxpayers the same 
protection by setting up a fund where all the extra profits are 
publicly declared and those will be committed legally to the  



March 2, 1995 

 
577 

debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 
answer the question raised by the Liberal leader and repeat what 
I had said previously. 
 
All of the information which she asks for is made public, better 
than it has ever been made public in the history of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Now I know she gets up in the House without 
being substantiate anything that she says in here — that's been 
going on for some time — because she hopes she'll get a media 
hit and get a story in the press. 
 
That's fine, but I want to say to the Liberal leader that a lot of 
people watch this Assembly and they know the inconsistencies 
that go on from the mouths of the Liberal members opposite. 
 
Now the member wanted to know about the comparison 
between the federal government and the provincial government. 
Let me say this and let me ask her this question: does the budget 
eliminate the deficit in Ottawa? The answer is no. Does it 
eliminate the deficit in Saskatchewan? The answer is yes. Does 
in Ottawa it achieve a sustainable balance? The answer is no. 
Does it maintain a sustainable balance in Saskatchewan? The 
answer is yes. Does the federal budget raise taxes? The answer 
is yes. Does the budget in Saskatchewan raise taxes? The 
answer is no. 
 
I am prepared to compare anything that that member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I've already said the answers and 
questions are getting too long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minister of Economic Development's Trip 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I direct 
my question this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
Economic Development. I know there are a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan who are sitting on the edge of their seats, as are 
the media, expecting this question. And I feel obligated to do 
that on behalf of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Minister of Economic Development, welcome back. And I 
would just like to ask you how your trip to sunny Hollywood 
was lately. And I want to ask you what you were doing there. 
 
Ostensibly your trip was there to support — your news release 
said — to support the Saskatchewan film industry. Well I know 
you pretty well by now, Mr. Minister, and I know that Quentin 
Tarantino or David Spielberg you are not. So what exactly were 
you doing there? Wasn't this just a beautiful excuse for you, Mr. 
Minister, to go on a holiday in the middle of winter to southern 
California at taxpayers' expense? Was that not the underlying, 
fundamental reason for you accompanying these folks on the 
trip? 
 
And by the way, since I only have time for one question, also  

tell me why you took Zach Douglas along and what was the 
cost of your entire trip with all the buddies that you took along. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the cost of my trip, to 
Economic Development, was about $1,600. We met with a 
number of film industry people. Kevin Dewalt, of course, from 
Minds Eye motion pictures here in Saskatchewan was along. He 
was the producer of Decoy, one of the first full-length feature 
movies, one of the first theatrical movies, ever produced in the 
province. And we met with a number of people who are very 
interested in looking at Saskatchewan as a place to produce 
movies in the future. 
 
The member opposite seems to think of these productions as a 
bit of a joke but I can tell you it's an 11 to $12 million industry 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It employs many hundreds of 
people. And I can tell you if you had put your mind to 
economic development instead of major give-aways for the 10 
years that you were in government we wouldn't have the $15 
billion in debt that we have at the present time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I turn to the next item of business I 
just want to remind members that in future question periods I 
intend to be a lot stricter on the length of both the questions and 
the answers that are being given. So if members are going to be 
cut off in the future, it's not my fault. You have had your 
warning. They're getting much too long. 
 
Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Yesterday during 
question period and again this afternoon in question period, the 
Minister of Social Services yesterday was quoting from a 
research study that was made from Manitoba apparently, and 
again this afternoon. Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Wilkie asked the minister to table that document. And there was 
not a commitment made by the minister to do precisely that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to substantiate my argument I refer you to 
the 6th edition of Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules & Forms. 
And it's citation number 495; page 151 states that: 
 
 A Minister is not at liberty to read or quote from a 

despatch or other state paper not before the House 
without being prepared to lay it on the Table. 

 
It goes on further that it says, and it's sub-section (5): 
 
 To be cited, (is what I'm requesting you to do, Mr. 

Speaker, to be cited) a document must be quoted or 
specifically used to influence debate. 



March 2, 1995 

 
578 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that that is precisely what that 
minister was doing and therefore it should be tabled promptly, 
like right now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding 
that the member referred to, the Minister of Social Services, 
was not quoting from a document but was using quotes from a 
document; but not using the document. And so I think there's a 
significant difference, but I would ask Mr. Speaker to rule on it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It is a long-standing tradition in this 
House that if a minister quotes from a document, then the 
minister must table that document. I do not know whether the 
minister was quoting from a document. I have to leave it up to 
his integrity to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order. 
That is also a long-standing tradition of parliament, that we take 
the word of members. If the minister was quoting from a 
document, then the minister must table that document. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Behind the bar 
with us today we have a long-serving member, now retired, of 
the Legislative Assembly who served for some 29 years in the 
Assembly, was recognized prior to his retirement as the dean of 
the Legislative Assembly, at that time of course the longest 
serving member without having broken service in the 
Assembly, serving his constituents for 29 years and serving this 
Assembly, certainly one of the more colourful and sometimes 
controversial politicians, even still today in the Saskatchewan 
scene. I'd like you to welcome Eiling Kramer here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Assessment 
Appraisers and to enact certain Consequential Amendments 

to The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
a Bill respecting Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers and to 
enact certain Consequential Amendments to The Assessment 
Management Agency Act be now introduced and read the first 
time 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984, and to make a Consequential Amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Northern Municipalities Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Assessment 
Management Agency Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code (Property Rights) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code (Property Rights). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 32 — An Act respecting the Management of Forest 

Resources 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move first reading 
of a Bill respecting the Management of Forest Resources. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 



March 2, 1995 

 
579 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
questions no. 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, and 54, I move they be 
converted to motions for return (debatable). And I hereby table 
the answer to question no. 52. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 52 has been tabled; 
48, 49, 50, 51, 53, and 54, convert to motion for return (debate). 
 
Before I recognize the minister, why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I'd like to introduce to the Assembly, through 
you, Mr. Speaker, an important person to the New Democratic 
Party of Saskatchewan. I'd like to introduce Elaine Driver, 
president of the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. Please 
welcome Elaine to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial 
Stability Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Farm Financial Stability Act consolidates 
existing farm finance legislation and broadens the capability to 
provide programs that address farm finance needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to the Act relate only to 
part VI of the Act. Part VI deals with feeder and breeder 
producer associations and provides authority to undertake the 
following activities: to establish producer associations for the 
purpose of obtaining guaranteed loans for the purchase of 
commodities; to indicate how commodities may be purchased, 
sold, and marked for identification; to define loan conditions; to 
require associations to establish an assurance fund; and to 
define the terms and conditions for claims on the guarantee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of making these changes is to create 
efficiency. Briefly the amendments provide for the clarification 
of the kinds of lending institutions that may provide loans; how 
loans are to be repaid by members of feeder-breeder 
associations; how feed bills must be submitted; the procedures 
for buying and selling of cattle within an association; and also 
additional information from lenders so as to prevent defaults on 
loans. 

These amendments were developed in consultation with the 
industry. The Government of Saskatchewan consulted with a 
producer associations committee established through the 
Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association. The committee 
members represent all feeder-breeder associations as well as the 
lenders. During discussions it was agreed that the previous 
legislation wasn't consistent with industry practice. 
 
The need for change was also identified as a result of active 
program experience and discussion with individual 
associations. To accommodate industry and to ensure financial 
responsibility guarantees, the Government of Saskatchewan 
developed these amendments which have received the approval 
of the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly, I 
encourage you to adopt these amendments to The Farm 
Financial Stability Act. Therefore I move that The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1995 be read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a 
few comments regarding the Act prior to adjourning debate. It 
sounds to me like the minister's amendments to the Act are 
basically including the feeder associations now in the same 
format that the cow-calf operator has, where they . . . or a group 
of producers have in forming an association, pooling money, 
pooling their resources and buying breeding stock. And I think, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the feeder associations have been asking 
for this ability. 
 
But if I understand the minister correctly, it gives them an 
ability to get a group of people together to pool their resources 
and then be able to access loans to set up a feeder association 
program. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think there are some positive 
influences in this type of a program, and I understand just from 
talking to the livestock people that there are many people that 
are very interested. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we do have some questions and look 
forward to continued debate with the minister as we continue in 
second readings and then move into committee. But at this time 
I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — As this is the first time for the Department of 
Health before the committee, I will ask the Minister of Health 
to introduce his officials to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my 
left is Mr. Duane Adams, deputy minister of Health. We are 
expecting shortly Ms. Kathy Langlois and Mr. Steve Petz. Mr.  



March 2, 1995 

 
580 

Steve Petz is associate deputy minister, and Ms. Langlois, 
executive director of finance and management services. 
 
Currently in the House with us, Mr. Jim Simmons, who is 
director of capital and special operating projects. We have 
Lawrence Krahn, who is executive director of the medical care 
insurance branch, and Ms. Maureen Yeske, executive director 
of health planning and policy development. And Jahzi Van 
Iderstine will also be back in shortly — she's an assistant to the 
deputy minister. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister and welcome to his officials who have joined us here 
this afternoon for debate on estimates regarding Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's no doubt that Health is one of the main 
focal points in politics here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It's certainly an issue that continues to rise to the surface as one 
department that really brings out a lot of interest from people 
across this province. 
 
I think through the years your party and certainly your 
government over the past couple of years has . . . and while in 
opposition have certainly viewed Health as one of the tools and 
one of the avenues whereby they have gone to the electorate 
and suggested that they were the basic protectors of health 
services in this province and have brought one of the best 
programs of health forward into the province of Saskatchewan 
and certainly into Canada. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what I've . . . what I'm hearing lately 
and what I've seen over the past number of months, not only in 
my constituency in visiting people in the hospitals, talking to 
people who work in hospitals out in our area, visiting in care 
homes, but also here in the city of Regina and the city of 
Saskatoon, as I visit some of the larger centres, I find that there 
are many people very disillusioned with our health system as 
we see it today. 
 
One of the things I think that really concerns people and that 
really has people somewhat on edge, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
. . . or Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that your 
government, three years ago when they set out to change health 
across the province, said that they must change it because we 
couldn't afford to continue funding the program as we saw it 
back in 1991. 
 
And as we get into the debate it's going to be interesting to note 
that while you talked about change and while you talked about 
the necessity of change and the fact that that change was needed 
to make it more efficient, to run more efficiently and to run 
more economically, the fact is the dollar expenditure in Health 
has not changed dramatically or changed very significantly 
despite the fact that we've had more than 52 hospitals closed 
across this province, and most of them in rural Saskatchewan; 
in fact all of them in rural Saskatchewan. Not only have we had 
hospitals closed across Saskatchewan, and in specifically rural  

Saskatchewan, but every community has been affected 
including our two large centres, where there have been beds 
have been cut back. 
 
(1430) 
 
There have been cut-backs in beds, we've had . . . and due to the 
cut-backs, then we've had the fact that there's been a reduction 
in staffing. And as a result people are beginning to wonder 
really what kind of a health system we have had. And the other 
day we had a bit of a debate over some questions that were 
raised and that came to the forefront. And I think you stood 
here and asked, well do you support a two-tier health system? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it's not a 
matter of whether we support a two-tier health system, and 
that's coming back to the question regarding the eye services 
offered in the city of Saskatoon, I believe it's at City Hospital. 
But it's the fact that people across the province of Saskatchewan 
have many tears in their eyes as they try to understand what the 
health system is doing to them and what services the health 
system is making available; what they can count on the health 
system doing to help them out. 
 
Mr. Minister, you stood in this House the other day and on a 
number of occasions, and your colleagues have suggested that 
this health system in the province of Saskatchewan is still one 
of the best in Canada. And you continually refer to Alberta, 
how it . . . and bring out the fact that the changes that have 
taken place in Alberta and how they have decimated their 
program. 
 
But let me just remind you of the fact that even though the 
government in Alberta made decisions to streamline their health 
system and even though they made significant cuts, the fact is 
the government made the cuts over there. Here in Saskatchewan 
what we keep and we . . . and the former minister of Health . . . 
as we were just debating this last year, because of the changes 
you've made and the formation of, I believe, it's around 35 
health care districts across this province, it seems last year we 
couldn't get a very straight answer when we came to addressing 
some of the concerns. And I trust that this year will be much 
different, that you'll be more forward. 
 
But on one hand you criticize the government of Alberta for the 
cuts they made; on the other hand when we try to establish why 
there's fewer nurses, why there's fewer beds across 
Saskatchewan, the former minister of Health kept telling us, 
well that wasn't really our problem, that wasn't our fault, that 
was the district, the district board that made that decision. 
 
But board members are telling me that they really had no 
alternative, that basically directives came out of Health. And 
that's why we've called for an elected board, a total elected 
board, not a board that's controlled by three . . . the fact that a 
third of the members still are appointed by the government, but 
a totally elected board in our health districts. 
 



March 2, 1995 

 
581 

Health district boards have told me that they really didn't have 
any alternative. Number one, the department basically laid out 
some guidelines for them; number two, the funding has been 
cut on an annual basis to the point that they had no alternative. 
And yet while the funding has been cut, the total expenditures 
in Health continue to remain the same. And those are where 
some of the discrepancies arise. 
 
But coming back to the system in Alberta, I was just informed 
the other day — my wife happens to come from central Alberta 
. . . and a gentlemen who had had a major, serious heart attack 
— in fact that gentlemen passed away unfortunately — but he 
was taken to his local hospital, and his local hospital stabilized 
him. It was a matter of not a very long time, and I'm not sure if 
they have the service right available, but he was lifted by air 
ambulance from a community of Coronation into Edmonton. 
 
So it seems to me their system, even though they've had cut-
backs as well, seems to be able to reach out and help the people 
within the system. And I found that very interesting that his 
wife could run him into the local hospital and that they could 
work to stabilize him and within a matter of a few . . . I don't 
know if it was an hour or less than an hour, there's an air 
ambulance ready to pick him up. I'm not sure if that's available 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But it seems to me, Mr. Minister, what we do have here is a 
health system that a person better work . . . and you talk about 
your wellness model; I think it's very important, as we 
mentioned last year, it's that people better work very seriously at 
maintaining their health and being well because there are cases 
where we have seen over the past year that people have found 
that the health system as we have it today is not providing the 
type of service that people expected and came to believe was 
available to them in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm looking forward to the ongoing discussion 
and debate as we enter the series of questions and discussing 
health care and how we can look at improving the health care 
program in this province, and how we can better meet the needs 
of not only the people of today but the people of tomorrow and 
certainly into the future, and building our health care system, a 
system that looks at all the residents of this province. 
 
And as the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who I 
understand has already been defeated in his riding and will not 
be able to run again because it appears he spoke out because he 
believed in the services that were available at one time in his 
community but aren't there any more . . . and because he spoke 
out, the very party he ran and represented and represents in this 
House, made sure there were other people up to contest his 
nomination. 
 
I don't know if that speaks very well of the government, 
especially when they take on individuals who feel that they 
should represent their constituents. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I believe your office has received a set of 
global estimate questions which were sent to the office. And as  

of now I don't believe we've had a response to the questions. 
And I'm wondering if you could indicate to us when that series 
or set of global questions will be arriving in our office. Mr. 
Minister, would you be able to do that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, to address the member's 
latter point first, the question of the global estimate package 
that you've provided to my office, you will note in the request 
that you have made of us that you are requesting the totals for 
the fiscal year '94-95. We have not, as you will know, come yet 
to the end of the fiscal year 1995. When we have that date past 
us, we will prepare all of the information, and all of the 
information will be delivered to you. 
 
So there's no sense here that we're holding back. You've asked 
for information for the total fiscal year and we will give you the 
complete package when it's possible for us to put that together. 
 
I want to say just a few comments about the member's opening 
remarks and I think within the purview of those remarks you've 
raised a whole number of issues that I expect over the course of 
today and the days ahead we'll be debating one at a time. 
 
Let me say, on some points I think we are in agreement. When 
you talk of health care being a focus of public concern in our 
province, you are absolutely dead on. And so it should be so. If 
there is something that is precious to the people of 
Saskatchewan as taxpayers, as residents of our province, if there 
is something that is key to the quality of life in Saskatchewan, it 
is health care. There should always be frank and open debate 
about health care in our province, and I'm sure we'll engage in 
some of that here. 
 
You say in your opening comment — and I think again we can 
agree and I think there would be few in our province who 
would disagree — that if we were to sustain this quality of 
health care in our province, if we were to sustain the principles 
of medicare which at least we on this side of the House support, 
if we were to sustain this quality health care in Saskatchewan 
and available to all Saskatchewan people, the change was 
required. 
 
Now you make an interesting point in your opening comments. 
I hear you being critical in your opening comment that we are 
spending as much today, or almost as much today, in Health as 
we were spending three and four years ago. You would suggest 
by that, that we should have further reduced expenditures in 
Health. 
 
And I want to make it very clear to the member and all 
members that when we inherited government in 1991, spending 
within the Department of Health across government had, over 
the previous 10 years, literally doubled. Spending in Health had 
literally doubled over the previous decade. And that's in 
constant dollars. 
 
Now if you take that trend line and follow it up, had no change 
been made in our expenditures in Health, had no change been 
made, if we simply followed all the programs and policies that  



March 2, 1995 

 
582 

were in existence in 1991 when we came to government, if no 
change had been made in spending, the budget figure before 
you this year would not be $1.5 billion — it would be $1.9 
billion. A $400 million increase would have occurred, given the 
trending of spending in Health. We would today have to be 
spending $400 million more. In that sense, there has been a 
significant reduction in how we are spending in Health. 
 
Now if the member's position is we should not have changed 
anything, that we should have just left everything in place, then 
that means, that trend line, we'd be spending $1.9 billion today 
and somehow we would have to find that extra $400 million to 
provide for that quality of care. I hope the member would agree 
with me, that is simply not sustainable in the Saskatchewan 
circumstance. 
 
What has been happening, Mr. Chair, is that we have been 
taking the global amount of money that we have available to us 
to spend in Health and attempting, as best as we are able, to 
match that money and those resources with real need. And so 
there has been some shifting, some shifting away from 
institutional acute services to services that are more appropriate 
to need and more accessible to people where they live and to 
meet their actual needs. 
 
Now the shift has not been easy. I want to remind the member 
— he will have read the Estimates — that still the vast majority 
of our resources, the vast majority of our resources are directed 
at providing the best quality acute care that we can possibly 
provide. 
 
The largest item in the Department of Health estimates will be, 
and remains to be, the hospital budget. The second largest 
chunk of our budget is spent on medical professionals, and the 
bulk of that to doctors. The third largest part of our budget is 
for the provision of long-term care, institutional care. 
 
And so a significant — the most significant  chunk of our 
budget is yet provided to the more institutional acute care. But 
there has been shift, and we're proud of the shift because we 
know in the shift we are bringing services closer to where 
people are and closer to meet their needs. 
 
At the end of the day, when this budget is passed, we will be 
spending now, in community- and home-based services, $140 
million to provide community- and home-based services. In this 
budget alone, we are redirecting $15 million, plus another 5 
million from the current fiscal year, to provide new funding of 
20 — over 20 — $20.3 million to community-based, home-
based services, bringing services closer to where people are. 
 
That's the goal — to use the resources which are available to us, 
not in an ever-expanding way as was happening, not in an 
unsustainable way that sooner or later would bring about the 
collapse of the entire system — and sooner rather than later in 
my view — but to use the resources we have to their . . . and 
tailor those resources to provide the best quality health care for 
Saskatchewan people that we are able to provide. 
 

And I want the member to know and all members to know that 
we are being watched, not only from across Canada but from 
across the world, in what we are being able to accomplish in 
Saskatchewan to reshape the delivery of health so that it is 
sustainable. So that it maintains the quality that Saskatchewan 
people desire and deserve; that it remains publicly accessible 
and universally accessible — publicly funded — and that the 
system that is being developed now in this last decade of this 
century will suit us well into the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Chair, I know that the member will have many specific 
questions and I invite him now to bring us the specifics and we 
can have, I'm sure, a good discussion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I find it interesting that you referred to the substantial 
jump in the expenditures in health care from the 1982 year 
through 1991. 
 
You will have to admit, Mr. Minister, that the expenditures in 
health care, part of those expenditures were actually taking 
place in '82, except they were in another department. If I'm not 
mistaken, home care services and care home services were held 
under Social Services. 
 
What was done in 1982 was lump what was actually health 
care, or health care-giving services, into the Department of 
Health versus having part of the health care under one program 
and part under Health. So that basically took that out of one 
department and put it into the Department of Health, where we 
have a total expenditure under the one department. I think that 
we need to compare the expenditures that we're talking about 
today based on what they were in 1982 and the fact that 
whether they were with another department is irrelevant. The 
fact is those expenditures were still taking place. 
 
And yes, health is the number one expenditure in the province 
of Saskatchewan. In fact, I would almost guess that health must 
be the number one expenditure almost right across Canada. It 
certainly eats up the largest amount of taxpayers' dollars not 
only in our province, but in all of Canada. 
 
And I guess it boils down to the fact that our health is very 
important to us, because without health, we aren't able to sit 
back and enjoy the beauty around us, that we see around us. 
And I think today of many people who do not have the same 
abilities that you and I have, sir, because of illnesses that have 
confronted them that wasn't because of a problem they arise, 
wasn't because of their own ignorance of health facts — was 
due to circumstances beyond their control and they don't have 
the ability to enjoy the freedoms to be able to stand up and walk 
around. 
 
And certainly we must, I believe, do as much as we can to reach 
out to meet the needs of those less fortunate than we are. And I 
think it's very important that we keep those things in mind. And 
there's some personal experiences that I'd like to bring to your 
attention as we get into further discussion as well. 
 



March 2, 1995 

 
583 

(1445) 
 
But, Mr. Minister, coming back to the global questions. You 
mentioned that yes, we have asked for the year '94-95. The 
unfortunate part is we've got another month to go until the end 
of the year 1995. And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, it would 
seem to me your department would possibly be able to start 
bringing some of this material together so by the time the end of 
the month rolls around, the year end rolls around, that those 
questions are made as quickly or as judiciously as possible. 
Because if they're not going to come out until the end of April, 
I'm not exactly sure; maybe the Premier by then is going to have 
decided it's time to go to the polls and we will not have had a 
chance to review it. 
 
So I want a commitment from you, sir, that your department 
will make every effort to have that information and those 
answers in our hands as quickly as possible following the year 
end. 
 
And while you're responding to that, I would also like to just 
bring to your attention a couple of questions, Mr. Minister, that 
we . . . last year we had asked if you could provide us with lists 
of trips taken over the past year, who accompanied, whether 
yourself or the former minister, on any of these trips, the 
purpose of the trips, total cost and any other pertinent 
information regarding travel. 
 
And it seems to me my colleague indicated that we did send 
these questions over, but in a lot of cases, the questions didn't 
come back as completely answered as we would’ve anticipated. 
And we're asking, Mr. Minister, if you will indeed commit to 
make sure that we have a total commitment . . . or the answers 
in full to these questions. I wonder if you would do that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank the member for his question. 
 
Just again, to return to some of his earlier comment, he is . . . 
that's absolutely true. In 1982 his government brought funding 
for home care and for nursing homes under the purview of the 
Department of Health, took it from Social Services and put it in 
Health. But I want to tell the member, when we did our 
factoring of the trend lines and the expenditures in Health over 
the decade, this was taken into account. This was taken into 
account. These do not in any way change the numbers which I 
gave the member. 
 
In the course of the period, actual funding on these health 
services doubled. And had the trend line continued, we'd be 
spending $400 million today more than we're spending. So that 
was taken into account. 
 
On the question of the estimate questions that you have 
provided to my office, clearly the answer is yes, we're working 
on them now. If any of those can be answered within . . . that 
don't have the fiscal year attached, we'll provide those as soon 
as we can. And we're working on them now, and they'll be 
available to you. 

And I understand why the member would want to have this 
information before any election should happen in this province, 
knowing that he may well not be here to ask the question after 
the election. I understand his concern in that regard. 
 
On the question of the travel, on the question of the travel, we'll 
be providing that information to you and to your caucus and to 
the third party caucus. And that will indicate any travel, and I'm 
assuming you're asking for travel outside the boundaries of the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
want all travel. Well we'll provide all travel, but I'm assuming 
you want more detail about out . . . the detail that you ask about 
who accompanied the minister and so on, I am assuming is for 
out-of-province travel. We'll provide the province in travel and 
out-of-province travel for both the former minister and myself. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as well, 
in view of the fact that we have had a number of cabinet 
shuffles, and the Department of Health has as well seen a 
change in roles or leadership as far as the ministers, would you 
please make available to the office any changes that have taken 
place in your office as far as personnel, staff changes. As well, 
could you provide the names and salaries and salary increases 
over the past year that have taken place in the Department of 
Health or in the office, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, in regards to both, both 
offices, when my predecessor was serving as minister and I 
served as associate minister, we'll provide to the members those 
people who were at work in our office, and I will also provide 
those who are at work in my office now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think 
one of the areas that certainly has changed over the past number 
of years is the drug plan. And at one time we had a plan that 
basically didn't have any levels tied to it. Then we had a plan 
that came in with a deductible. Now we've got a plan that's even 
got a higher deductible. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what's the policy of the 
department? What type of a drug plan do we have today? 
What's the deductible and how often does the deductible come 
into play? What avenues the department follows in dealing with 
people that must deal with drug costs that are almost exorbitant, 
beyond their control, due to health problems that they have that 
maybe somebody else doesn't have. Maybe you could kind of 
outline where the drug plan is, where it sits today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member requests a rather 
substantial amount of information about the drug plan. I'm very 
happy to share that with him. Let me say generally that we in 
Saskatchewan are one of I believe three provinces in Canada 
that still have a whole-population drug plan — a drug plan that 
is available to all citizens of our province, based on a number of 
criteria. But very few other provinces offer a universal drug 
plan. 
 
And we're very proud of that fact, that in the fiscal circumstance 
that we inherited, that we have been able to preserve the  



March 2, 1995 

 
584 

structure of a drug plan, and within the limited financial 
resources that we've had available to us, or the more limited 
resources than we used to have, that we've been able to 
structure a plan that is income sensitive while also recognizing 
need. 
 
And so we have, I think, arguably the most sensitive to the 
individual's situation drug benefit of any in Canada. In fact it is 
the only plan in Canada that actually links ability to pay and 
income. 
 
In terms of some of the detail of the plan today, 82,400 family 
units are receiving some subsidy under the plan. That would 
equate to about one in four families in Saskatchewan receive 
some subsidy under the drug plan. There are 30,400 separate 
family units which are approved for special support and receive 
the reduced co-payment. Of those, 12,900 family units are 
approved for special support and will have a co-payment of 35 
per cent or less. And on average the drug plan will be paying 58 
per cent of the prescription cost for families which are approved 
for special support. 
 
In addition, there are 15,000 family units in Saskatchewan — 
those people who will be receiving FIP (Family Income Plan), 
SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan), and GIS (guaranteed income 
supplement) benefits — who automatically have their 
deductible lowered to 100 or $200 semi-annually, and they 
would receive the 65 per cent coverage under the drug plan. 
 
There are another 34,500 family units approved under social 
assistance or SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living), 
palliative care, and special high needs drug costs, receive 
almost . . . their prescriptions at almost little or no cost at all. 
 
We spent $52.4 million last year providing the drug plan, and 
this year we've budgeted 58.0. 
 
So just to repeat, there is the special support program for 
families whose drug costs would be high in relation to their 
income, and that will be for families whose income, combined 
income, is less than $50,000. So if family income is less than 
$50,000 and whose drug costs exceed 3.4 per cent of their 
annual family income, there is the special support program. 
 
One of the concerns that we have had is the knowledge of the 
drug plan among the people of Saskatchewan. And so we have 
taken steps on a number of occasions to provide educational 
materials. In fact we actually sent a direct mailing to all those 
whom we knew had high drug use, to be sure that they could 
. . . to get the benefits under the special support program. So 
that for families with an income of 50,000 and less and whose 
drug costs are more than 3.4 per cent of that income, there is 
special support. 
 
And I'm just going to say it now, because someone may want to 
note this, that there is a toll-free line. If anyone has any 
questions about getting the special support program, we have a 
toll-free line. It's 1-800-667-7581. 
 

Now those people, as I indicated, who are low income in our 
province, who will be on the Family Income Plan, they 
automatically have their deductible lowered to $100 semi-
annually. And once they reach the deductible, the support is 35 
— they are only required to pay 35 per cent of the cost. 
 
Under the guaranteed income supplement, those receiving 
guaranteed income supplement and those under the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan — and these for the most part will 
be seniors — they have an automatically assigned deductible of 
$200 semi-annually, and once they reach the $200 level the 
prescription cost drops to 35 per cent. 
 
And then we have all the special coverages for those who may 
be paraplegics, cystic fibrosis sufferers, chronic renal disease; 
all palliative care drugs are covered. 
 
And if you are receiving social welfare, if you are among the 
poorest of our people, the coverage is a simple $2 flat fee for 
any prescription — no charge for children — and there would 
be no charge at all if you are on social assistance and you have 
a high use of prescription medicines, which would mean five 
prescriptions a month or more. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now you gave me a lot 
of figures in just a few minutes there and I think I got a few 
down. Number one, you didn't give what the deductible is just 
for the average, ordinary citizen and whether it's on a bi-annual 
basis or an annual basis. I wonder if you could give that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The deductible is 850 every six months. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, as far 
as the health plan in this province, for a lot of people there 
really isn't a health plan — or a drug plan, pardon me. At $850 
every six months, that's $1,700 a year. That's a fair bit of drug 
costs. And for some people, especially diabetics, they may not 
quite reach the 850 on a six-month period, but they're facing a 
substantial increase . . . or I shouldn't say increase, but a 
substantial drug layout. 
 
Now I'm not exactly sure how that fits into some of the numbers 
you just gave me. You talked about different groups having . . . 
when you said income less than 50,000, I would take that to be 
a gross income you're talking of; I'm not exactly sure if you 
were referring to a net income. Because what happens in the 
small-business or the farm community, people can have 
incomes of, say, 50 or 60,000 or $40,000 but what they're 
actually living on at the end of the year may be in the 
neighbourhood of 15 to $20,000, which almost falls right into 
what a lot of people would term as being almost at the poverty 
line. 
 
So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could kind of clarify 
that. Is that a net income we're talking of here? And then if a 
person has, when we're talking of a substantial need due to 
physical conditions that they have, that . . . and I think you 
mentioned a couple areas. I'm wondering if multiple sclerosis 
happens to be part of some of the assistance, where assistance is  



March 2, 1995 

 
585 

provided, or how . . . how does a person actually determine 
where they should receive assistance, Mr. Minister? Maybe you 
could try and clarify on some of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Just to clarify then, for the member. Yes, 
when we're talking about the $50,000 annual income, that is a 
gross income. That is based on your gross income, not net, but 
on your gross income, which means that in fact there are 
thousands of Saskatchewan families who do benefit under the 
current drug plan. 
 
I spoke to the member about some of the numbers — 82,400 
family units do receive some level of subsidy under the plan. 
There are other — 30,400  family units are approved for the 
special support. The numbers go on. 
 
So there are thousands of people . . . And I must say, Mr. Chair, 
that if you travel to many other provinces of this country, that 
level of support is not there for you if you are a family. There 
may be some support if you're a senior, but in many provinces 
across Canada there is no support from their provincial 
governments for drug coverage. 
 
If you're a family in Ontario, if you're a family in Quebec, if 
you're a family in New Brunswick, if you're a family in Nova 
Scotia, Prince Edward Island, or Newfoundland and you have a 
drug cost, you're going to pay the entire amount. 
 
Now we have tailored, using $50 million, a drug plan  $52 
million  a drug plan which endeavours to take those resources 
and provide the support in a fair way to those whose incomes 
are lower and whose drug costs are higher. And then we have 
separated out, for instance as I illustrated with people on social 
assistance who have very low incomes, for very special support. 
And we provide special support for those diseases or conditions 
where the need is very, very high and the treatments are very, 
very expensive. 
 
So I don't accept the argument that people are not being assisted 
through the Saskatchewan drug plan. Thousands of people are 
receiving assistance. Now do we wish we had greater numbers 
of resources to put here? The answer is, of course, yes. I mean 
you'll recall when this plan started — it started in the 1970s; it 
was pioneered — one of the most difficult choices that we had 
to make as a government surrounded the issue of the drug plan 
and at what level could we continue the support. 
 
I'm proud that we've been able to continue a plan in 
Saskatchewan when other provinces have abandoned their plans 
or never had plans. Would I wish that we had more resources 
we could devote to it? The answer, of course, is yes. But 
currently, with the resources that are available to us, I think 
we're providing a plan that tries to be sensitive, one, to a 
person's ability to pay, and two, to your need. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
well I've chatted with the Minister of Social Services regarding 
a special need out in our area. And for the sake of the fact that I 
actually haven't talked to the family about bringing the name  

forward, I'll just send it across at a later date for your 
department to peruse. 
 
But I'm wondering how the department treats individual cases, 
especially where multiple sclerosis is a factor. Would that fall 
under the special needs as well, because of the drugs that are 
. . . especially when you're talking of individuals who are totally 
dependent upon somebody else for their livelihood; they can't 
even feed themselves. 
 
(1500) 
 
In the one case I'm talking of, the individual isn't even able to 
swallow or take in food; they're basically being tube fed, which 
is certainly difficult for the family. And I'm wondering, Mr. 
Minister, if you could kind of indicate how the department 
deals with circumstances such as this, and what kind of support 
there is for a family like that in those circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, regarding if the member has 
— and I believe he has — maybe an individual case that he 
would like us to follow up, if he would please send that over 
and I will guarantee that we will review the circumstances of 
that individual case. 
 
And indeed, if there are any others who have individual cases, I 
would refer again to the toll-free line, or to contact any one of 
the MLAs of this House, or to contact the local pharmacist for 
information, or indeed to contact my office directly, and we'll 
follow up. 
 
In the case of MS (multiple sclerosis), there is not a specially-
defined special coverage. But not knowing the circumstances to 
which you refer, again coverage will have some basis on the 
income of the family. They may qualify under the SAIL 
program — I don't know that — which might provide some 
special benefits. There are avenues to explore, so if you provide 
us with the name, we'd be very happy to do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, I can assure the minister that in talking to 
the family they do get support under the SAIL program, which 
they're quite grateful for in view of the fact of where they were, 
and not that long ago. It is a farm family, which comes back to 
the point of . . . that's why I'm pleased to hear that at least you're 
taking into consideration, gross, not . . . well, not gross . . . may 
create a problem there because a farm family may have a high 
gross but that net factor can be very small. And that's where we 
have some of the discrepancies. 
 
I guess the concern we have, Mr. Minister, and I'm coming back 
to and I'm going to bring one other area into this besides just the 
drug costs; and that is because of the individual needing very 
special care, and you announced — I think it was a little over 
two weeks ago — an additional expenditure in home care 
services. 
 
However, home care, I believe, only provides service for five 
days — five days out of the seven . . . not five days, four days, 
Monday to Thursday, I think is what they get. And then they  



March 2, 1995 

 
586 

can get a couple of days in a respite bed. But certainly when the 
patient has care in a respite bed, they have to cover that cost as 
well. 
 
And so there's so many other factors that come into it, and I'm 
just thinking of one specific case. I'm not sure how many other 
circumstances such as this we do have across the province, but I 
will undertake — and unfortunately, I don't have all the info 
here this afternoon, Mr. Minister — but I will undertake to at 
least try and get it into your hands by tomorrow, to follow up on 
that. 
 
So these are just some of the circumstances that we're dealing 
with, that many people are dealing with, in trying to address 
how to meet . . . to provide for themselves at the end of the day, 
especially if they fall into a scenario where drugs or the use of 
drugs becomes a major problem for them. 
 
Mr. Minister, at this time I'd like to move into another area for a 
few moments. As you're aware, I believe it's at least three weeks 
ago now, we raised the question about special care homes. And 
you'll be very familiar with the fact that I brought forward a 
question from the community of Avonlea. And I brought a 
number of petitions to the floor. I believe you have the original 
copies in your possession, but I'd like to present these to the 
Table, place a copy of the petitions. 
 
Mr. Minister, at that time you'd indicated, and I believe in a 
letter to the MLA from Bengough-Milestone dated August 25, 
1994, you indicated that you're undertaking a thorough review 
of the long-term care sector and developing a strategy that 
recognized the integration of all services, and this process 
should take three to four months. And you also indicated in 
your letter that you were in consultation with Mrs. Krieger, and 
that you would be getting back to them regarding the licensing 
of special or private care homes. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, from the meeting in your office that 
you had with the group from Avonlea, you'd also indicated that 
you'd be making an announcement within a week or so that you 
thought they would be quite well pleased with. 
 
And I can assure the minister that the announcement you made, 
while I'm sure most people were quite pleased with the fact that 
there was an additional influx of money into the home care 
program to help people stay in their homes somewhat longer, it 
still doesn't meet the need of this community and the people in 
the community of Avonlea and surrounding area, who have 
already indicated that they're more than willing, out of their 
own resources, to put forward money to help construct and 
build a private care home of some 40 beds that would meet the 
needs of individuals who basically are at the point of not being 
able to really be taken care of, adequately taken care of, under 
the home care program. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, where the department is 
today, where you are sitting, where we are sitting as far as 
licensing of private care homes in this situation. I think you 
would have to admit that Mrs. Krieger's track record in  

providing for the needs of the people in the care homes that she 
has been involved in to date has been pretty impressive and a 
number of communities have certainly looked at and adopted it. 
 
And I wonder if you could just elaborate and let us know where 
we are and where the community of Avonlea may be in the 
large scheme of things regarding the licensing of a private care 
home they're looking forward to having in their community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I want to just step back 
one step before addressing the special care and supportive care 
issues that the member raises. I want to just step one step back 
and make it clear, and my officials have asked me to try and 
make this clear, in terms of the drug plan and the income levels. 
 
We are talking about gross income; particularly if you're on a 
fixed income or wage income, that's easy to identify. If we're 
talking about a farm or self-employed or a business, then the 
income will be the adjusted income. I'm told it's line 151 of the 
income tax form. Is that correct? Line 151 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 150. I'm sorry, line 150. So it is gross, but it's 
line 150. The actual, exact and appropriate phrase is the 
adjusted income reflected from the income tax. 
 
You make, I think, an interesting and a significant point about 
an individual who may have MS and some . . . There are many 
factors that call for home care, for respite. One of the things 
that I'm very pleased about and excited about in this budget, in 
terms of the community-based services that we're putting into 
place, we're devoting some resources to accessing information 
to individuals, providing for quality of care in a local 
circumstance, and facilitating the whole broad range of 
treatments that may be necessary in an individual case. 
 
So part of this budget will provide monies to our districts to 
look at the concept of providing what we might describe as 
health facilitators. And that would be someone who works with 
individuals to help them sort out what is sometimes a myriad of 
services which may be available to help individuals steer 
themselves through to find the most appropriate mix of 
services. 
 
I think that's a real step forward, particularly  and this has 
happened in many cases  where an individual will have 
multi-needs. It isn't just one issue but a variety of issues. 
 
I'm also very pleased that in this budget we've been able to 
provide some extra support to help care-givers — family 
members who have care responsibilities. It may be with an 
elderly parent; it may be with a disabled child; it may be with a 
spouse. If we can provide some more support for the actual 
care-givers, and this may mean . . . well we are going to double, 
actually double, the number of respite beds across the province. 
It may mean some personal support and training for the care-
giver. This too becomes a very important part of the mix. 
 
So I think your point is well-taken, that individuals may have 
indeed a variety of needs. And if we can help individuals access 
the services that are available and support them in their role as  



March 2, 1995 

 
587 

care-giver, we're going to have better communities, better 
families, and a better society. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the special care piece that you 
raise. I expected you to raise that. We are — I may say — very, 
very close now to having some decision making around that 
piece. We've been in communication with Mrs. Krieger and all 
along telling her just what stage we're at. We're very, very close 
to coming to a policy decision. When we come to policy 
decisions in this government, we try to involve the caucus 
deeply, and we've had a number of discussions. But I'm 
confident we're going to be close to a policy announcement very 
soon. 
 
However that is a specific policy announcement around the 
question of long-term care facilities and what options might be 
available. The department and government have worked for the 
last number of months in setting out what we describe as a 
supportive care framework document to give us some vision for 
care for those who will need care on a daily basis, whether as a 
result of illness or frailty or disease. And that paper — and it's 
quite a substantial paper — has been released with the budget. 
If you don't have a copy, we'll sure get you a copy of that paper. 
And it sets out some broad framework, and that took some 
substantial amount of work within the department to work 
through that framework document. 
 
Now we're working on more specific policy issues that come 
out of the framework, one of them being the question of long-
term care, personal care homes, and the mix of facilities and 
options that should be available in Saskatchewan communities 
and to Saskatchewan people. Let me say that today in 
Saskatchewan we have a substantial number of long-term care 
beds. It would be close to 10,000 people who will occupy level 
3 and level 4 care beds across our province. That takes about 
$250 million of the budget of the Department of Health. 
 
We have as well, across the province, a series of personal care 
homes. Most of the personal care homes — I think about 240 of 
250 — will be small, residential, 10 resident or fewer personal 
care homes providing a quality care service across our province. 
We have a number of other personal care homes which are 
somewhat larger; many of them have been existing for some 
time and have sort of been grandfathered into the current 
circumstance. 
 
It's my sense, Mr. Chair, that there may be some room as well in 
Saskatchewan for yet another option that we may wish to look 
at. That option we might describe as supportive living. It will 
not have the intense care that can provide independence for 
individuals and couples. But still within the context of their 
living arrangement, be it apartments — likely apartments — 
there may be within that building some extra support services 
— perhaps a nurse, perhaps some meal services, and so on. 
 
Providing therefore that we're not continuing to, as some people 
have described it, to warehouse our seniors, but to provide for 
them the options of independence which most, if not all, seek as 
long as they possibly can, but to provide some interim step  

which we might describe as supportive living. So I'm going to 
want to be very interested in looking at some of those options as 
well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I listened very closely to your 
answer. And unfortunately the words, close and very soon, to a 
lot of people . . . some people would interpret close or very 
soon as maybe being tomorrow or within a week's time. I think, 
in view of what we've seen take place over the last few months, 
close in your terms looks more like five, six months, maybe a 
year, maybe two years down the road. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in regard or relation to the questions I've 
been raising regarding the Avonlea home, there were a couple 
of questions that have come in under the “Mr. Premier, I want 
to know,” and I think it would be appropriate if I would at least 
raise the questions right now so that you can respond to them. 
 
And this question I want to raise comes from Dorothy Watson 
from Avonlea: I want to know why the village of Avonlea 
cannot have a nursing home. We were not asking for any 
financial assistance from the government. The government is 
trying to create more employment and this home would have 
employed approximately 25 people. 
 
I'll allow you to respond before I raise the other question. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I will be happy to inform Mrs. 
Watson, if you would do this for me, that we have been, as you 
well know, working on the policy framework. Because it's not 
simply a matter of one community, it is a policy that will affect 
our entire province and will affect communities across our 
province; that we've been working very diligently and there 
have been many meetings between Mrs. Krieger and the 
department on this issue, and those meetings . . . there have 
been discussions as late as over the course of the last week. 
 
We are moving to a policy decision and it is very close. 
 
Mr. Toth: — A second question that has come from the same 
community regarding the same personal or private care home. 
This question comes from James and Ardiss Clarke from 
Avonlea: we want to know why we, the people of Avonlea, are 
being deprived the construction of a personal care home badly 
needed in this community. Your government refuses to give its 
approval to a plan worked out with a private investor willing to 
construct a 40-bed facility. A year ago enough money was 
pledged by local residents to go ahead with construction at no 
cost to the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And again I will repeat my answer in 
that we have been giving consideration to this and all of the 
issues around long-term care in our province. These are not 
issues that affect just one community, but communities and 
individuals across our province, and we are very close — very 
close — to announcing a policy decision in this regard that 
doesn't just affect Avonlea but that affects communities across  



March 2, 1995 

 
588 

our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I come back to the term close 
or very close. And I'm wondering if you could be a little more 
specific about what close or very close means, especially to the 
town of Avonlea. 
 
Now you've talked about the fact that we've got to look at the 
global picture, and I don't dispute that. I realize that when we're 
setting regulations . . . And I recall some of the discussion took 
place. And I was involved in some of it prior to the 1991 
election, having been able to work with the former minister of 
Health, the Hon. George McLeod, where there were many 
people coming to us at that time as well seeking licensing for 
personal care homes, or private care homes. 
 
And of course a concern at that time, as I'm sure it is today, was 
to make sure that these licences . . . that there were regulations 
in place about the type of care home, the services that were 
provided, so that people weren't taken advantage of. And I can 
appreciate that. 
 
But it would seem to me that there are also circumstances 
whereby people have already proven that they have the ability 
to provide a top level form of care to individuals who would be 
willing to participate in that care. And as the one question 
brought forward . . . Number one, there's a couple of things for 
the community and for the government. 
 
Number one, the community already has it; they're not asking 
the government for any funding of any kind whatsoever. It 
wouldn't cost the government a dime to give a licence to allow a 
40-bed care home to be built in the town of Avonlea. 
 
As well, a 40-bed care home would bring employment to that 
community. Now I realize, after seeing what happened in the 
community of Maryfield, people were really excited about that 
small care home that was built there. A lot of people applied for 
jobs. And after they had received the jobs, I don't think it was 
quite a year and then they all of a sudden started looking down 
the road at a government-funded care home and thought that 
they should be receiving the same wage, without realizing that 
there wasn't any government money in their program, other than 
the ability to license and giving regulations about the specific 
terms of what they could do as a private care home. 
 
The result was, at the end of the day, the employees realized 
that if it wasn't for that facility they wouldn't have a job, and so 
they'd better be thankful they've got the job. And also the books 
were laid out before them, so they could see it wasn't a big 
money . . . it wasn't a money-making business. It was there to 
provide a service. And I think that's what Avonlea is asking for 
as well. 
 
I also understand that the seniors who would like to participate 
in and make use of that care home are quite well aware of the 
fact that they are looking at costs in the neighbourhood of about 
$1,200 a month to be in the home versus I think it's in the 
neighbourhood of around 700, or a little over $700 a month, in  

the government-funded care homes because it's based . . . there 
again I think income has something to do with it. It comes in, 
and most people are in a fairly low bracket, and so their only 
income is old age security, and based on that fact the costs are 
associated. 
 
So what I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is, this very soon you're 
talking about, and this ability to grant that licence, are we 
talking of the fact that the department is realistically working to 
a date of — let's say — March 15. And I'm just throwing out a 
date. By March 15, you will have in place the policy and the 
ability to say to the community of Avonlea, we've got a 
program. We believe you fit within it, within the guidelines, and 
yes we're prepared to grant you a licence to go ahead and build 
your private care home. 
 
Or are you going to continue to sit on it and use the 
terminology: soon, or close, or very soon, based on the fact that 
everything's going to depend on when the next election is called 
and use it as an election ploy. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you 
could basically be a little more specific for us and the 
opposition and the community of Avonlea in presenting that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Your last comments make the answer 
quite easy. This is nothing to do with an election, and this 
policy will be well in advance, I'm sure, of any election unless 
the Premier should decide this  in the next few days to call an 
election; although some of us would encourage him to do that. 
 
Let me say that this is not . . . And I think the member will 
recognize, establishing policy in this regard is not just simple. 
It's not just simple. In terms of establishing any kind of a care 
facility for people — whether it be privately owned and 
privately funded, or whether it be publicly owned and publicly 
funded — I don't think the member opposite would suggest that 
this should go without a certain amount of forethought and 
regulation. 
 
In the establishment of private care homes, he and his 
government worked very hard; I know that. And we have 
continued to work hard on establishing standards for personal 
care homes, which I believe that is appropriate. It is an 
extremely appropriate role for the Department of Health and for 
government to establish regulations and control over personal 
care homes, where people's lives are being cared for. 
 
We have in place, the member knows, a complete set of 
standards for personal care homes less than 10. We do not have 
that complete set of standards for personal care homes now that 
may be proposed for to be substantially, substantially larger. 
 
There are all the questions of the long-term viability, the long-
term business viability of special care homes, the numbers of 
those which may or should or should not exist. Long-term 
viability in this case is very, very important. 
 
If seniors from our province and from communities have 
chosen to make their residence in a personal care home, I think  



March 2, 1995 

 
589 

they should have some assurance, some solid assurance, that 
they will be able to spend the remainder of their lives there 
given, hopefully, decent physical condition. There should be no 
risk to people that in two or three years, because of business 
failure, that they would then be — having sold their own home, 
very likely, or given up their own apartment — then to be 
subjected to a very unsettling experience. And so the long-term 
viability and the risk is extremely, extremely important. 
 
Now what also plays into this whole equation, and in fact is a 
very significant factor in this whole equation, is the matter of 
national building codes. And there is quite a different, I'm told, 
quite a different set of requirements in code for any kind of an 
institution that will house more than 10 individuals. And we've 
been working around some of these code issues. This is not a 
small problem or a small issue. 
 
I want to remind the member that currently, currently we are 
licensing the smaller personal care homes. And I repeat, they do 
provide a valuable service in caring for individuals across our 
province. 
 
But then with all of that said, let me also say this: we are also 
moving in the direction of providing as much independence to 
our seniors as we possibly can, as much ability for our seniors 
in Saskatchewan to maintain their own homes and to maintain 
their own apartments. Because that is what the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan seniors desire: that they could have access to 
services, ability to access services that could keep them living 
in their own homes, their own apartments, as long as they 
possibly can. And that is very much the direction that we want 
to follow. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I have another series . . . a question 
here. Basically its got three questions in it. And I'll bring it 
forward, and I think it's certainly a question that comes back to 
some of the points you were raising. 
 
And I think I alluded to a little earlier that certainly we need to 
be very careful when we're setting guidelines, but I think there's 
also been . . . we've had a number of years to put in place a 
number of guidelines. And you mentioned the fact that we do 
have in place right now a program that allows for the licensing 
of care homes, private care homes of less than 10 people. 
 
One of the problems with that is, I believe, they also in that 
licensing of less than 10 people, they take into consideration the 
family unit that may be providing the care. And there's a small 
care home in my community — and I just can't think of the 
name; Antler Creek care home, I believe is the one — where 
they've been looking for a licence. But because they . . . and 
they did have a licence for under 10, and they went to expand. 
But because their family is size of six and then they had four, 
they haven't been granted the licence. And that has created a 
problem. 
 
So I'm throwing that out as well, as I'd like to read this into the 
record. A question that came to us through the Mr. Premier, I 
want to know, program. And it comes from a Mrs. Joan  

Williamson from Pambrun: 
 
 I would be pleased to have you address the following 

question to the "MR. PREMIER I WANT TO KNOW" 
session of the Legislative Assembly regarding license 
regulations of Personal Care Homes: 

 
 1. Does the present government realize the fact that 

their licensing regulations allow the owners of 
Personal Care Homes to increase the fees for 
residents by any amount the owners choose? 

 
 2. Does the present government realize the fact that 

their licensing regulations allow the owners of 
Personal Care Homes to increase the fees for 
residents as many times as they choose which could 
be 5-6 times in one year? 

 
 3. Will the Minister of Health give consideration to 

changing the regulations governing the increase of 
fees by owners of Personal Care Homes which 
would reflect fairness to the elderly citizens who 
find themselves in the position of needing this type 
of health care as well as the people providing these 
services? 

 
Now in view of these three questions I've laid out, Mr. Minister, 
I think what the individual is saying here brings to light some of 
the concerns that I'm sure that your department has had. It 
certainly were concerns that were available, or we were aware 
of back prior to 1991. 
 
But I also want to raise the fact, individuals who do establish 
private care home and then increase fees like this, basically put 
themselves at risk in the fact that that private care home may 
not be around very long because I'm sure residents are going to 
say enough is enough. 
 
But maybe, Mr. Minister, I'll allow you to respond to the 
questions that have been raised here by Mrs. Williamson, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the specific answer to the 
question, do we regulate the fees and charges that are levied in 
the personal care homes, or when those fees and charges can be 
changed, the answer is we do not. 
 
There is not regulation on the amounts that can be charged. 
These are viewed as private enterprise, a business opportunity, 
where if people offer a service, and they offer that service for a 
price, then the client has, I guess, the choice whether to accept 
the service or not. We do not regulate in the personal private 
care homes, the fees. 
 
Now we do regulate quality of care, safety, building code 
issues. And I think appropriately, appropriately so. But this in 
fact is the nub of one of the issues that we're struggling with 
because this does present then the question of viability. 
 



March 2, 1995 

 
590 

If you were going to build a facility that meets the National 
Building Code for a residence of 10 people or more, or more 
than 10 people, then the cost of the construction of that facility 
is going to be substantially up, just to meet the codes. Therefore 
if this is a private business, and you have had to invest 
significant amounts of capital into the structure, into the 
building, then obviously you're going to have to try and recoup 
that through the fees and charges for the residents, because 
these are not publicly subsidized. 
 
If those fees and charges become out of reach for most people, 
then I think the business viability is in question. So you, I think, 
raise one of the very points that we are having to struggle with. 
And the person who inquires raises one of the real points that 
we're struggling at. Where is the line of viability, particularly in 
large circumstances where all the building codes have to be 
adhered to? 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This comes from a 
. . . this request that we've been dealing about for Mrs. 
Williamson comes from my constituency, Mr. Minister. And 
when she raised this with me, her father was moved into a home 
where there were eight residents, I believe, six or eight. 
 
And at January 1, he received a notice that his rent was going 
from $1,200 to $1,500. And I believe that even in normal 
circumstances when you have rent being asked of an individual, 
that you should have notice of that. And this was not even 
given. 
 
And so Mrs. Williamson asks the question, are there going to be 
regulations put in to give some stability not only to the people 
who are in the business, but also the people who are in the 
home. 
 
You talked earlier about the unsettling experience that it would 
be for an individual to have to move in some of these facilities, 
and that you have to make it a matter of a certain degree of 
security because this is their home. And this has already been 
an adjustment for these individuals over a period of time to 
establish in their own minds first of all the need to move and 
then to rationalize all of the decisions that are necessary to put 
that move together. 
 
And so when you have an individual who comes in and says, I 
can afford $1,200 a month for this service, plus his medication 
and all of the things that are required, and then to be told that 
you got another $300 a month that you have to pay, that is very 
unsettling, not only for the children of these people but for the 
individual him or her self. 
 
 And that is why Mrs. Williamson is raising this point — in 
order to make sure that you understand that there needs to be 
some serious recognition of exactly what you're going to do and 
how you're going to allow this to happen. 
 
If we would have had a whole bunch of these homes in the city  

of Swift Current for example, we'd had 25 of these, the amount 
of charges that could be made or charges that could be levied 
against the individuals who want this service, then they would 
have an option. But they don't even have an option because 
there aren't enough licensed facilities to give them an option. 
They don't have the option of going to the lowest cost one. They 
are bound within the framework of a monopoly, Mr. Minister, 
and that has got almost . . . Well that has a very serious 
ramification. 
 
And so what we have to consider is, is there more need for 
more homes? And if there is, then we should start to do that. If 
they're private and these people are initiating their own money 
for the investment and then they turn around and say, we'll 
increase the price, the only way that you can reduce the cost is 
provide more licences. Because if you have more licences, they 
will then have to reduce the cost because of competition. 
 
And you shake your head, Mr. Minister. But this gentleman, 
this gentleman has no place else to go. He's sold his home and 
he's gotten rid of it. So now what does he do? He's taken it upon 
himself so he is being told that he's going to have to pay $1,500 
instead of 12. And that is where the problem exists. And that 
exists over and over again. And I wonder if you'd respond to 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is worthy 
of some debate in the House. Because I think what I hear 
members of the opposition proposing this afternoon is that we 
ought to regulate the pricing. That we ought to regulate either, 
one, regulate the pricing in the personal care homes, move in as 
government on what is essentially private business and tell them 
what they can or cannot charge. Or, in the alternative, we 
should flood the market with licensed homes and therefore 
drive the price down. That seems to be the two positions being 
sent over here. 
 
Now if either of those are the position, please refine it and tell 
me and we'd certainly have a look at it. 
 
Now recall that the personal care home regulations and policy 
was a policy shaped while you folks were in government. We 
haven't essentially changed that. We've tightened up, I think, 
some of the regulations and some of the enforcement. But I 
think essentially this is the same policy. And that policy said we 
are not into moving in and setting the prices or regulating the 
fees and charges. 
 
But again this is one of the very issues that we're struggling 
with. Because if there are more and more of these in the 
province and then they begin to lose their viability of have 
vacancies, prices go up, people are going to be hurt. No one — 
no one, I think — wants that. 
 
Now I'm told, Mr. Chair, by some friends in Saskatoon, for 
instance, that because of the work that has gone on in 
Saskatoon in putting community and home-based services in 
place . . . and I have to give credit to Saskatoon; they were out 
in front on this some years ago. They have a wide network of  



March 2, 1995 

 
591 

home and community-based services in Saskatoon that may not 
yet exist province-wide, that we're working towards. 
 
But as a result of that, I'm told, Mr. Chair, that a number of the 
personal care homes in Saskatoon now have vacancies and are 
having trouble filling some of their spaces. I'm also told that a 
few months ago we actually had a circumstance where there 
was a vacancy, an empty bed, in one of the level 3 and 4 
facilities, and there was not a waiting list. There wasn't 
someone on a list immediately to fill that place. 
 
Now that to me is indicative that as we build the community-
based services, that we can begin to meet many, many more of 
our needs outside the concept of an institution. On the other 
hand, we will always have the need for institutional care, for 
who knows -- any one of us may require it, any one of our 
parents or neighbours. Where that need exists, we will need to 
provide institutional care. 
 
We have the mix currently of small personal care homes and the 
level 3 and 4 facilities, and we are looking at the kind of 
options that have been presented by the community of Avonlea 
and other options that have been presented. And I say again, 
that policy decision will be made very soon. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, there has to be some way 
for the price to be controlled. And control comes in two ways 
— either it's regulated or let the market-place dictate what it is 
going to do. 
 
You're telling the people in Swift Current you can only have X 
amount of licences so that the price can't relate to not what the 
market should bear, but you're saying let's talk about a 
minimum requirement for a cost and then put that in there. 
 
If that's the way you regulate it, then you can say, fine. But I 
would far sooner have it regulated by the market-place. Let the 
market-place dictate what will happen. And what you have then 
is an opportunity for the market to stabilize. And if people want 
to get in the business they will say, I have X amount of spaces 
available — under 10 or 8 or 7, these are available — and then 
let the market dictate what the price will be. 
 
There will be a minimum standard there, Mr. Minister — not a 
minimum standard of quality of care, but a minimum standard 
of price and cost. And when that is reached, everybody will be 
the same. And if one guy can be more efficient than another, or 
if one person in his home or his facility can be cheaper than 
another, then allow him to be that and let him determine what 
that price is going to be. 
 
But now what you have is you have a full house and people on 
a waiting list. You talked about Saskatoon. Well that isn't in 
those small local communities, Mr. Minister. That isn't in Swift 
Current. Because I know people who are on the waiting list and 
my in-laws were on that waiting list this past summer as well, 
Mr. Minister. There are tens of twenties of people on waiting 
lists in Swift Current in looking for a place to get into one of 
those kinds of facilities. 

And then you have the individual who has the home, who has a 
monopoly control on the licence, and you're saying to him he 
can't . . . or the individual going into that home has no recourse 
except to stay in that home and pay that bill or go into a hotel 
bill. 
 
I just spoke today, Mr. Minister, to an individual whose mother 
has a retarded son — and it's this fellow's brother — and they 
have a serious problem because the mother is not able to look 
after that son. They have no place to put that individual, no 
place to put that individual, and she can't look after him any 
more. So what do they do? There is a waiting list, in the tens, in 
the twenties in Swift Current and they can't do anything about 
it. So what are you going to do about that? 
 
This individual says there is too much supply so that the 
individual who has the home can charge whatever they like. 
They could charge $5,000 an individual, Mr. Minister, and there 
would be no recourse. The people would move out, but where 
would they move? Where would they move, Mr. Minister? 
 
Allow more licences. And that's what the member from 
Moosomin is talking about, about Avonlea. Allow more of 
these. And if they fail, they fail. There will be times when some 
in Swift Current may fail too, but it may not be because of 
supply. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, you either do it in a regulatory basis if 
you want to control the licences or allow the licences to be 
expanded. You have choices to make, Mr. Minister. And I 
believe you're afraid to allow more licences because that will 
point out the error of what you're doing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, will you give some assurance to this lady, 
Mrs. Williamson, about the condition that exists for her father? 
Will you provide that for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member makes an 
interesting argument in this debate. I think he bases his 
argument on some mistaken notion that there is no ability to 
licence a personal care home in Saskatchewan today and open a 
personal care . . . That's simply not the fact. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh yes, but you have so terribly many 
restrictions on it, you can't . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well now the member says from his seat 
we have a terrible number of restrictions on them; that's why we 
can't open them. Well now he wants me to add more restrictions 
on what people can be charged. 
 
Now I want to make it clear to the member. There has been no 
restriction or delay beyond meeting the appropriate standards in 
opening a personal care home in Saskatchewan. In fact there 
have been new personal care homes open . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Remember the story about the good 
Samaritan? Where was the Levite going when he walked by the  



March 2, 1995 

 
592 

guy on the road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Apparently the member now wants to get 
into a biblical discussion; I'm not sure. Now if he would sit still 
and listen, he may understand what's happening in our province. 
Now, Mr. Chair, if the member wants the answer, I'll give him 
the answer. If he wants to chirp from his seat perhaps I can sit 
down and he can . . . 
 
The Chairperson: — Order, order. We've been having a fairly 
orderly review of department estimates, and I'll simply ask that 
all members of the House cooperate and allow it to proceed in 
that way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now let me repeat. We've had a policy 
where personal care homes of less than 10 beds have been and 
are being approved if they meet the appropriate regulations and 
standards. 
 
If there is a community and individuals in that community — I 
would hope caring individuals — who wish to open a personal 
care home as a private business, they have the ability to make 
application and receive a licence should they meet the 
standards. There's been nothing to change that. 
 
Now the member proposes that somehow we should make that 
process easier, I guess, so that more options may be available, 
more homes available. Then he says from his feet, well if they 
fail, they fail. Now I would remind the member, we're not here 
dealing with nuts and bolts. We're not here dealing with 
hardware stores or hamburger joints. We're dealing with 
institutions that will care for people. If the hardware shop goes 
broke, what happens? Well you padlock the door, and you sell 
off the inventory. Now if a personal care home fails . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Remember you're talking to this woman 
here who's got a father that's got a problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the member says, remember you're 
speaking to a woman who has a father in need. Well I'm sure 
that she would want us to be careful about having institutions 
that her father may be a part of and that someday may have to 
close their doors, because I ask the member, then what? Then 
what? What do we do if, as the member says, well if they fail, 
they fail? Well it's not that simple. If they fail, what do we do 
with these human beings, perhaps my mother, your mother, our 
friend, our neighbour? What do we do? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's what you should have thought 
about when you shut the door at Vanguard and Ponteix, in Gull 
Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Chair, the member seems to 
be recommending that we either regulate or flood the market. 
We're not . . . regulate the pricing or flood the market. Mr. 
Chair, we're not going to do either; we're going to take, I think, 
a more sensible and thoughtful approach. 
 
In the interim, Mr. Chair, I want to remind the member that  

those who wish to license a personal care home in the province 
of Saskatchewan, 10 beds or under, 10 residents or under, are 
more than welcome and are free today, as they always have 
been, to make application, and having met the standards, will 
receive a licence. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in view of 
current regulations regarding private care homes — and I'm just 
going to raise this; I'm not going to dwell on it — regarding the 
Antler Creek situation. And certainly what comes up there is a 
problem in trying to establish what would be an appropriate fire 
guard system. And I think the big factor is the number 10. The 
fact that they did apply. They did have a licence for . . . because 
they're a family of six, the parents, the husband and wife and 
four children, that they were granted a licence to have four 
special care or care home people, individuals, in their special 
care home. Then when they expanded, of course, they got 
beyond that. And now they haven't received a licence, and a lot 
of the licence is all tied around basically putting in an adequate 
fire retardant system despite the fact that there's almost an 
exterior door at . . . well actually I shouldn't say almost, there is 
an exterior door pretty well available to every one of the rooms. 
 
And this has created a problem and I'm not exactly sure where 
they sit because I haven't chatted with them lately. But what I'm 
wondering, is that still, when we talk about the private care 
homes and you're talking about licensing a facility, you're still 
limiting that facility to actually, if there's a family of five, there 
would be five individuals being able to get the service; they 
could take five more people in. Or has the department looked at 
the possibility of licensing based on 10 people receiving 
services through the special care home over and above the four, 
five or six family members? 
 
Just exactly where is the department sitting today in 
circumstances like that, and maybe your department could 
maybe update me as to where we might be sitting as well 
regarding the Antler Creek situation. I understand that the 
proprietor has had some health problems as well and that may 
have created a bit of a problem. But maybe you could just 
update us on that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in regard to . . . and I think I 
have this correct; I just want to just check with the member. It's 
Antler Creek? Antler Creek? In regard to that specific situation, 
I'll have some officials be sure to be in touch and see what 
exactly is there. 
 
My understanding of the circumstance is that yes, we are talking 
about 10 individuals under one roof. If it exceeds 10 individual 
. . . now some of these may be family members; some of these 
may be clients of the home, but it is limited to 10 individuals. 
And the requirements are not simply ours, but requirements 
based on National Building Code standards which we are 
obliged, and I think rightly so, to meet. 
 
And when I say rightly so, I think some of the initial move of  



March 2, 1995 

 
593 

the province of Saskatchewan into regulating some of the 
circumstances around personal care homes arose after, if I 
recall, it was a fire in Prince Albert where two individuals lost 
their lives in that fire. And I tell you so long as I'm Minister of 
Health around here, we're not licensing anything that presents a 
fire risk to individuals. No, I don't think anyone in this House 
wants to wake up some morning hearing on the radio that lives 
have been lost in a tragic fire because we didn't strictly enforce 
the appropriate regulations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, has there been any construction of 
care home beds in the province since 1991? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes. I 
assume the member would like some more specifics around 
that? 
 
Mr. Chair, in terms of brand-new construction of long-term care 
facilities, notably there is construction going on in Moose Jaw 
to construct Providence Place. There is construction happening 
in Gravelbourg to construct there for the Foyer. There has been 
approval granted to Prince Albert for new construction. 
 
But I would refer, member, also to a number of the health 
centres where in fact, in the integrated facilities, where some of 
the acute care beds that had one time been used for acute care 
are now serving the role of long-term care beds, some of those 
acute care beds. And the other notable of course is La Ronge 
where there are some long-term care beds being built into the 
new capital facility in La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, maybe 
you could just inform us as to what has taken place at 
Providence Place and some of these other facilities. Are we 
talking specifically beds? I know there was a request. And I'm 
not exactly sure . . . Is Providence Place up on the hill, south of 
the river? Is that the . . . There was a care home . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, that's St. Anthony's. Okay. Now we've got 
it straight. 
 
But I was just going to say, I find it interesting that the long-
term care . . . I'd like to have some in my constituency as well, 
Mr. Minister. I guess as Minister of Health you have that ability 
every once in a while just to pull a string here or there that says 
yes, I think my community comes ahead of somebody else. I'm 
not exactly sure if that took place or not, but . . . 
 
Anyway, Mr. Minister, I understand that some of this 
construction possibly is related back to decisions made prior to 
1991. And I'm wondering how many beds are under 
construction under the program that you've talked about. How 
many actual beds are we talking of placing in the province with 
this construction that's presently taking place? 
 
And also maybe one other thing you could answer, Mr. 
Minister, is if there are any other small private care homes that 
would be included or part of or over and above the question I 
just asked about care home construction or private care homes 
. . . not private, but care homes construction, including private  

care home construction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if the member will permit, 
we'll have to do some addition to be accurate on all of these 
numbers, the numbers of personal care homes. So I will assure 
him we'll get these numbers and get them to him. 
 
I do want to respond though to one or two of his comments, 
particularly beginning with the construction of Providence 
Place in Moose Jaw, Mr Chairman. As you well know, Mr. 
Chair, this project was approved not once, not twice, but three 
times when you were in government. 
 
Now approval and getting some bricks under way was a 
different thing. But it was . . . and I give some due credit to 
your government in this regard, for working with the 
community of Moose Jaw in developing some long-term health 
care plans. But for sure, approvals were given that weren't 
followed through on, let me say. 
 
I want to be clear with the member, that in health delivery in 
Saskatchewan now, if any kind of capital is going to be 
approved it must . . . that request must come through the 
district. The district must make its own need assessment of 
capital requirements and put to . . . The first test that must be 
passed must be at the district level. Then the district will make 
its recommendations to the province, and there are a number of 
criteria that must be followed. 
 
But I would also point out to the member that while he was in 
government I'm kind of aware of a fair bit of capital that 
seemed to go on down around the Moosomin area. It seems to 
me Broadview and Whitewood and Wawota; there seemed to be 
some capital work going down there in Moosomin. I'm sure it 
was all appropriate, the member would argue as well. 
 
But I do want to emphasize this, in terms of any capital 
construction, that capital construction — and given the limited 
dollars we have, you'll see in the budget this year there's not a 
large capital budget available, and we will always have some 
emergency needs that need to be dealt with — but in light of 
that relatively restricted budget, we work entirely with the 
districts on the basis of their recommendations, on the basis of 
the need that they've assessed for capital. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as much 
as I would like to take credit for the new home in Whitewood 
and Wawota and possibly the one in Broadview, those 
decisions were made prior to my involvements; unfortunately I 
can't even take much credit for that. But I think the people of 
the community are quite pleased that they are there. 
 
A couple of things in some of the comments that you made just 
recently. Number one, district approval. You mention the fact 
that now basically the . . . in looking at construction, it first of 
all goes through a phase where the district determines whether 
or not there should be some capital construction before it is . . . 
an approval is given at the district level, and then it comes to 
the Department of Health. 



March 2, 1995 

 
594 

And based on that, I'd like to come back to the Avonlea 
principal because we've talked to the district out there and the 
district is quite supportive of a private care home in the 
community of Avonlea. So on that basis, Mr. Minister, I 
wonder at the end of the day, who makes the final decision 
then? 
 
If the district . . . you're saying the district, if they have that 
ability and they have come to you with recommendations for 
construction, is the final decision made at the department level 
or can the district . . . and I guess this is where the district is a 
little uncertain, as well, as to what their role is. They are quite 
supportive of the Avonlea group and their private care home, 
but at the same time they feel that their hands are tied as well. 
So maybe you could clarify a few of those things, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I'd be very happy to do 
that. Let us be clear again about definitions. When we are 
talking about special care homes — homes which will have care 
for level 3 and 4 needs and will be subsidized by the provincial 
taxpayer — those must clearly have the full approval of the 
district and be built into the needs assessment of the district. 
 
Currently, in the small personal care homes, the application for 
licensing comes directly to the department. Now it is my 
preference that, as we move into other options and looking at 
the future licensing of personal care homes, that the district 
should play some role so that they have a sense of all of the 
options that are going to be available to the people of their 
district, so that they should play some role. And when we 
describe the policy, the role of the districts will be very clearly 
described. 
 
So today, if it's a special care home that will be subsidized, it 
needs entire district approval. In terms of personal care homes 
in the 10 and under, right now the licensing is just a matter of 
application directly to the department and approval or denial at 
the departmental level. 
 
And just for the information for the member from Morse, I'm 
told there have been three recent applications in Swift Current 
for smaller personal care homes and they're all being reviewed 
by the department right now, and none have been turned down. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as well, 
you made a comment in one of your early answers I think just a 
few moments ago about the fact that some of the acute care 
beds that were in integrated facilities have been turned into 
long-term care. For that I commend you, for at least looking at 
that and making that option available, rather than just closing 
the beds down. 
 
And that gets into another question regarding hospitals and 
acute care services in rural Saskatchewan. Because it seems to 
me, Mr. Minister, I think that it would have been quite 
appropriate and would still be appropriate for many 
communities to allow a few acute care beds in those 
communities. And I don't think that a lot of communities are 
expecting a 10-bed acute care hospital. 

I think what most communities are looking at, especially if the 
facilities are there, is if we had even two or three acute care 
beds so that we've got one that could be used in an emergency 
situation. Maybe a bed or two that's available for patients as 
they recover and are sent out from major centres. I think a lot of 
people would certainly feel that that would be appropriate. 
 
But I want to come to another question, and that's regarding 
respite beds. And maybe I'm . . . I'm just going to throw out a 
couple of things here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Across this province we do have a lot of facilities. And I 
certainly agree that the way these facilities were funded created 
a problem. And I think that most people are aware of that. 
We've got hospitals that had acute care bed funding and yet had 
level 4 patients occupying those beds. And the hospitals weren't 
getting covered for that because of the funding process. 
 
And I've always wondered why we couldn't have developed a 
policy that recognized that community's need for some long-
term care beds. And basically in the acute care facility that was 
there, let's throw it . . . just for an example, let's say we've got 
an acute care facility that has the ability to accommodate 30 
beds. But that community or that facility is down to possibly 12 
acute care beds that should actually be funded because of the 
utilization, and yet there's a waiting-list in and around the 
community. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if we couldn't have designed 
a program that took into consideration of turning that facility 
into, if you will, an integrated facility. Because I believe it's a 
lot cheaper to keep a person in a long-term care bed than it is to 
keep a level 4 patient or client in an acute care facility. 
 
And I don't know if the department took the time to assess some 
of that and looked at turning some of these beds that were 
available into long-term care versus acute care. And maybe the 
minister would like to respond before I get on into some other 
discussions in the area of funding and how beds are funded 
across the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I understand at 4 we'll be 
wrapping up, and I'm sure we'll have a longer discussion. We'll 
maybe hold this question. 
 
I can just very briefly respond by saying that as our district 
boards now do all of their need assessment — they look at 
community by community and then the district generally — 
about what is the appropriate mix of institutional beds, we have 
had and continue to have the availability under policy to create 
the integrated circumstance where you could have the mix of 
acute and long-term care, although the staffing levels are quite 
different. 
 
We know circumstances now where communities are choosing 
to have available to them observation beds or respite beds. 
Some communities are describing it as palliative care beds. But 
I'm sure we could have a much longer discussion about this. 
 



March 2, 1995 

 
595 

(1600) 
General Revenue Fund 
Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Chair: — As this is the first time for the Women's 
Secretariat to be before the committee, I'll ask that the minister 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today Faye Rafter, acting executive coordinator of the 
Saskatchewan Women's Secretariat; Joan Pederson, assistant 
executive coordinator, Saskatchewan Women's Secretariat; and 
Pat More, director of administration from Saskatchewan 
Labour. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Madam 
Minister, and congratulations on your appointment as minister 
of the Women's Secretariat. And as the chairman mentioned, it's 
not only the first time this session that we've been in estimates, 
it's also I think your first time in estimates. 
 
So as you notice, the caucus, our caucus, picked the most 
gentle, easygoing person to question you, and as you can see I 
was raised in those days when women were respected. And so 
they chose me to ask you some questions, Madam Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The only trouble is he has to put his 
glasses on to see you. 
 
Mr. Britton: — No, the glasses are just a sham; I want to look 
dignified. Madam Minister, I would like to welcome your 
assistants as well because, as you know and I know, without 
them we'd have a difficult time getting through these questions. 
 
Madam Minister, we have been in the habit of sending over 
global questions and I'm sure you've received them and they're 
just a standard set, and I wonder if you could give me some 
indication as to when those answers would be coming back to 
us? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member from Wilkie for his 
question. We understand that a lot of the questions are financial 
in nature so we'll be waiting till the end of the fiscal year, but as 
soon as that information is available, you'll get it right away 
after that. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That would be 
after March 31 then. You have received the questions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — My understanding is that we've not 
received them yet. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well as the global questions cover an area of 
travel and staff, I hope you won't mind if we ask you a few 
questions about your travel and your staff here before we get 
the answers. 

Can you provide the names of staff in your office who deal with 
the Women's Secretariat? In addition, could you provide how 
long they have been with you. And could you tell me when they 
were hired and what their rate of pay is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, if I understand that question, you 
asked to know who the assigned staff were to the Secretariat, 
when they were appointed, and . . . 
 
Mr. Britton: — And rate of pay, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We're just asking for some clarification 
here. Are you meaning the actual staff of the Secretariat, the 
people who work in the Secretariat? 
 
Mr. Britton: — Yes, Madam Minister. What I'm interested in 
is the actual staff that you have who are working in the 
Women's Secretariat. Not the staff of your minister's . . . Just 
the people that are working for the Secretariat, and when they 
were hired and the rate of pay. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I'll read those into the 
record. Secretary at an SG4 level, D. Bureau, 2,600 a month, 
and March 1, '84 was the appointment date. Senior policy 
analyst, V. Dohlen, 4,121 a month, December 1, '94. Senior 
policy analyst — that one is vacant at the moment. Information 
services officer, S. Dusel, 3,518, appointed January 1, '93. 
Research officer 3, J. Havelock, $4,046 a month, February 14, 
'84. Clerk typist, J. Mohr, 2,205, September 21, '81. Assistant 
executive coordinator, J. Pederson, 6,318, September 1, '88. 
Info services officer, G. Quinney, 4,155 a month, October 25, 
'93. Acting executive coordinator, F. Rafter, 6,615 per month, 
June 1, '94. Clerk typist 3, J. Young, 2,205 per week, April 16, 
'84. Ed and extension co-ordinator, J. McCamus, 3,272 per 
month, September 1, '94. Ed and extens co-ordinator, C. 
Senecal, 3,146 a month, September 6, '94. And a pay equity 
analyst, which is a new position, 6,000 is the salary and a new 
position April 1, '95. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam 
Minister. I think you and I are going to get along real well. 
 
I believe what you gave me was your total ministerial staff, and 
that was my next question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, is 
that so? Well okay, then. That seemed like a lot of people. It 
seemed like a lot of people. Then can I ask you how many 
people are employed at the Women's Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's 12 full-time existing and one 
additional in the next fiscal year. And those are the total staff of 
the Secretariat. Those are not performing any function for 
myself other than their role as the Women's Secretariat. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam 
Minister. That's what I was needing. It just seemed to me that it 
seemed like there was a lot of folks there. 
 
So could you then provide their names, the position they hold, 
and at what rate of pay? And have any other of these people  



March 2, 1995 

 
596 

received an increase in pay during the last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's only one person that has 
received an increase in pay and that was a 1.8 per cent 
performance increase and a 2 per cent economic increase as of 
January 1, '94. And the list that we read was the entire . . . No, I 
won't repeat it again for you; it was the entire list and there is 
only one who's received an increase. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have a couple 
of questions regarding the acting executive coordinator of the 
Women's Secretariat, Faye Rafter; she's still in your employ? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That was one of the people I introduced 
to you earlier, sitting on my right here, Faye Rafter. And yes, 
she's very much actively in my employ, and I'm very pleased to 
have her. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Order in council 
326/94 states that Ms. Rafter receives a salary of $77,820. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This isn't an order in council. It's a 
secondment from the university. Faye Rafter was seconded 
from the University of Regina Faculty Association for the term 
of June 1, 1994 to November 30, 1995. 
 
Her experience in the university was extensive as a manager 
and administrator, as well as having experience in industrial 
relations, conflict management, and gender-related issues. And 
we're just very pleased to have somebody this skilled in this 
position. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Madam Minister, I don't think I was concerned 
about her qualifications. I was wondering if the salary that I 
quoted was the correct one: $77,820? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The salary on a yearly basis is 79,380. 
 
Mr. Britton: — That is for the year. Could I ask you about the 
previous executive coordinator, Marianne P. Weston, who I 
understand challenged the minister for the nomination of 
Regina Lake Centre in 1991, was hired at a salary of $75,000; 
that's OC (order in council) 607/92. Can you confirm this, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that's accurate. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
also understand that Ms. Weston is currently employed as an 
associate deputy minister of the Executive Council; that is OC 
618/94 at 85,956. Is that figure also correct, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — She's not employed by myself, so I 
wouldn't have those figures. But you could certainly ask those 
when the appropriate minister is in front of you. 
 

Mr. Britton: — Well certainly not trying to discredit Ms. 
Weston's abilities, but the Women's Secretariat is certainly a 
stepping stone, it seems, for bigger and better positions within 
the NDP government. 
 
Madam Minister, can you explain the discrepancy in salaries 
between Miss Faye Rafter, executive coordinator, and the 
previous executive coordinator, Marianne Weston? Why is 
there a discrepancy there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it's as other contracts in 
government are, the contract is contracted at a particular rate 
and that rate is not always the same depending on the individual 
and other criteria involved in the hiring. So that was a particular 
contract set at that rate. 
 
Mr. Britton: — And is it your opinion that these quite high 
salaries are justified, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would mention that women in 
general, 70 per cent of women in Saskatchewan, earn under 
$20,000 a year, and that women are able to achieve some of the 
same salaries . . . levels as men, I find quite admirable. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Madam Minister, that isn't quite what I asked. 
I'm not worried in this particular position as to the 20 per cent. 
I'm just asking you, are these high salaries, in your opinion, 
justified? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — These salaries are commensurate with 
other permanent heads in the government with a similar level of 
policy responsibility within the government. So this would be 
comparable to what other people, not mentioning gender, are 
making in the government. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Madam Minister, can you then tell me what the 
salaries are based on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As in most hiring, people’s salaries are 
based on a couple of different areas and factors. One is, level of 
responsibility, supervision, budgetary impact, policy 
responsibilities. And on the other hand it's based on what they 
bring to the job, being their qualifications, experience, 
background and years in the workforce. 
 
So there's always those two elements at play. And there's always 
an additional market element, and that's the ability to find the 
people that you need with the money that you have to attract 
them. So I guess that's a third factor that comes into hiring. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Could I ask you, Madam Minister, was a 
competition held for the position and positions? If yes, would 
you please provide the information on those competing for the 
position? And if not, Madam Minister, could you explain why a 
competition was not held? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — When the original person holding this 
job left, she left on a secondment. So this was, I guess, a series  



March 2, 1995 

 
597 

of temporary arrangements at the time. And we moved quickly 
to place Ms. Rafter into this job, and she is also seconded from 
the University of Regina. 
 
So these are not, at this point . . . at least this one here is not at 
this point a permanent arrangement. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Then, Madam 
Minister, am I to understand there was no competition held? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be accurate. For the 
purposes of filling the job temporarily, people were not asked to 
leave their job on a temporary basis to hold this. It was thought 
that a secondment was the best way to do this. 
 
And looking around at individuals with this kind of 
background, there are not lots with this particular kind of 
background. And so Ms. Rafter was seconded from the 
university. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Can you then tell me when you intend to hold 
a competition for the position? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In a timely manner, before the end of 
this particular contract, we'll review that and make a decision 
about that at that time. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
could you then tell me the length of the contract we're talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As I mentioned earlier, but I don't mind 
repeating it, it goes from June 1 of 1994 to November 30 of 
1995. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Madam, the Estimates document states that: 
 
 The mandate of the Secretariat is to work in partnership 

with all other provincial departments and the 
community to achieve the goal of equality for all 
Saskatchewan women. 

 
Could you expand on this mandate for us today and inform the 
Assembly what you, as the new minister, see the Women's 
Secretariat role as being and what you plan on accomplishing in 
your tenure as the minister for the Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As you can see by my reading off of 
the staff of the Secretariat and what not, it's a very small 
Secretariat with very limited resources. And so we hope to use 
those resources as strategically as possible to accomplish our 
goals across government. 
 
But if I could give you a bit of an idea of how I see this thing 
functioning, in the past government departments used to operate 
fairly independently from each other. You might have an 
initiative over here, an initiative over there. It's women over 
time have been sitting in a bath-tub with only about two inches 
of water in it and the notion with the policy secretariat is to  

raise the water level so that we can at least get wet. 
 
And so what we're trying to do is right across government — 
rather than a program here or a program there — are trying to 
raise the overall standard of access to government; of 
understanding of circumstances and programs and how they 
impact women; looking at problems across the province of 
women who are living in isolated or northern communities as 
well as urban centres; looking at issues that are of particular 
concern in the family violence area; providing good supports to 
children in families, those are achieving economic equity. 
 
Those are some of the kinds of issues that we deal with. And 
really, our goal is not unlike most departments — and that's in 
the end what we hope to see is results. And if we're not seeing 
those results, then obviously we're going to have to adjust our 
activities in order to see the results. But for the moment a lot of 
the results we would like to see for women are not there, so 
we're going to keep working away until those results are there. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I heard you say 
something about children and the abuse of women. Can you 
outline just a little bit as to how you see your department, your 
role, in making sure that in a home where the women, 
particularly the female, is being abused, how you will protect 
the welfare of those children? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There are a number of ways this takes 
place. For example, right across government, there's a child 
action plan and that involves people from all different 
departments looking at how to put in place in the community, 
services that support family and children. 
 
So for example, some of that involves helping to move some 
government services into the schools so that there's full-service 
schools. And in that way if a child has a problem at school, the 
school can work with the child, with the family, and help to 
create those changes that'll make that child successful in the 
school and make sure that the family has the support it needs to 
bring those changes about. 
 
So the Women's Secretariat would be on that kind of a 
committee in government to help make those decisions, to make 
sure that money is well directed to the place where it'll have the 
biggest impact for children and families. 
 
Another way would be a partnership that they have with Justice 
on The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. And one of the 
things that's been very useful about this Act is the provisions of 
the Act itself, but a very important side effect has been all the 
training that goes along with training people involved in the 
justice system on how to work with family violence situations. 
And the Women's Secretariat has been involved with Justice on 
working on these educational and training needs in that 
particular area. 
 
There's a number of pilot projects that have taken place in areas 
under the child action plan. For example, there's pilot projects 
in rural and northern locations. 



March 2, 1995 

 
598 

There's new day care subsidies that help parents in various 
circumstances, whether in training or whether they’re 
employment; it helps provide that comfort level that there's an 
adequate level of child care and their children are safe and well 
looked after. 
 
There's been — I don't want to make too much of this, but an 
unfortunate circumstance over the years of women sometimes 
being under personal pressure in a workplace because they need 
a job and sometimes there's sexual harassment and other types 
of activities occurring in a workplace. And the very economic 
necessity has made it difficult for women to take any steps to 
prevent that kind of activity. And so under the new 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, there now is provision to 
deal with issues like sexual harassment in the workplace. 
 
And again, the Women's Secretariat does training throughout 
the community, NGOs (non-governmental agency), private 
business, Crowns, government agencies, to help people 
understand the inappropriateness of that kind of behaviour in a 
workplace, particularly related to the economic constraints that 
women are under in dealing with those kinds of issues. 
 
So I don't know if you need more examples than that, but that's 
the kind of thing that we deal with. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam 
Minister. I certainly appreciate what you've said and I certainly 
agree with you that there is a need in that area. Because I think 
all of us will agree that what happens to a child in the early 
stages can sometimes carry through their whole life. And while 
that's not to say that every child that's had a certain amount of 
neglect or abuse don't turn out good . . . I'll give you myself as 
an example. I turned out very well and I got strapped many 
times, and needed it every time. 
 
So I certainly support you in that part of your mandate, Madam 
Minister, and I just hope you have success with it. 
 
And another thing I might say is that I hope that the cabinet will 
allow you to have enough finance to carry that out. 
 
I think you covered a pretty good bit of ground there, and I 
appreciate that. I say you and I are going to get along really well 
here. We don't seem to be frightened about anything. 
 
Could you then just give me a little run-down on what the 
Women's Secretariat has accomplished in the last year, we'll 
say. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Do you want me to go through all of 
them or give you some examples? Because I've got four pages 
here of specific accomplishments over this last year and I'm 
prepared to provide as much detail as you would like. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Madam Minister, no, I don't think . . . I just 
wanted to get a bit of an outline, what you feel that has been 
accomplished in the last year in order to fulfil the mandate. 
Have you some specific things that might have happened that  

would give us encouragement that your program is not only 
there but it's working? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the important initiatives that has 
continued into this year, but didn't just start in this year, is 
looking at options for implementing pay equity in 
Saskatchewan, and starting to create the movement within 
government for pay equity in an orderly process, of making 
improvement to the incomes of women so that it reflects the 
actual work they're doing and places the appropriate value on 
women's work in relation to other kinds of work. 
 
I would say we've accomplished our first one or two steps in 
this process, but this is something we intend to continue 
working on until we can say that we've achieved fairness on that 
front. 
 
We're involved in the review of The Labour Standards Act in 
the areas of the Act that affected women particularly. And you 
may have noticed the improvements to maternity and paternity 
leave. As well, there was the inclusion of domestic workers by 
regulation under The Labour Standards Act because of course 
domestic workers are very vulnerable in their workplaces. 
 
There are working members of 25 different committees that 
exist to deal with particular problems. And some of the 
examples of that would be the child action plan steering 
committee, the interdepartmental committee on family violence, 
the working committee on funding for transition houses, the 
social security policy and task group committee to respond to 
the federal government initiatives in the area of income 
security, the interdepartmental committee on the International 
Year of the Family. So that would be some of the work in the 
policy and research area. 
 
When it comes to public awareness, I mentioned earlier the 
work on sexual harassment prevention in both the public and 
private sector, the community consultations and training on 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act. They've done a number of 
things to make information more accessible to women and 
children as far as services, with the production of some wallet 
cards with phone numbers and that kind of thing. So if women 
are experiencing danger or experiencing problems, they have 
ready access to the information that they need. And they also 
liaised with Executive Council and hosted a member of the 
Namibian delegation. 
 
One of the things I found when I attended an international 
parliamentary conference is that although women here still have 
gains to make, that in some areas we're light years ahead of 
women in other countries. So it's very important that as well as 
our local efforts, we stay involved in international efforts 
because it can help set a standard around the world. 
 
As far as partnerships with other areas, again I mention the 
work with Justice on the domestic violence Act and also with 
the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat because many of the  



March 2, 1995 

 
599 

problems experienced by women are experienced by women 
from the aboriginal community. And because of the particular 
way our systems have worked, they have not necessarily been 
very accessible to women from those communities. So we've 
been working on ways to improve that and get them included in 
some of the benefits of the changes. 
 
There was a partnership to develop a model of cooperation on 
how to deal with family violence in the community because, as 
you know, there's many people — from police to emergency 
wards to family service agencies, crisis services — that all deal 
a bit in these areas. And there is a need to pull together all of 
the various people that are having an effect on this area. 
 
There was work with the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission on particular issues related to women. And of 
course some of the new provisions in the human rights 
legislation disallow discrimination based on economic status 
and family status, and those are very positive for a lot women 
who have that kind of situation. 
 
And we've also been involved in some national meetings with 
the B.C. (British Columbia) ministry on women's equality, 
creating some video materials for use in the schools. And these 
are again largely to help young women overcome gender 
socialization and to realize that a wide range of careers are open 
to them, a wide range of choices and opportunities are open to 
them. 
 
We've also worked with the area of film classification. And 
right now the national classification system is using some of the 
work that we did to look at reviewing the content of films, 
again for their impact on children and families and women. So 
these would be just some examples of what we think some of 
the accomplishments have been this year. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you. Madam Minister, you were 
mentioning equality between the two genders. I was just 
looking at some information I have. And it seems that Ms. 
Rafter was an instructor at the university, and an instructor 
receives in the neighbourhood of 55,000 to 60,000 a year, and 
that's maximum. Could you explain why she was entitled to a 
$20,000 increase, coming over to the Secretariat? Could you 
explain how that wide a spread could happen just in changing 
jobs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In her role at the university, she was 
never a full-time professor in the particular time period you're 
referring to but was a sessional instructor, and their salaries are 
quite different than a full-time professor. But subsequent to 
that, she had a range of other responsibilities and jobs at the 
university. 
 
So I think the particular time period you're talking about is an 
isolated moment. And I don't think it would be reasonable to 
discuss her pay in that institution in this setting. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well, Madam Minister, you lost me a little bit 
there. You're saying that Ms. Rafter was not a full-time  

employee, so that would make the jump seem quite . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Worse. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Yes. The maximum an instructor receives is 
between 55,000 and 60 a year from the information that we 
have, and this is from a professor that we talked to. And if she 
was not working full time, that doesn't change the . . . You're 
anxious to get up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll just clarify to save you having to 
restate your question. The sessional work was part time, but that 
was in addition to a full-time job within the university, so it 
wasn't the only job. But it, itself, was part time. But that was in 
addition to full-time duties. 
 
Mr. Britton: — I think again we're off track a bit. Maybe I 
should ask you then: is it fair to assume that had Ms. Rafter 
worked full time, full time as an instructor at the university, her 
salary would have been between 55,000 and $60,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well being that you represent the 
particular political philosophy you do, you would certainly 
understand the market-place, and you would also understand 
that people often get jobs throughout their life that pay different 
ranges of salaries. I myself have worked in a broad range of 
salaries, depending on my circumstance at the time, what was 
available at the time, and who was available at the time. So I 
think to make comparisons are not particularly fair or that 
meaningful. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. It would 
seem that we . . . you and I are going to have some fun after all. 
I did not ask you for your opinion on my philosophy. I did not 
ask you as to whether it was fair or not. I asked you a simple 
question: is it fair to assume that had Ms. Rafter been employed 
for a full year as a director at the university, her salary range 
would be between 55,000 and $60,000? 
 
Now if you don't want to answer that — it's a straightforward 
question. And regardless of where my opinion is, I haven't as 
yet indicated that I disagreed with it. I'm just asking you to tell 
me why there would be a change of $20,000 between the job as 
an instructor in the university and the job Ms. Rafter has with 
you today. Is that fair? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Ms. Rafter was selected to 
move into a position for which there is a pay and salary 
standard set and, I would comment, is on the lower end of that 
scale. And that is the scale that the job pays regardless of who 
is in it. And I think I would have to remind you that she was 
executive director of the faculty association in her most recent 
position before she came over to us. 
 
But I really don't think it's appropriate in any job to talk about 
what the person's previous salary was, because the job you're 
applying for is the job that is set at a particular rate. And 
whether you're hired as a ditch digger, the fact of whether you 
picked a shovel up or not, if the guy decides to hire you, he  



March 2, 1995 

 
600 

hires you on at the shovel-heaving rate and that's the rate you 
get. And so I'm not quite sure how pertinent this is. Once we've 
assessed that a person is qualified, then they are qualified for 
the salary that goes with that job. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. Well I guess 
if you come out of a university, at least when you went digging 
ditches you'd get your first choice of the shovel. That would be 
an advantage. 
 
Madam Minister, all I want you to do is explain to me and those 
who may be watching if this salary level of, I believe you told 
me $79,000 — if that's an appropriate level, say so. I don't think 
you have to justify to me and I don't have to justify to you what 
questions I asked about the salaries of the people that you have 
that are being paid by the taxpayer of this province. 
 
So let's not get banging away at each other here, because I can 
tell you I can hold my own when it comes to that. Now please 
tell me and those that are interested why that salary level is 
there. Is that an accepted salary level in the Women's 
Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That is an accepted salary level for 
permanent heads with a similar level of responsibility in 
government. Now I used to be assistant director of personnel 
for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and we had 
2,000 employees, so I know a little bit about this topic. And all 
jobs had salaries assigned to them and when you decided to hire 
a person into a job, they got the salary that was assigned to that 
job. We did not veer off that because the salaries had been set 
according to the particular requirements of that job, and the fact 
you accepted a person for that job indicated that they were 
qualified to perform those duties that were assigned to that job 
and to that pay level. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well, Madam Minister, I would warn you, you 
said you knew a little about the subject. I tell you, when you 
only know a little bit about something it's a dangerous thing. 
 
Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I needed 
a confirmation. 
 
Madam Minister, I did start out, but I don't think you're telling 
me just exactly the whole story here. When I asked you about 
an order in council, you said that Faye Rafter was not hired a 
OC, and I have here in my hand a piece of paper that indicates 
she was. 
 
And it says, the undersigned has the honour to recommend that 
Your Honour's order do issue pursuant to positions of The 
Public Service Act appointing Faye Rafter to a position in the 
unclassified division of the public service, acting executive co-
ordinator at the Women's Secretariat, at a salary of 77,820 per 
annum; in the salary range, 70,000 to 88,040. Now, Madam 
Minister, why would you tell me that it was not an order in 
council? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I apologize if I made an error. It is a  

contract, but it was an appointment by order in council. I mean 
it's a bit complicated in that it is a secondment. It is a contract, 
but it is an order in council. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As I mentioned, 
you — and as I said, I don't intend to be hard to get along with, 
but I do expect you to be; I expect you to be open and 
forthcoming. As I mentioned, to know just a little bit about 
something is a dangerous thing. 
 
Madam Minister, we'll leave that for now and we'll go onto 
another day. I'd like to ask you, does the Women's Secretariat 
provide any sort of grants to third party organizations, or is the 
entire amount. that is budgeted to you spent on wages and rent? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, there is no direct funding to groups 
from the Secretariat but there is money spent on the resource 
materials that are done, the costs of going out to do training, 
and some of those various other kinds of things. And we have 
looked at some cost recovery on that kind of training effort, but 
there is no direct granting at all. 
 
If they're involved in any grants, it would be on an 
interdepartmental committee where there's people from various 
departments who are coming together to look at things like the 
child action plan grants and have a coordinated approach to 
problems in the community rather than just an individual 
department making a decision. 
 
So they would influence that discussion but not be a direct 
granter at all, no. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Then I'm to assume, Madam Minister, that 
there is no grants at all? 
 
Then, Madam Minister, I would like maybe to go on again to 
uncover as much ground as I can. But I guess we'll be visiting it 
again and we can do some of this. 
 
Do you see your role, Madam Minister, and the role of the 
agency, as being an advocate or a voice for the women of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm not sure quite in what way you 
mean that. Certainly the role is to provide good information on 
the circumstances of women and the ways we can improve the 
functioning of government for women as part of the citizens in 
this province. And certainly where changes are needed, we 
would urge that those changes occur. If that's what you mean by 
advocacy, then that would certainly be one of the things we do. 
 
Mr. Britton: — I guess the difference is the difference between 
an advocate and a voice. And I understand from what you've 
told me that you, that you . . . I think you're more of an advocate 
than you are of a voice. I think you . . . it seems to me that 
you're dedicated to further the role of women in society. And I 
would suggest that that was an advocate, rather than just  



March 2, 1995 

 
601 

a voice talking about it. 
 
Now I would like to ask you a question. Does the Women's 
Secretariat represent the views of REAL — Realistic, Equal, 
Active for Life — women, a conservative anti-feminist 
women's group which promotes traditional family values, in 
addition to the feminist movement? Do you represent those 
views, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would say that women have 
educational needs, whether they are pro-choice or pro-life. 
Women get beat up whether they're pro-choice or pro-life; and 
women don't get paid fairly whether they are pro-choice or pro-
life. So I would say, yes, we do fairly represent the very broad-
based needs of women regardless of their views on those 
particular subjects. 
  
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I have for some time wondered about the usefulness of this 
whole department. Could you tell me, what does your 
Secretariat and all of the money that you spend, what does that 
do in my constituency, the constituency of Maple Creek? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well one of the things I could say 
generally that it would do there is to ensure that there are 
facilities available for women who are in family violence 
situations so that they can remove themselves from a dangerous 
situation and get into a safe house somewhere. 
 
Certainly we have met with rural women to discuss the 
particular kinds of child care needs that are specific to rural 
areas and very different from the needs in urban areas because 
of distance. And not all of that can be solved immediately 
because, as you know from having been in government, every 
initiative has a cost associated with it. 
 
One of the things I would like to see us do more actively in the 
next year, is use some of the distance-ed mechanisms to assist 
women with getting the kind of support educational services 
and what not that they need out in rural areas. And hopefully, 
over time, we can be even more useful in rural and northern 
areas. 
 
I certainly am concerned about that and I think it's important, 
and if you have suggestions or women in your constituency 
have suggestions, I'd very much like to hear them. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, the suggestions I'm getting you wouldn't want to 
probably hear, but I'm going to tell you that most of the people 
out in my area simply don't see any value for their dollars at all. 
And quite frankly, they've told me that we ought to scrap the 
whole thing and put it into Social Services or some place like 
that because it really isn't doing any good. So I'll allow you the 
opportunity to prove those folks and myself wrong here in the 
opinion that you're wasting a lot of time and money. 
 
So what facilities have we got in my constituency? Where are 
they, and what are they? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — These are some of the kinds of things 
that perhaps women in your area have utilized and not realized 
that the Women's Secretariat have had an effect on. 
 
For example the toll free farm stress line was established to 
ensure that farm families can access existing services. And in 
1994, 49 per cent of the callers to this line were women. Now I 
don't have a break-out from your particular area, but I hope that 
they were comfortable in using that service as other women 
were. 
 
I mentioned already the shelters and the crisis counselling 
services that exist in various locations throughout the province, 
and I was actually part of a group of farm women who 
produced a film called "Fear on the Farm," where they very 
much were raising concerns about the dangers to women living 
in isolated areas without protection. 
 
The distance education network provides education in 52 
centres which give university level and career-oriented classes 
to rural women to further their education. And in fact, I was at a 
Statistics Canada conference earlier this morning, and one of 
the very promising statistics there was the rising education 
levels of women in Saskatchewan. And education is always a 
first step to improving your pay and living conditions. So I 
think SCN (Saskatchewan Communication Network 
Corporation) as it develops will be even more useful in helping 
accomplish that goal for the women in the area where you live. 
 
The child action plan has provided pilot project initiatives in 
rural and northern locations. And if your community is not 
accessing those, we certainly could help you get the information 
to help them access those kinds of programs to assist in their 
community. 
 
The breast cancer screening program has been expanded to 
serve the entire province. And of course this is only maybe 
pertinent to those of us who have those accoutrements, but it's 
certainly important to myself and I think important to women in 
rural areas. 
 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is making efforts to work 
towards meeting the needs of farm women. And many of the 
farm managers — we know there's many farm managers out 
there now who are actually the farm operator. With the federal, 
provincial, and territorial counterparts, we're working on ways 
to reduce barriers to women in agriculture and increase the role 
for farm women through participation in boards and the various 
organizations that have been dominated in the past only by the 
male farm operators. 
 
Now I'm not able to assess how important any of this is to the 
women in your community, but I would suggest that they 
perhaps don't know that some of these initiatives are affected by 
the work of the Secretariat. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 


