






















































March 10, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 10, 1995 

 

 
783 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Carnduff, 
Carievale, Gainsborough, south-east Saskatchewan. I so lay 
them on the Table. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition. The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a full page of names here, and they're 
from my community of Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy this 
morning to present on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake 
area a petition with regards to Highway No. 1. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to lay these on the Table this morning, Mr. 

Speaker, for the people from the Gull Lake constituency and 
area. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated 
toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of member shareholders of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool petitioning the Assembly to require the 
directors of the Pool to seek the approval of the Pool 
membership by a vote before the proposed changes to 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool are enacted by the 
Assembly. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act 
respecting the Property Rights of the People of Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to the Assembly two constituents of mine 
sitting in your gallery. To my left is Val Wiebe, my constituency 
assistant, and her husband John. Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House a constituent of mine who is seated up in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Michael Stasiuk. Michael is a constituent of 
mine, a friend of mine, and a farmer from the Canora area. And 
Michael is on his way home today from Calgary where he was 
out visiting his son who is attending university there. 
 
And Michael has taken some time out of his journey home to 
take in the proceedings of the House here today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to ask all the members to offer Michael a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Search and Rescue Organization 



March 10, 1995 

 
784 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Saskatchewan still has places very close to 
populated areas where individuals can easily be lost, sometimes 
with tragic consequences. We were all reminded of this last July 
with the fruitless search for Ashley Krestianson in the Tisdale 
area. 
 
To prevent a similar occurrence, a group of Prince Albert area 
citizens is forming a volunteer search and rescue organization. 
They plan to call the group the P.A. (Prince Albert) North 
Search and Rescue. The purpose of this group will be to be 
prepared to assist the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
and local officials in the search for missing and lost persons in 
rural areas. 
 
The Prince Albert RCMP detachment, local Environment and 
Resource department officials, and the RMs (rural 
municipalities) surrounding Prince Albert have all expressed 
their support for the plan. 
 
Sergeant Wasylenka of the RCMP said this is an excellent 
example of community policing. Without assistance from 
civilians, the work of the police is that much tougher. These 
people will be an excellent resource for us. 
 
The RCMP will train the local volunteers and the group itself 
will raise funds to equip itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an excellent example of people joining 
hands for the security of their families and their neighbours. I 
congratulate Mr. Nick Czychowski for his community service, 
and I congratulate all the volunteers who have taken the 
initiative to set up the P.A. North Search and Rescue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Role Model Program 
 

Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
education system is constantly changing and growing with the 
times. Today I wish to report on some recent events in 
Saskatoon that demonstrate how these changes are benefiting 
young children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon's inner-city schools have joined forces 
with the Saskatoon City Police to initiate a school role model 
program. Over the past few months, and in future weeks as 
well, school children will receive visits from famous Canadian 
aboriginals. The guiding theme behind these visits is that if kids 
wish to follow in the footsteps of their role models, they must 
continue in their education. 
 
An example of some of the events happening as part of the 
program took place at St. Mary's Community School last night. 
There, children were thrilled to meet Tina Keeper, star of CBC's 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) gritty but realistic drama 
North of Sixty. Ms. Keeper is a gifted actress and a great 
inspiration to children. Her visit follows one by Gordon 
Tootosis, a Saskatchewan-born actor who is also a star of North 
of Sixty. 

This month, Mr. Speaker, the focus of the program will shift to 
literacy and the fine arts. Some of the scheduled visits are from 
well-known aboriginal author Frida Ahenakew, and painter 
Alan Sapp. Truly, Mr. Speaker, children are our future. 
 
I wish to commend the Saskatoon City Police, Saskatoon's 
community schools, and the aboriginal community for their 
efforts in ensuring that future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Government Defending Canadian Resources 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
state my approval for the federal government's stance to defend 
our east-coast fishermen and our fish stock. It's time that 
European fishermen stopped pillaging Canadian waters and be 
held responsible for breaking regulations in place to protect our 
ocean resources. 
 
In light of the moves by the European Union to impose 
sanctions on Canada for defending the earth's resources and 
eastern Canadians, Canada should consider some form of 
economic retaliation comparable to that imposed by the 
Europeans. One form could be imposing a ban on European 
wines. 
 
I must say that it's interesting that the federal government is 
anxious to defend eastern Canadian people on resources. I 
would hope they share the same enthusiasm in defending the 
needs and interests of western Canadians as well. Presently, Mr. 
Speaker, railroad strikes are hindering the transportation of 
grain to export, some of which is grown in the Souris-
Cannington constituency. 
 
Is the federal government going to allow these strikes to 
continue until August so that western Canadian producers will 
have to pay the full cost of shipping their grain to market, 
thereby saving the federal government the Crow rate on grain 
still on the farms? I should hope not. But unfortunately western 
Canada has not received a fair shake from the federal 
government to date. 
 
It's time the provincial government pressed the federal 
government for a fair shake for Saskatchewan, and I urge the 
members opposite to discuss this matter immediately with the 
federal Transport minister and demand action. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Procrastination Week 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as you know, yesterday my 
seat mate, the member for Humboldt, gave notice that he 
intended to make a statement about National Procrastination 
Week today, but apparently he's not here yet. And I know he'd 
been working on it all week, Mr. Speaker, and just hadn't 
finished it off yesterday. But actually, Mr. Speaker, he and I had 
intended to work on a statement recognizing National  



March 10, 1995 

 
785 

Procrastination Week for last year but somehow we forgot it. 
As we procrastinators like to say, better late than never unless 
never is the more preferred option, and it usually is. 
 
What are some of the things that we can do to honour National 
Procrastination Week, Mr. Speaker? Well unfortunately we just 
haven't gotten around to thinking about that yet. But each year 
National Procrastination Week seems to creep up faster than the 
one before, and all of a sudden we realize we've done nothing 
to prepare for it, and then the week is just about over. 
 
Perhaps in the future, Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly 
might want to do some brainstorming for National 
Procrastination Week. But seeing as how this year's week is 
already past, we wouldn't have to worry about that for some 
time. After all, Mr. Speaker, we legislators have our own 
procrastinating motto: don't put off until tomorrow what you 
can put off until the day after, unless of course you can get 
leave and move a motion to adjourn debate indefinitely. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I know if the member from 
Humboldt were able to be here by now that he'd want to give 
notice that next year we'll talk about this again or maybe the 
year after that, I'm not sure. But anyhow, thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to remind the member from Moose 
Jaw Palliser — and I will not procrastinate — that you should 
not refer to the presence or absence of a member in this House. 
And not to procrastinate any longer, oral questions. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Justice Minister 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, two weeks 
ago I brought to your attention a serious error that was made by 
your deputy minister in his handling of the investigation into 
the former Justice minister. In turning the case over to the 
independent investigator, Mr. Cotter provided Justice McIntyre 
with completely erroneous information about the history of 
these types of cases in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you had indicated to this Assembly that you 
would investigate the matter and decide the appropriate action 
that must be taken. Mr. Minister, can you inform this Assembly 
about the results of your investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well one can understand, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps why some of these issues are being raised. 
Jobs I can see is not a subject you want to talk about . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I can recall a day when members 
opposite were in office when the job figures were a regular 
Friday morning question. Not any more. They don’t want to talk 
about the budget and so on. 
 

Let me say with respect to the misinformation which was in the 
letter, I have received a report on the matter. The mistake was 
made innocently in an . . . I may say as well it was a very high 
profile mistake, but it was made innocently. The individual 
involved has been reprimanded, and that's probably an 
appropriate disposition of the matter. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
interesting to note that the minister talks about jobs and maybe 
a thorough investigation would just create another job or two 
for the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, your deputy minister provided the independent 
investigator, Justice McIntyre, with information that was 
completely false. If it had not been detected, it could have 
seriously biased the outcome of the investigation. And Mr. 
Cotter's actions were a deliberate attempt to mislead or a gross 
incompetence. Either way, a serious error was made, and you 
simply brushed it off. 
 
Mr. Minister, was the mistake a result of incompetence or a 
deliberate attempt to mislead . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the member is out 
of line when he infers or, you know, says that an official or a 
member is deliberately misleading this . . . the minister. And I 
ask him to please refrain from doing so. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this side 
of the House and many people in this province want to know 
what actions you have taken, whether or not you have given a 
thorough . . . an opportunity for investigation and whether or 
not Mr. Cotter will be treated like any other individual across 
this province would be treated under similar circumstances. 
What actions have been taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Members opposite truly are short of question period material 
when you allege that there may be some sort of nefarious plot 
behind this error. 
 
I think the comment of the deputy attorney general spoke for 
themselves when he said that surely if we were going to attempt 
to mislead someone, you wouldn't do so in such a high profile 
fashion. 
 
I say to members opposite, it was apparent that it was a . . . it 
was apparent to any fair-minded person — I exclude members 
opposite — it was apparent to any fair-minded person that it 
was an innocent mistake. It was brought to the attention of the 
individual involved, and I think that is indeed an appropriate 
disposition of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Advertising Agency Political Contributions 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for government advertising. 



March 10, 1995 

 
786 

Mr. Minister, Phoenix Advertising does about one and a half 
million dollars worth of business a year with your government. 
This morning on CBC Radio the president of Phoenix was 
quoted as saying that political contributions are, and I quote, a 
common part of the cost of doing business with your 
government. 
 
That's an incredible statement, Mr. Minister. When you start to 
consider contributions to the NDP (New Democratic Party) as 
part of the cost of doing . . . getting government business, that, 
Mr. Minister, is called a kickback. 
 
Mr. Minister, now that we know political contributions to the 
NDP is the cost of doing business from your government, could 
you tell us what's the going rate? And how much does it cost to 
get a cut of your government's advertising business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to respond to the member opposite. And it's really quite 
amazing how he can't separate himself from the 1980s; because 
what he's talking about is the kind of situation that existed here 
in the 1980s under the administration of which he was on the 
front benches. 
 
I want to say again, as I have said in this House before, that the 
way that advertising services are allocated under this 
government's administration is by a tendering process. There are 
some 14 different advertising firms who do business with this 
government; that Phoenix is one of them; Cooper Quine & 
Fraser are another; Brown & Associates are another. All three 
of them do about an equal amount of business, and there are 
many others who do some business as well — after tendering, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the member should forget about the past and recognize the 
improvements and the reforms that have been made which have 
made the future so much better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I don't know 
how more current I can be than this morning's CBC Radio that 
said, a common part of the cost of doing business with your 
government . . . is a quote from Mr. Barker. 
 
Even though an NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) has been convicted of fraud for receiving a 
kickback, Mr. Minister, the president of Phoenix Advertising 
still considers it a political contribution and a legitimate cost of 
doing business with your government. 
 
The message isn't getting through, Mr. Minister — there's 
something wrong here. This was not a legitimate political 
contribution. A judge has determined it was illegal. And that's 
why your member was convicted. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don't you come clean? How widespread is  

this practice of political contributions in return for government 
business, and why are you afraid to hold an independent 
investigation of Phoenix Advertising? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, there is no 
requirement to do business with the government that there be 
political contributions. If that was so, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to explain whether that's the principle that applied to the 
Conservative government when Canadian Pacific contributed 
$64,000 and Molson companies, 24,000 and Toronto Dominion 
Bank, 37,000. 
 
Part of democracy, Mr. Speaker, is that people who are in 
business and individuals make contributions to political parties 
to make democracy work. There shouldn't be one rule for the 
private sector and another rule that contributes to Conservatives 
and another rule for somebody else. 
 
But the more important point, Mr. Speaker, is that all of the 
work that is being done for advertising with this government is 
tendered and it is awarded on the basis of the tendering, not like 
it used to be under the former administration where it was 
allocated only to two firms that were spin-offs of the 
Conservative Party who got 97 per cent of the advertising at 
that time. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that has changed under this 
administration. It has changed for the better because we have a 
system that is based on tendering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, apparently the 
member opposite doesn't agree with the judge. Mr. Minister, 
Graham Barker of Phoenix Advertising said he considers 
political contributions to be a common part of the cost of doing 
business with your government. And he said that, Mr. Minister. 
How come, Mr. Minister? How common are these kickbacks? 
What other companies give you political contributions in 
returning business with your government? Who else is 
soliciting favours from you? Is this how your union leader 
buddies got you to sign that obscene union preference policy? 
 
Mr. Minister, exactly how common is this preference to 
kickbacks in your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Morse continues to build on the circus. First of all I want to say 
that the CBC report was inaccurate, and now the member 
himself has put his own interpretation on a CBC report . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I will have to ask the members 
in the opposition, particularly one member, to please just tone it 
down a bit. We would like to hear the questions and the 
answers. 



March 10, 1995 

 
787 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, my fear is that 
another member of the same caucus will get up and even put a 
different spin on it than the member from Morse has. 
 
But I want to come back to my basic answer that I have been 
giving here. In the 1980s under the former administration, all of 
the work for advertising was given to two firms which are 
friends of the Conservative Party. No tendering. And if there 
was some tendering, I challenge the member from Morse to 
stand up and give us some documentation that shows that there 
was. 
 
In this administration the work that is allocated to a large 
number of advertising firms is done through a tendering 
process. I don't apologize for that, Mr. Speaker, because that's 
the right way for it to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Rural Health Coalition 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has no plan for health care, no plan for the welfare 
of rural Saskatchewan. Recently a director of the rural health 
care coalition contacted member communities to get an update 
on whether the services agreed to in the rural health care 
coalition agreement were now in place. 
 
The answers are coming in and, Mr. Speaker, this government 
should be embarrassed. The overwhelming response is the 
agreement is being ignored. Again we see the government break 
their promise. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government hasn't kept its word and lived up 
to this rural health care coalition agreement signed over a year 
ago. Did you purposely negotiate in bad faith with these rural 
communities, having no intention of living up to the spirit and 
the intent of the rural health care coalition agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say directly to the 
member's question, in the vast, vast majority of communities 
the agreement that we signed with the Rural Health Coalition is 
being implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little 
about credibility, and in doing so talk about . . . you will recall, 
Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question yesterday, brought to 
the House by the Liberal leader. In this House yesterday, the 
Liberal leader made the accusation that people were being 
removed from the waiting-lists for orthopedic surgery in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Royce Gill says today, and I quote: "That's 
false information." False information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to suggest that the Liberal leader and the Liberal 
caucus should suggest in this House that individuals have been  

removed from the waiting-list in Regina, Mr. Speaker, is a 
blatant falsehood, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I want to warn the member from 
Shaunavon, if he wants to ask another question he'd better abide 
by the rules of this House. The minister was on his feet, and I 
will determine when the time has come for the next question, 
not the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I'd like to say two other things. This 
leader, this Liberal caucus and this leader, has been wrong on 
the jobs issue when they brought it to the House. They've 
changed their position all over the place on the Crow issue and 
in agriculture. Their information brought to this House on 
health care is false. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now let me say finally, let me say finally that I 
think it does a disservice to use fearmongering tactics with 
people on waiting-lists to try and score political points in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
minister is afraid of the question because he didn't get anywhere 
near it with an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agreement has been ignored by this 
government and the people are fed up. The rural health care 
coalition from the community of Vanguard writes, and I quote: 
 
 In our community no parts of the agreement have been 

fully implemented. It is felt that the provisions of 
adequate emergency care has still not been provided. 

 
The community of Ituna says: we still have no 24-hour 
emergency service. And the list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you are able to take immediate action in telling 
folks not to release information, but during this past year there 
have been court actions and pressures by communities to force 
your government to live up to this agreement. Will you stand in 
this House today and promise the people of rural Saskatchewan 
that you will immediately take action and fulfil your promises 
in this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I invite the member to join 
us in estimates and we can walk thoroughly through the rural 
health care coalition in a matter of moments. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member says that people of the province 
are fed up. They are fed up, Mr. Speaker, they are fed up with 
that leader and that caucus not knowing where they stand on 
issues, not knowing where they stand on agricultural issues — 
the Crow rate, the flip-flop there — where they stand on the job 
figures, where they stand on gun control, Mr. Speaker. And 
then they come to the House with false information, false 
information, trying to fearmonger among the people of 
Saskatchewan for their own political benefit. 



March 10, 1995 

 
788 

Mr. Speaker, in my view, that member should stand up now and 
apologize on behalf of his leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you have been 
telling us all week that all the financial statements of each 
district are public information. Yet we are told by many districts 
that we have to use the freedom of information Act to obtain 
the truth. 
 
Now the Premier has become involved. Yesterday he stated on 
a Yorkton radio show that the numbers we obtained were 
phoney. The Premier's view of the truth is a poor one, Mr. 
Speaker. These numbers were obtained from a handful of health 
districts who are open enough to release their statements for the 
last fiscal year  his own boards. 
 
Local people are complaining as well. The coalition from 
Climax states, and I quote: 
 
 The board is very tight-lipped about everything. We do 

not get any information on anything publicly until it's 
done. 

 
Mr. Minister, obviously you gave instructions to local boards 
about sharing public information. Why have you told them to 
release nothing until after the election, when it will be too late 
to stop the devastation that your government has created on 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member gets up and 
talks about false information. The leader of his party, the 
woman who would be premier of Saskatchewan, comes into 
this House yesterday and — not according to myself or to 
members of the government, but according to Mr. Royce Gill 
— says, and I quote: “That's false information.” To suggest that 
people have been removed by, in her words, bureaucrats, from 
waiting-lists, Mr. Speaker, is false information. 
 
And again I say, if that member wants to regain a little 
credibility for himself, if even for himself and not for his 
caucus, he should stand today and on behalf of his leader 
apologize in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Constituency Allowances 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the Board of Internal 
Economy directive no. 5 states that MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) are entitled to funding to pay for office 
expenses and secretarial services incurred in respect of his or 
her duties as members in his or her constituency. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think that organizing political party events  

during regular business hours falls under that definition? 
Should constituency offices and constituency secretaries be 
used to organize party events? What do you think, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It strikes me that that is a question 
more appropriately addressed to the Board of Internal 
Economy, the Speaker. It's hardly an appropriate question to the 
Minister of Justice. I know the members opposite are sorely in 
need of good advice, but the Minister of Justice doesn't act as a 
personal legal adviser to members opposite. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister may make 
light of the situation but clearly party events are not appropriate 
use of constituency offices or constituency secretaries. And you 
know that, Mr. Minister; you've been around here a long time. 
 
Now I have a poster here, Mr. Minister, for an upcoming NDP 
fun spiel put on by the Regina north-east constituency. If you 
wish to enter the bonspiel, the person to call is Dianne at 757-
9858. And I know you recognize the number, Mr. Minister. It's 
the number of your constituency office. And Dianne is your 
constituency secretary. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, do you think that taxpayers of this province 
should be paying your constituency secretary to organize a New 
Democratic Party fund-raiser out of your constituency office? 
Do you think that's proper, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I can provide members opposite with 
the names of the organizing committee if you want. None of 
them draw a pay cheque from the provincial government. That 
happens to be a number where there's someone at during the 
daytime. The people who are organizing it aren't at home. It just 
happens to be a number that's available. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, that's simply not excusable, and you 
know it. Here's the poster. Dianne is your secretary. That's your 
constituency office, and it is clearly a political event, nothing 
else, Mr. Minister. I mean I don't know why you don't learn. 
Your member from Yorkton, your member from Melville, your 
member from Quill Lakes have all been caught using public 
funds to do NDP political work. It's not a simple error, Mr. 
Minister. You've been around a long time. I believe it was 
deliberate. 
 
Now why was this bonspiel being organized out of your 
constituency office? Will you put a stop to it immediately? And 
what remedial action will you take, sir, to make sure that it 
doesn't happen again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It really is, Mr. Speaker, a sign of 
how this session has degenerated into an issueless session, that 
something of this sort would consume a Friday morning 
session. Nothing about jobs, nothing about the budget, all of 
those issues have dissolved. 
 
Instead they are reduced to the pettiest of muckraking, and this 
truly is the pettiest of muckraking. There is not a scintilla of  



March 10, 1995 

 
789 

evidence this is being organized out of my office because it isn't 
being organized out of my office. She is taking telephone 
messages. No public funds are being spent organizing this. I 
suggest you people simply don't have a case here, and you don't 
have a question period, and you don't have any issues. And it 
strikes me you don't have a party, and you don't have much of 
an opposition either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Casino Management Company 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately the degeneration process in this province 
continues, as I direct my question to the minister responsible for 
gambling. 
 
Madam Minister, your report from the committee which 
recommended that your government hire a Dutch company to 
run your casino is less than complete. Your report says you used 
the investigative service division of the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority to undertake due diligence on each of 
the proponents. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, these are the same people that cleared 
GTECH and VLC (Video Lottery Consultants), the companies 
which were under indictment in the U.S. (United States) for 
everything from government kickbacks to extortion. Perhaps 
not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, your report 
does not include any of the details of this investigation. So this 
doesn't give me and it doesn't give the public a great deal of 
confidence. Madam Minister, very simply, will you table the 
entire security report on these companies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, here again the 
members of the Conservative opposition want to muckrake a 
company which has  a Crown corporation out of Holland  
that has very, very high reputation, operate 14 casinos around 
the world, have never had this kind of an accusation made 
about them before. And I say to him that it was done through a 
process by the board of directors reviewing a number of casino 
operators. In the end, three submitted proposals: two from Las 
Vegas, one from Holland. 
 
The board of directors of the casino corporation at the end, after 
all the due diligence and research was done, chose the Holland 
group because they best fit the needs of designing a 
community-based casino. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the jobs being created in 
the casino are important to the people of the province. And it's 
interesting today that on the day that StatsCanada releases the 
report on employment, which shows the job numbers for 
February up by 9,000, year over year, not a word of question 
from the Liberals or the Conservatives. 
 
What they want to do is talk about curling bonspiels. They want  

to talk about misinformation on health care, the member from 
Shaunavon, but not a word about jobs. And I say to the 
members opposite, look at the big issues in the province, and I 
want to tell you that this muckraking will take you nowhere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, you say that this Dutch 
company is the one that best supplies the needs for the people. 
We have no way of knowing that. We have no way of 
determining that because, Mr. Minister, the freedom of 
information Act was not designed to use it as a hiding place, 
but that's what you're doing throughout your entire report. 
 
Just take a look at the last three pages of the report — zippo as 
far information is concerned. In fact the section deals with the 
cost to taxpayers and that has been completely removed. 
 
You've completely censored the fees and the cost of this 
contract which is going to be paid to this Dutch company — 
completely. And I'm sure that this will be of great interest to the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), the 
exhibition associations, and certainly to the taxpayers, because 
they are the ones that are going to be directly affected, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Will you table those costs today, Mr. Minister, or Madam 
Minister? Or do I have to look 46 sentences and 1,416 words 
further down in the report to be able to get that answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, who laughs from his seat to tell you how 
seriously he does take this issue, that yesterday he was attacking 
CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce). Yesterday he 
was attacking CIBC; today he's attacking another corporation 
which has a great reputation. 
 
I say to the member opposite, if he has evidence that this is not 
a reputable company and able to do the job, tell us what it is. 
But obviously we will be working on this arrangement and the 
deal will not come as a surprise to the FSIN because they are 
the people who sat on the board of directors, reviewed the 
information when the deal was struck. 
 
So for you to say, Mr. Member, that somehow the FSIN is 
going to be surprised by this deal, you should know that they 
were sitting on the board and made the decision. So don't tell 
me they're going to be surprised. They are the ones who in fact 
made the decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to abolish the Rules Against 
Perpetuities and The Accumulations Act and to enact 

Consequential Amendments 



March 10, 1995 

 
790 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill to 
abolish the Rules Against Perpetuities and The Accumulations 
Act and to enact Consequential Amendments. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
amendments to An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I move first reading of The Local 
Government Election Amendment Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
motions for returns (not debatable), I would move they be 
converted to debatable motions. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 48 and 49 motions for returns (not 
debatable) converted to motions for return debate. Order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Before government orders, with leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — I notice sitting in your gallery we have the newly-
elected Liberal candidate who is the United Church pastor in 
our community, Mr. Vic Greenlaw, his wife Betty, and I'm not 
sure of that would be who . . . the mother or whoever is with 
them. But I think we'd like to join with them and ask the 
Assembly to join with you in welcoming these folks to the 
Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like  

to join with the member from Moosomin in welcoming Vic and 
Bettyann Greenlaw from the Moosomin constituency. It's 
always nice when we see some of the replacements of some of 
the current members come to visit the legislature. And please 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — An Act 
respecting Private Vocational Schools be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy this 
morning to be able to add something perhaps to the debate on 
this Bill. It has come to our attention, of course, as you know, 
Mr. Speaker, that there have been serious problems in this area 
over the past few years, and definitely it is right and proper that 
the government and the Minister of Education should take this 
approach to try to clear up the problems that we have in this 
area. 
 
We do believe though that when we are trying to get these 
problems corrected, that we should do it right the first time and 
make sure that we've covered all of the bases and not have to 
end up redoing it right away again. So we want to discuss with 
the government members, Mr. Speaker, through you, the 
possibility of some amendments to this Bill in order to get the 
whole thing right so that we can protect the people that in fact it 
is intended to protect. 
 
Now we noted, Mr. Speaker, that we have a government 
expenditure of some $69,000 to study the vocational schools. 
Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, after spending that much money, 
we would have thought that the legislation would have come in 
a little more complete and with a little more clarity. It seems an 
awful lot of money to put into the planning of a Bill that really 
doesn't quite hit the mark. 
 
(1045) 
 
Now changes did have to be made to this legislation. We know 
that these rules have to be tightened up for the private 
vocational schools although we have pointed out we don't think 
it has gone far enough. And I think that in all fairness, if we 
take a reasonable and rational approach to this Bill and point 
out to the government members where their shortcomings are, 
they might in fact go along with changing those things and 
make it all-encompassing in one try. 
 
The good things about the Bill that we note — and we want to  



March 10, 1995 

 
791 

give credit where credit is due — is that the minister is 
receiving now through this Bill an annual return and financial 
statements for the year. And that will be a very excellent start at 
financial accountability and put some responsibility into the 
process. 
 
We note also that student contracts approved by the department 
will be a part of the new legislation, and that is an excellent 
approach, Mr. Speaker. Definitely there has to be somebody 
that takes a look at these kind of contracts that are done 
between educational professionals and students who haven't 
had any experience probably whatsoever in the areas of law and 
in the area of contracts. And so it's important that we have in 
the process the requirement to have these contracts checked 
over to make sure that the people involved are protected, 
especially in this case younger folks as a rule. 
 
Now I realize that there are some older folks that also take 
advantage of these programs, but for the most part it's younger 
people who do need to have someone watch out for their 
interests a little more than the ordinary individual out in society. 
So we compliment the minister on including that part. 
 
No operator of the school shall engage in the false advertising. 
Now I guess we've seen some examples of such advertising 
over the past year in the case of the Reliance students and 
others which were brought to the attention of the general public 
in the past year. So having had that experience, the government 
rightfully is acting on this area. 
 
Now the Bill doesn't go far enough though, Mr. Speaker. It just 
hasn't quite caught all of the areas of concern that we think it 
should. So first and foremost, students who are caught in the 
middle of a school term need to be able to finish their courses 
with as little disturbance as possible. Now Bill No. 10 mentions 
this important consideration, yet there's not much in the 
legislation to address the real issue. 
 
So we're asking very simply, Mr. Speaker, that the minister take 
a hard look at this area, review it, talk it over with some of the 
people who are involved in these kind of problems and see if 
they can't be a little more complete and a little more precise in 
making sure that this area of concern is addressed. 
 
The training completion fund needs a little more examination. 
Now it seems that it's up to the school to develop a training 
completion plan to ensure a minimal disruption for the students 
now should their school close. Now does this mean reciprocal 
agreements will have to be signed between the private 
vocational schools? 
 
And the legislation here, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, is not 
clear. We don't know exactly whether we have to have the 
schools themselves now go to the other schools and make 
contracts among themselves so that in case something does 
happen that their students will then be taken care of. We want 
that clarified, because the approach of saying that we need to 
protect the students so that they will get their course completed 
in case the school goes broke half-way through that mandate  

. . . now we want to ensure that they can finish their course but 
how will they in fact finish that course if there isn't an 
agreement or some other school available? 
 
So what we want is quite simply to have the minister check this 
area out. Perhaps a little amendment here would clarify that; 
simply, if that's what she means, say so, say it clearly in the 
legislation: we expect you to negotiate with other schools and 
provide the Department of Education with a copy of your 
contract with others schools that are involved in this area that 
shows that they will take over your students and complete their 
courses if you yourself are unable to do that. 
 
Now I hope that we have been clear in exactly what we mean 
here so that the minister can deal with this very important area. 
It's simply a matter of clarification, because quite factually, I 
think the minister is trying to do the right thing in this 
legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, we do want that part cleared up 
along with a few other things. 
 
Further, in her second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
stresses how much more protection students are going to 
receive under this legislation. Yet in the case of school closures, 
who gets paid first? This is a very important area, and I note 
that there are quite a few lawyers in the government side and 
they will know that when you go into bankruptcy, there can be 
some very serious problems of who gets the money that is 
available. And so when you set up a small bond that is available 
to draw from and a particular company or organization goes 
broke and declares bankruptcy, the secured creditors obviously 
get the money first. In our society that's what happens. 
 
It's unfortunate though that when you have people working with 
other people's money and you have people who might go broke 
and there are people who need to get those monies back in 
order to continue with their lives, it's unfortunate but true, the 
banks are the people who are most usually the trained 
professionals in this area. So very naturally they're the ones who 
have protected themselves with all of the legal documentation 
and all of the dotting of the i's and crossing of t's to make 
legally their point that they would be the first in line, secured 
creditors. 
 
And that always happens. And we can point to the private 
sector — and I guess I happen to have just a little bit of 
experience in this area that some other folks might not have, in 
that I worked with counselling in assistance for farmers for 
some years. And we did see some farmers going into 
bankruptcies and we did have some experience as to who stood 
in line to take the little bit of cash that might be left at the end 
of the day, after assets were liquidated. 
 
The reality of course was that the big banks always seemed to 
be protected the best. And we've got to give them credit for 
doing their homework and doing their job right. But it does 
mean in this kind of a situation, if you take a comparison, that 
the people who can least afford to take the losses are the people 
who are the least secured in the process, and that of course in 
this situation would be the students. And the students of those  



March 10, 1995 

 
792 

schools who might want to make a claim to get their money 
back — and we have some examples of that having happened in 
the past — they're the ones that end up holding the bag, so to 
speak. They don't get any money. They're the last in line. And 
they may even if they did qualify probably get 5 cents or 10 
cents on the dollar. It's just simply not enough protection for 
young people who need training in our society. 
 
The government members talked earlier today, Mr. Speaker, 
about the need to discuss jobs and job creation. Well that's what 
this kind of training is really all about. It's really all about 
training people to get jobs in our society, to be able to be self-
sustaining in Saskatchewan, to be able to get off the welfare 
systems, the unemployment systems, and to actually get 
employment. 
 
So if a school goes broke in the middle of a term, we want the 
government to write this legislation so that those people are 
definitely listed as secured creditors if there's a need to get that 
money out of that bond fund in order to apply it to a new school 
where they would, in fact, have to go to finish that course, if the 
school that they're presently in happens to shut down and not 
complete that course. 
 
So we're saying we think that the government has the right idea 
here, we believe that their intent is right, but it hasn't been 
written into the legislation clearly enough to clearly identify that 
the students will be protected in this area. 
 
I believe legislation can do this. I have no reason to suspect that 
bankers, for example, who might be the first secured creditors, 
could manipulate the legislation or the direction of the law in 
order to make themselves a preferential treatment if it is written 
into the legislation. 
 
So that's what we're asking the minister to do, is to clarify her 
position, to restudy this for a few minutes, and see if we can't in 
fact come up with a plan that will protect the students, who are 
the most vulnerable in this process. 
 
Now the small bond that we've talked about in this legislation 
cannot possibly come close to repaying the funds to all of the 
people involved. In reality, if you study this thing a little bit and 
take a close look at it, we've got a very small amount of money 
that's going to go into this fund. 
 
I'm suggesting here, Minister, that maybe the idea would be to 
increase the size of your bond. Or maybe you want to put your 
government a little at risk here and stick your neck out for the 
students of this province, and say that you will back some of 
this bond with a government matching bond or something like 
that. We want you to revisit this issue and this question. 
 
I'm not sure which is the fairest way to do it or the rightest way 
to do it. We don't certainly want to have to impose a bond on 
schools that would in effect break them from the outset so that 
they couldn't do business, so that they couldn't start up. So that 
would be self-defeating. But we do think that we have to have a 
little bigger fund available to protect the students themselves. 

So let's revisit this issue. Let's discuss and think it over and see 
if we can't come up with some way that we can put more dollars 
available for the students in the event that there is a wreck in 
this process again in the future, as we have seen in the past. 
 
It is unfortunate that the minister didn't seek the input of 
students like Ross Joorisity and Petria Racette. Now I guess 
these are the two students, Mr. Speaker, from the Reliance 
Business College, who have yet to have their situation resolved 
from the past experience that we have taken a look at. 
 
So we want to know, I guess, from the minister, why she hasn't 
sat down with these kind of students, why hasn't she taken the 
time to discuss with them what their individual problem was, 
what it was like, and get their input into what needs to be done 
in order to protect the students themselves. 
 
Now we understand that these students have offered many good 
ideas that would protect private vocational school students, and 
of course the institutions themselves need protection perhaps. 
And they've had some really good ideas, apparently. 
 
And so we're suggesting to the minister that you should take a 
few minutes, maybe an hour or two, and sit down with these 
folks and draw from their past experience to see if we can't 
come up with a little better approach to solving the problems 
that exist here. 
 
Now unfortunately many of the students' ideas were not 
included in this legislation, from what we can understand of the 
points that they've made with us and having read the legislation 
through. 
 
So I hope that the minister is willing to sit down very soon to 
talk with these people. I'm suggesting that perhaps later this day 
or tomorrow you could get together with them, talk it over, then 
revisit the question, look at bringing in some amendments to 
your legislation in order to make sure that it covers all of the 
bases, make sure that it does the job right this time around so 
that we don't have to redo this again next year. 
 
Always it seems that when we have legislation to protect people 
from a problem that has occurred, it gets . . . in our system, 
things happen that we get the legislation done up and then 
there's not another situation like that perhaps for a year or two 
or three down the road. And then all of a sudden, bang, we have 
another example of a wreck out there in the system and we find 
that the legislation should have been done better in order to 
cover that kind of a situation. 
 
So what we're simply saying, as I hope a responsible 
opposition, is that we think you're doing the right thing here, we 
think you're going the right direction, but we want you to finish 
the job. And we don't want to have to go three or four years 
down the road, find another school going into a bankruptcy 
situation, and then find another group of students are into 
another big mess as a result of the fact that we didn't do our job 
right here, at this particular time. 
 



March 10, 1995 

 
793 

So let's do our job right; let's take another look at this 
legislation, improve it a little bit, talk to the key players that 
have been involved, and get it right. 
 
And so knowing that we need a little more time to study this, 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to ask that the government members go 
along with us and we'll move adjournment on this debate while 
they carry on. I'm moving adjournment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

MLA Resigns 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I wish to inform the Assembly 
that a few moments ago I received a letter which I believe I 
should read to the Assembly immediately: 
 
 Dear Mr. Speaker: I write to inform you of my decision 

to resign as the member of the Legislative Assembly for 
Quill Lakes, effective immediately. Yours sincerely, 
Murray J. Koskie. 

 
(1100) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

Item 1 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed, perhaps we might call on 
the minister to reintroduce the officials who have joined us here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The officials who 
are with us in the House today consist of Lorraine Hill, 
associate deputy minister, Department of Health; Andrea 
Smandych, acting manager of financial services; Maureen 
Yeske, executive director of health planning and policy 
development; Steve Petz, associate deputy minister; Glenda 
Yeates, associate deputy minister; and seated in the back of the 
Chamber, Jahzi Van Iderstine, who is an assistant to the deputy 
minister; and Lois Borden, who is executive director of district 
support. 
 
Mr. Chair, in our last discussion of the estimate process I made 
a commitment to members opposite to provide for them a 
detailed accounting of the expenditures of the District Health 
Board Elections Commission. You will recall, if I'm not 
mistaken, Mr. Chair, that initially it was suggested or has been 
suggested by members of the opposition and others that this 
was going to cost a half a million dollars, $500,000. Those kind 
of figures have been bandied about in this House by members 
of the opposition, suggesting it would cost a half a million 
dollars or $500,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will pass a printed copy to members opposite, of  

this information, but here is the actual expenditure for the 
District Health Board Elections Commission. Remuneration to 
the commissioner, Mr. Garf Stevenson, was $33,000; clerical 
services, $6,240; office rental, $4,770; office equipment and 
supplies, $8,991; advertising and printing costs, and that 
consisted of advertising in every weekly and daily newspaper 
across Saskatchewan to announce the commission’s work and 
then the printing of the final report, the advertising costs were 
$11,340; travel paid to the commission was $2,007; and 
miscellaneous meeting expenses, $174. The total, Mr. Chair, for 
the expense of the District Health Board Elections Commission, 
the Stevenson commission, was $66,522. And I believe we have 
copies of that. If I could get a page . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They've gone over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They've gone over? Great. Than you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you for 
taking the time to dig this information out and sending it over to 
us. We appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess we could sit here and argue, well that isn't 
a significant amount of money in view of the expenditures in 
the Department of Health and certainly in the overall 
expenditures of government. 
 
But I think at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, and that was the 
point I was trying to bring out . . . or bringing out the other day, 
the fact is that a decision had been made about the ward system 
regarding district health boards and about setting up that 
process. 
 
And if I understand you correctly, the other day you indicated 
that the actual working . . . drawing up of wards within the 
district health boards is being undertaken by individuals who 
have been appointed to do this process from different groups. I 
believe seniors and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) has representation in most of the 
health districts in drawing up the ward maps. 
 
I guess at the end . . . What I can say and what I would just like 
to bring to your attention, Mr. Minister, is, was this really 
necessary? I believe your government — and I realize you were 
not the minister of Health at that time — but the minister of 
Health when this decision was made had basically come to the 
conclusion that the ward process was the form of electionary 
process that you wanted established and have in place. 
 
And I can only say, why did you not just proceed with that? 
Why didn't you just allow the process to take place as we see it 
evolving right now, rather than spending even $66,000 on a 
commission that basically came back with an argument 
indicating these are the reasons that we must have the ward 
system? I wonder if you could just answer that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Why did you spend this amount of money to come up with a  



March 10, 1995 

 
794 

decision that you knew was already in place, rather than just 
going to the health districts and saying, we're establishing a 
ward system; would you just appoint . . . put a number of 
people in place to draw up wards or zones within your district 
to accommodate the election of the eight district health board 
members. 
 
And certainly we would like all . . . As we've brought to your 
attention before, we would like to have all 12 elected. But even 
the fact that eight are being elected, I believe that process could 
have been accommodated quite simply, quite effectively, and 
certainly been in place for last fall and running the election of 
health board district members in conjunction with municipal 
government elections. And, Mr. Minister, why was that process 
not followed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, let me try and address the 
member's concerns or questions about the functioning of the 
district electoral commission headed up by Mr. Stevenson. 
 
As the member I'm sure will recognize, Mr. Garf Stevenson is a 
highly regarded individual in our province, having served in 
many capacities and continues to serve in many capacities 
across our province, highly regarded by a wide cross-section of 
Saskatchewan people. And indeed by having Mr. Garf 
Stevenson at work in this regard gave instant credibility to the 
work that was being done. The member is correct that decision 
had been taken that the districts should be divided into wards 
for the electoral purpose — a decision that I think was 
appropriately taken and I would want to defend on any platform 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We took that decision, I think, as the member knows, to ensure 
that within any given district all communities could feel 
appropriately and adequately represented at the board level. 
However, that said, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the member 
would also recognize that what we are doing here is launching 
into an entirely new electoral process across the province of 
Saskatchewan. Indeed this is pioneering in Saskatchewan; it's 
pioneering in Canada. 
 
As we've said many times, we are beginning a new electoral 
process. And whenever a new electoral process is being 
undertaken, there are a whole variety of issues that need to be 
explored and dealt with. The ward piece which had been 
decided is only one of many, many issues that need to be dealt 
with and decided. 
 
Now we could have taken the option, I think, as the member 
would recommend — we could have taken the option simply 
within government as the Department of Health or as the 
government caucus, we could have taken decisions and then 
simply imposed those decisions on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We could have made that arrangement in Regina and then we 
could have said to the rest of the province, this is the way it's 
going to be. We chose to use quite a different route — the route 
of consultation and conversation with communities, with 
groups that have particular interest, with representative bodies  

across our province. And so to do that work independent of 
government, if I may say, independent of government, we 
established the commission that was headed by Mr. Stevenson. 
 
Mr. Stevenson then went, as was our desire, and consulted and 
talked with people across our province. He talked with all of the 
major groups, the representative groups in our province — 
SUMA, SARM, SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations). He met and spoke with the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association. 
 
Beyond that he held public meetings in many communities, 
invited general interest in the electoral process, invited people 
with special interest. And then through that process, that rather 
lengthy process of community consultation, then presented to 
government a significant set of recommendations. 
 
I have here, Mr. Chair, a copy of the Stevenson report, or the 
report of the Saskatchewan Commission on District Health 
Board Elections. I know the member has a copy and he will 
know from having read the copy — I'm sure he did — that the 
recommendations and the work that Mr. Stevenson did goes far, 
far, far beyond the simple question of whether we'll have wards 
or not. He's right; we'd made that decision. 
 
But he, for instance, Mr. Chair, has provided for government 
and for the public, recommendations on the timing of the 
election, various options for conducting the voting. He made 
recommendation about the need to appoint a provincial 
administrator for the health board elections, which has been 
done. 
 
He talked in his report about the time lines leading up to the 
election, and all of the various things that needed to be 
accomplished before the first elections could happen. He talks 
then about the timing of those who will be appointed to the 
boards following the elections. 
 
He makes recommendations, Mr. Chair, regarding the 
qualifications of a board member. These are important 
discussions and important recommendations. He talks in his 
report about the responsibilities of a board member. He talks 
about how the process of nomination for district health board 
candidates should occur. 
 
He discusses, which is a significant issue, limitations around 
election spending in the health board election process. He talks 
about, and again an important subject, the conflict of interest 
guidelines that should be in place for health board and health 
board members. He addresses the questions of a code of ethics 
for district health board members. 
 
Then he talks very specifically about ward boundaries and 
suggests process for the establishment of the ward boundaries. 
And if the member, Mr. Chair, if the member's been reading any 
of the local papers in our province these days, he will see in 
many of them the district boards are now doing their public 
discussions about the ward boundaries. 
 



March 10, 1995 

 
795 

I happened to be in Weyburn yesterday, and the journalist there 
tells me that their papers now will be publishing some tentative 
district health board ward boundaries for their communities to 
look at. 
 
He talked about, in his report, equitable representation. He 
talked about voter qualifications. He talked about the question 
of by-elections. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, my point is this. The member suggests that we 
should not have needed to do this work because we had already 
made the decision about wards. It's true. We'd made the 
decision about wards. But all of these other very significant and 
very important issues in this pioneering process, we felt it was 
important that the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity 
to have their input, voice their concerns. We had a gentleman 
with a high degree of credibility across our province doing it. 
 
Members of your caucus, the Liberal caucus, were throwing 
around figures saying that this was going to cost a half a million 
dollars, $500,000. Perhaps not so much in your case, but 
certainly in the case of our Liberal friends here. Some of these 
figures that they throw around in the House are so wildly 
exaggerated. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is this commission did a great, great 
work for the people of Saskatchewan, and they did it far, far 
under budget for a total of $66,000. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would have been 
disappointed if there wouldn't have been a number of 
recommendations coming forward regarding the process. I think 
it would have basically said to us, that would have indeed 
proven that it really wasn't necessary to have the commission. 
 
And the fact that there are a number of recommendations . . . I 
think a lot of those recommendations that were brought forward 
by Mr. Stevenson certainly aren't new, because a lot of people 
had those in the back of their minds over the period of time. 
 
Now I'm not exactly sure how much access people had to . . . or 
how many submissions came forward to the commission, but 
maybe . . . The one thing you did mention, Mr. Minister, was 
about the timing, and I'm not exactly sure if your department 
has established a time or a period when these elections would 
take place. I believe you had indicated that the elections will 
take place and then the appointment for appointed positions 
will be done after the elections take place. 
 
(1115) 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could just indicate if there's 
a specific time that's being brought forward as to the 
appropriate time to run these elections. Or whether or not in 
following years they will basically be tied to the municipal 
elections and combining the process, versus sending . . asking 
people to elect health district board members on one week and 
then two weeks later going to the polls for municipal elections. 
I'm wondering if you could just clarify that. 

And then also I believe the other day you indicated that the 
chairman would be elected by the district health board itself. 
Now this probably, if I understand from what your comments 
today, would not be able to take place until the appointed 
positions have already been put in place. Is that true? Maybe 
you could just clarify some . . . that comment or that point as 
well, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'd be very happy to clarify on 
that point. No, the appointees to the district board, those who 
will be appointed, will be appointed following the election, 
following the electoral process. That's the way it'll work. 
 
And the point there is that our view in having and maintaining 
four appointed positions is that those appointees should 
complement those who are elected. Now when I say 
complement, I mean that those who are appointed should 
hopefully reflect even a broader scope of the community and 
the district than might be put on the board through the electoral 
process. 
 
In your comments you asked the question about the number of 
submissions that the commission actually heard. I don't have 
them totalled, but if you refer to the document, they are all 
listed there. And the list is a very significant list including, if I 
may say, some correspondence from your own caucus and your 
own leader; including a meeting with the Leader of the Third 
Party here in the House. But perhaps even more significant, a 
long, long list of community organizations, district health 
boards, health organizations, and a long list of individuals who 
communicated with the district health board commission. 
 
You ask about the timing of the health board elections. I have 
said repeatedly, and say again today, those elections will be 
held during this calendar year. No specific date has been set. 
We are looking to a fall date. And some of this is being 
predicated on the necessary preparation, which is happening 
now. We want all of the preparations to be well in place. 
 
We also desire a time of public education so that people can 
know exactly how this whole process is going to work. Because 
I think the last thing that anybody would want is a circumstance 
that we've come through the district health board elections and 
they are questioned because of questions about the process. 
 
And so we do want to have all the process well in hand and 
well in place, and then give some time for public education so 
people can understand the process. And that will very, very 
likely take us into the fall. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, when you talk about fall, and I'd 
just like a clarification on this fact, is the department looking 
seriously at, when you talk about a fall date, at tying these 
elections into the same time period as the municipal elections, 
so that we don't really have an overlap or we don't have . . . I 
think at the end of the day what you'll find, Mr. Minister, while 
the people want the opportunity to vote and are willing to get 
out and vote, they also don't really want to be asked to go to the 
polls in one week, and then two weeks later go to the polls on  



March 10, 1995 

 
796 

another issue, and then down the road a third issue. 
 
It seems to me there that we could coordinate the municipal 
elections and health district board elections and any other 
elections that may take place around the same day, formulating 
a question and a ballot on that basis; that the public in general 
would certainly find it more appropriate. Serves their needs and 
it gives them their opportunity to vote, but also would be 
viewing this as a process whereby it's not another additional 
cost. 
 
Yes, there will be some costs associated with electing district 
health boards. And I don't want you to get . . . want you to think 
or the public to think that there's no extra costs. There will be 
some costs associated. But there would be also savings in 
combining, rather than running two or three separate elections. 
 
So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just inform us of 
the process that has taken place, the discussion that's taken 
place, and where you are leaning, so that at the end of the day 
we have a simplified and effective way of electing not only 
local governments but district health boards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I appreciate the member's comments here 
and I think he reflects a concern that we all have. 
 
Let me just share with the members some of the difficulties that 
present immediately if we talk about having both electoral 
processes happening simultaneously, or on the same day. As the 
member will know, in this first election we intend to have the 
elections in every health district. My understanding of the 
municipal elections this year is that this is the staggered process 
that the municipal elections go through. However in this 
instance, we want all of our health boards to be going to 
election this year. Point number one. 
 
Point number two, as the member will know, our health district 
boundaries do not, and by legislation are not forced to, follow 
municipal boundaries. And so we have a circumstance where 
the boundaries of the jurisdictions — municipal as opposed to 
health districts — are in some cases quite different. 
 
Add to that our commitment to have the health board elections 
conducted on a ward basis. And so again, the wards are not in 
any way coterminous with — or necessarily coterminous — 
with municipal boundaries, which presents I think a significant 
issue in the discussion. 
 
Further to that, when we consider the process of municipal 
elections more generally and when we're talking about urban 
municipal or rural municipal, I know the experience we've had 
in our own community in the last number of years is that in that 
municipal process, we may be faced with several, if not 
numerous, issues to deal with. 
 
There will be the typical council elections; there may be 
election for mayor or reeve. And in these circumstances, I know 
in my own experience in our own community, on occasion the 
ballots for these have become a long and lengthy list. 

You can add to that then the concept of school board elections, 
which do occur at the same time, with the various issues that 
maybe surround the school board elections and the various list 
of candidates in that regard. And then you may have a number 
of local plebiscite issues that are there. I think we would have to 
think very seriously about then adding the very, very important 
— very, very important work of selecting our health board 
membership at that same time and in what could be a very 
complicated kind of a milieu. 
 
It is at best very debatable about the question of cost, and would 
there be any savings by combining with the municipal election. 
 
I note these figures on the financial statements. These 
statements come from the Department of Education. They 
would indicate that the school boards will have spent in 1991 in 
the electoral process, 533,685. Now that may sound a 
reasonable figure, and I think that figure has sometimes been 
suggested as what it would cost. But in fact what school boards 
do, they average their cost over the three-year cycle. And so 
they average it at 500,000 or 530 in this case, per year for three 
years. And so the actual figure is well more than a million and a 
half that it costs the school boards, and they run simultaneous 
with the municipal elections. So that's a pretty significant cost. 
 
If we take just the city of Saskatoon and the cost of combining 
the school board election with the municipal election, we find 
that it costs 350,000 for the total election, half of which came 
from the school board. So in one community alone it was 
$170,000. 
 
Here in the city of Regina, their total election expense is 
$482,000, half of that, $233,000 attributed to the school board. 
And so the school board elections combined with the municipal 
elections in Regina and Saskatoon alone came to over 
$400,000. 
 
And provincially, the audited statements from the Department 
of Education tell us that it would cost about 1.5 or more. And 
so it is at best debatable whether there is any real cost saving to 
running municipal and health board elections simultaneously. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess as 
I've indicated on a number of occasions, I think the process of 
consultation on an area-wide basis is certainly important. And 
whether or not I totally agree with how you've drawn up or your 
government has drawn up or worked towards district health 
boards, I still can see a problem that we'll be facing down the 
road. 
 
And I think that it will certainly be hitting us . . . whether it's 
before the year 2000, I don't know. But one of the problems I 
saw a number of years ago was the fact that: we had municipal 
government; we had rural government; we had a hospital 
district, and we had a school district, and we've got a home care 
district. We've got so many divisions or boundaries drawn up, 
that when you start looking at a map, you can't find the towns 
because there's so many lines crossing over. 



March 10, 1995 

 
797 

And unfortunately, I think the same thing is taking place here. 
I'm not sure that we've really defined what would be good, solid 
trading areas, and I think when I raise that I think at the end of 
the day we're possibly going to have to come to a point in 
asking local governments as well to become involved and 
school boards in addressing trading areas where education and 
rural government and health are basically built into an area and 
are working together and working coterminously I guess as 
well. 
 
So that is . . . while the larger health districts do offer some 
benefits, I'm not exactly sure we still have achieved what could 
be in the long run, what will be needed in the long run, to 
provide more efficient, effective, and appropriate care as well 
as . . . whether it's in health, whether it's education, or just in 
local government. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a couple of questions that were raised in 
the past and I'd like to bring to your attention again this 
morning to get your input on, because there . . . who are people 
who have asked questions about these questions to our 
attention. And the one is regarding private care homes. And I'm 
going to get back to that in view of the fact that the Minister of 
Economic Development stood up in this House during question 
period and asked where our questions were regarding job 
creation in this province. 
 
And I've raised the question with you, I've brought this to your 
attention; the fact that if we would get on and come up with a 
policy regarding licensing of private care homes, that certainly 
opens up the door for job creation in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it's not only the job creation aspect, Mr. Minister. As well, 
it would be meeting a need in rural Saskatchewan, and not just 
rural Saskatchewan; I would think even in . . . I think we had 
this in our discussion of the other day, you had mentioned that 
some of our larger communities have had presentations 
regarding private care homes. 
 
Unfortunately, the legislation today just licenses a facility based 
on 10 individuals, and what we're talking of here is people who 
would like to build private care homes that would maybe have 
up to 30 members in those private care homes. 
 
And I'm wondering today, Mr. Minister, if you've had any 
further discussion or we've moved along further, if you've come 
to a point within the department that you're getting closer to a 
decision on this, to address the needs that are already being 
presented by organizations and communities like Avonlea. And, 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could respond and let us know 
where we sit today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thanks Mr. Chair. I'll try and go from 
where the member ended and then reverse in the areas that he 
raised in his comments. He gives me quite a wide swath every 
time he asks a question. 
 
Let me refer to the discussions that we've had here earlier about 
the policy regarding personal care homes and private  

investment in providing supportive and long-term care in our 
province; and I have assured the member on a number of 
occasions that the decision would be made public very soon. I 
will explain now to the member the process and where I see this 
process happening, again I repeat, very soon. 
 
Mr. Chair, in the context of our government — I'm not sure 
how it worked when the members opposite were in government 
— but this is a very significant and important issue. Therefore, 
while I suppose it is entirely in the purview of the Minister of 
Health to announce policy decision, I want to share this policy 
decision with my cabinet colleagues and with my caucus 
colleagues. I had hoped to see that happen this week. Our 
regular opportunity to meet in a lengthy cabinet meeting is 
Tuesday morning and many of our members of cabinet were 
attending to Bishop Mahoney's funeral this past Tuesday, as you 
know, and because of that constraint I anticipate having this 
then before my colleagues very soon. And beyond that, there 
will be public announcement. And if I dare to predict, I'm 
confident that all members of the House will feel good about 
the policy that will be announced. 
 
So if I can ask the member's indulgence, the policy will be 
announced very soon, very soon. 
 
I want to just say just a word though about the member's 
observation about the provision of jobs. And I understand the 
point; it is a significant point and without doubt health care 
provision in our province is a large employer, if not one of the 
largest in the province, if not the largest in the province. 
 
(1130) 
 
But I think we always have to be a little cautious and a little 
careful about justifying how we provide health care on the basis 
of whether or not it provides jobs. I think our goal in health 
must be to provide high, high quality care and not to consider 
health to be economic development. I just want to make that 
point. 
 
Now earlier in your comments, the member talks about the 
formation of the districts and the various boundaries which do 
exist in our province, and here he strikes I think what is a very 
important point and indeed what gave motivation, in some 
ways, to the formation of health districts. 
 
Now he will know — he was in government at the time — that 
his government spent several millions of dollars on the Murray 
Commission, which commission travelled the province, did a 
very, very thorough review of health care delivery across our 
province at some great expense. 
 
His government chose not to act on the recommendations of the 
Murray, but one of the key recommendations of the Murray 
report, as he well knows, was a recommendation to move to 
more regional delivery of health care services. 
 
Now the Murray Commission recommended I think about 15 
regions across the province. As we assessed the Murray  



March 10, 1995 

 
798 

Commission and did our own conversations with the people of 
our province, it seemed to us that 15 regions created regions 
which were simply too large and we've opted to a smaller 
district size and so we have about 30 across the province. 
 
The Murray Commission, from their conversations with 
Saskatchewan people, in our conversations with Saskatchewan 
people, make the very point that you make, that when we had 
the small hospital board here and the small ambulance board 
here and the small home district here, that the lines were very 
convoluted. And what was being prevented, it's what we all 
desire, and that is the integration of services and the most 
effective and efficient delivery of services to the people of our 
province that we can manage. 
 
Everyone had concluded for many years that the right way to 
move in this regard was to do this in a more regional district 
concept. Now we had the courage to do it, and it wasn't easy. 
 
Now some other governments in Canada are doing exactly the 
same thing, but using quite a different style. For instance, if you 
take the Liberal government from the Maritimes, what they did 
was simply, in their capital city, decide how many districts there 
were going to be and then just drew the map, dissolved all of 
the health boards in the province, the hospitals, the home cares, 
the ambulance boards, and just inflicted these district 
boundaries on their province. 
 
We chose to use, as we are using now in the ward divisions . . . 
but when we designed the district boards, we chose to use the 
process of letting communities decide. 
 
Now I recall some journalist and others coming from central 
Canada to our province and reviewing this process as it was 
going on and with communities trying to decide for themselves 
which district formation they would like to be a part of. I 
remember some of those journalists and some of these . . . the 
brain trust from central Canada coming to our province and 
saying, it will never work; you'll never do it; at the end of the 
day the province of Saskatchewan, the government, or the 
Department of Health, or somebody is going to have to just put 
their foot down and say these are where the district boundaries 
are. 
 
Well I maintain those folks who were here observing that and 
saying those kinds of things were wrong because they didn't 
understand our province. Because we've got a long history in 
Saskatchewan, a long history of communities being able to 
work together. Now it wasn't simple. It wasn't simple, and there 
were some struggles — there's no doubt about that — in the 
initial formation of the district boundaries. 
 
But it is my conviction today, as it was then, that having 
allowed this process to work on a community basis was the 
better route, better that some of us sitting in the Department of 
Health in Regina on Albert Street, deciding where those district 
boundaries could be. Because they will, having been formed at 
the community level, will much more reflect trading patterns 
and all of those things which cannot be shown always in  

statistical population information and the kind of things that we 
have to look at. 
 
I've used this analogy, Mr. Chair, about the district boards and 
how they were formed, how these boundaries were formed. 
When I was a student over here at the University of Regina, the 
campus wasn't all that old in those days — I hate to admit it, but 
it wasn't all that old — and there were a limited number of 
buildings on the campus. And I think they'd hired some kind of 
a special . . . I don't know what you would call them -- they do 
sidewalks; they plan landscaping and so on. And they'd 
landscaped the place and they'd put these sidewalks all over the 
place. And then we students arrived on the place, and of course 
we came out of one door of the building and went directly 
across to the next door, right across the lawn, not where the 
sidewalk was. Well now when I go over to the University of 
Regina, I see they've moved the sidewalks to where the students 
walk. 
 
I think in terms of the district board formation, that's precisely 
what happened. We formed our district boards where people 
tend to walk and where they live, and they had a better sense. 
And that's exactly what's happening now in these weeks and 
months as we form the wards. 
 
Again, we're going to communities. We're not imposing, nor are 
the district boards imposing the ward boundaries. They're going 
to their communities. They're saying, where do you believe the 
appropriate division should be within our district. Where should 
the lines be drawn? And now I see as I review the newspapers 
in the province these days, I see public ads being taken out with 
proposed ward boundaries inviting public comment. 
 
This is the way we've done it in Saskatchewan, and I think in 
the long run this will give us much more lasting health districts. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for reviewing that 
process again. I'm not exactly sure that it totally addressed all 
the issues and the questions and the long-term aspects of health 
care, but you and I can have our differences of opinion, and 
that's fine. 
 
I guess, as I indicated the last time, we discussed the issue of 
when we will finally hear about private care homes. The 
concern I have is the fact that soon is the word that's used, and 
soon can mean quite a difference of opinion. It could mean two 
days. It could mean two weeks. It could mean two months. It 
could mean never. So that's the concern I have there, and I trust 
that indeed that there is a time period that you're looking for 
some information regarding private care homes. 
 
Another issue I'd like to address, rather than spending all our 
time in certain areas . . . there's certainly so many areas that we 
need to look at in regards to health. I also raised the question 
regarding eye services and eye surgery in Saskatoon a while 
back, for Mr. Korizone had brought to our attention. 
 
And at that time it was indicated to us that we do have indeed 
specialists who operate and — I believe it's out of City Hospital  



March 10, 1995 

 
799 

— who provide eye surgery and that we have a waiting-list of 
some 18 months. And Mr. Korizone, because of the problems 
that were developing that were actually progressing much more 
rapidly than had been anticipated, the specialists had moved 
him up on the waiting-list, and then he was informed that 
actually the service had been shut down because of lack of 
funding. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could update us on that process and 
whether or not there were emergency funds that could have 
been drawn on to maintain or continue the eye operational 
services that are available through City -- and you can correct 
me on this, Mr. Minister, but I believe it's through City Hospital 
 to continue that service and make it available rather than 
shutting that service down for a month. And what that does is 
just lengthens the waiting time for people who are looking for 
and need the laser services to enhance their vision and certainly 
enhance their quality of life. So, Mr. Minister, could you bring 
us up to date on that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we're trying to assemble the 
most up-to-date and accurate information so that I can speak to 
the member's question. We may work a little more at that yet, 
but let me begin by sharing some information with him. 
 
When we talk about cataract surgeries generally province-wide, 
the member should know that in 1988-89 the volume of cataract 
surgeries conducted in that year were 3,082 — 3,082 in 1988-
89. In the last full year, 1993-94, we conducted 6,774. And so 
there has been literally a 120 per cent increase in the number of 
cataract surgeries being performed in our province over the past 
five years. 
 
And if you take that number, the number of 6,774 cataract 
surgeries, and apply to it to our population in Saskatchewan, 
you would see that Saskatchewan ranks very near the top of 
cataract surgeries being offered to its population anywhere in 
Canada. 
 
Now we have the issue of the waiting-list for cataract surgery. 
Let me put that in some context, Mr. Chair. In 1994, the Fraser 
Institute of British Columbia did a survey across Canada of 
waiting-lists and waiting times, and they looked at all the 
various surgical procedures and specialty treatments. 
 
In this context, if we take all of the waiting-lists, all of the 
surgical procedures, Mr. Chair, the Fraser Institute's work 
shows that in Saskatchewan we enjoy the second — I repeat — 
the second best record in all of Canada. The only province in 
Canada where the waiting times from when you first see the 
doctor to when you receive the specialty treatment, the only 
province better than Saskatchewan is the province of Quebec. 
And Quebec only marginally better than Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that said, and I think we can all feel . . . we can feel good 
about that in our province, that the service is . . . while we 
might all desire that all of the procedures might be more readily 
available, I think we can feel good that in Saskatchewan we've 
come a long ways in making our specialty services and  

surgeries more available to our people than in anywhere other 
than Quebec. 
 
However, Mr. Chair, with that said, it is recognized that there 
are still waiting-lists around, particularly cataract surgeries. In 
fact in the Fraser study work, as I've reviewed it, it is the one 
area that is highlighted in our province as being of some 
significance. 
 
Now I want to share with the member some . . . just statistical 
information to illustrate that when it comes to cataract 
surgeries, the waiting times will vary considerably dependent on 
your ophthalmologist and will depend upon where you seek to 
have the surgery done, be it either in Saskatoon or Regina. 
 
Generally said, the waiting period in the city of Regina is a 
shorter waiting period. The waiting period in the city of 
Saskatoon is high in the case of two individual 
ophthalmologists. But other ophthalmologists practising in the 
city of Saskatoon have elective lists and waiting-lists that are 
much, much shorter. 
 
And so the issue here is really the allocation between all of the 
ophthalmologists in our province. And we want to be fair to all 
the ophthalmologists so they can have a sense of fairness in 
terms of their access to the surgical procedures, but the issue 
tends to be an issue particularly focused in Saskatoon and 
particularly focused on two ophthalmologists 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while you 
produce statistics that show the increase in the amount of 
surgeries that have taken place from '88-89 to I believe it was 
'93-94 statistics you gave me, I think the statistics can show a 
couple of things. While it shows that we certainly have the 
ability to do more procedures, it also shows that we do have an 
ageing population and a population that tends to run into more 
problems with the need to have cataract surgery. And I think, at 
the end of the day, it's appropriate that we are indeed trying to 
provide the service. 
 
Now you mention that the service is available in Regina as well 
as in Saskatoon. You also indicated that there is a difference 
between ophthalmologists as to the waiting-list. The other 
question I had raised was the fact that the individual who had 
raised the concern with us was informed that indeed the 
procedure was not available through the month of March until 
the new budget year. And I don't believe you addressed that. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, you could inform us as to whether or not 
the laser surgery continues to be offered, is available. And I'd 
like to know — I'm not just addressing it to Saskatoon as to 
where the question comes from — I'd like to know in 
conjunction with which hospital it's serviced from in the 
province, and whether or not that procedure continues to be 
offered and surgery continues to be performed on a daily basis 
in this province regarding cataract surgery. 
 
(1145) 
 



March 10, 1995 

 
800 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member now asks I think 
very specifically about the laser procedure. Let me say this, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that we're going to be back into estimates again 
— I assume we will be — before this session ends. And next 
time round we'll bring the very, very . . . we'll review the 
Hansard and check the member's question very carefully and 
get very specific information. 
 
Because . . . well let me say this. As we know, when we're 
talking about waiting- lists, these lists can sometimes be 
deceptive. For instance, on the waiting-list there may be a 
certain number of people, some of whom will opt voluntarily, 
for personal reasons or other commitments, to postpone that 
cataract surgery or change their time. 
 
And to illustrate, during the month of July 1994, there were in 
Saskatoon, 66 cases on a waiting-list for cataract surgery. Of 
those 66, 34 of them voluntarily chose to reschedule. 
 
So I think we just need to understand that waiting-lists are not 
. . . like there are issues around them. 
 
Let me just say again to the member that if we take the 10-year 
period . . . I've got some 10-year period numbers here, from 
1983 to 1993, in the city of Saskatoon. The number of 
procedures, cataract procedures, went from 881 in 1983 to 
3,786 in 1993. And that's a 330 per cent increase in the number 
of surgeries. And so we are providing the cataract procedure in 
large numbers, 120 per cent more now than we did just five 
years ago. And in Saskatoon alone, 330 per cent more than we 
did 10 years ago. 
 
Is there yet room to move? Yes, we believe there is. And we've 
worked with . . . as the Department of Health we've been 
working with particularly the Regina and Saskatoon boards in 
trying to streamline the waiting procedure in processes that can 
make fair allocation to all ophthalmologists, with the resources 
we have available, to try and meet the need as best as we can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, you raise an interesting point 
or a question, I guess. And you kept coming back to the 
question I raised a minute ago. I didn't still receive an answer as 
to . . . You indicated earlier on that both Saskatoon and Regina 
have eye surgery service available. I get, from the last response 
you made, that there's two forms of eye surgery: laser surgery 
and possibly another form. And I'd like a bit of a clarification 
on that. 
 
I'd like to know how many ophthalmologists are operating in 
the province, how many would operate in the city of Regina, 
what facilities they would operate out of, as well as in the city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
And I guess the other concern I would have, or question I 
would have, is when we're talking, if there's a difference 
between laser surgery and other surgery, I would almost think 
that laser surgery must be the highest form of surgery or 
institute most of the surgeries. And if not, I'd like a clarification 
on that. And maybe if you'd indicate to us what the difference is  

between the laser surgery and other methods of surgery. 
 
We're getting into a fairly large area and there's no doubt about 
that. I can appreciate that. But maybe for my own information, 
and certainly as constituents call us, then we can inform them of 
other procedures and other avenues that they may follow 
through in progressing with or speeding up or receiving the 
treatment that they are looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am technically unable, I 
think, to address fully the member's question. I do not even 
pretend to have the kind of expertise, I think, that could 
describe in any detail the various procedures that will be used 
by ophthalmologists in cataract procedures. 
 
Now we can try and get some information for the member in 
that regard. I can very specifically report that today in 
Saskatchewan there are 17 ophthalmologists practising in our 
province. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 
The Chair: — The Municipal Government has been before the 
committee previously, but I'll ask the minister to reintroduce her 
officials to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right I 
have Ken Alecxe, associate deputy minister of Municipal 
Government; behind me I have Larry Chaykowski, director of 
finance and administration; to my left I have Craig Marchinko, 
director of operations and programs in Sask Housing; and at the 
back we have John Edwards, Paul Raths, Ron Holgerson, and 
Ken Engel from the department. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, a 
question that just arose this morning, and it may or may not 
apply to your department, but I'd like to bring it to your 
attention. Maybe it's something that can be addressed and can 
be looked into. And that's just one of a number of questions that 
certainly I'd like to raise with you this morning. 
 
But this one comes from a constituent and it's regarding a 
spring in the Qu'Appelle Valley, and there's a discrepancy as to 
who's responsible to maintain access to that spring. And I know 
some of your officials will know of where I'm talking of. It's 
just north of Whitewood as you go down into the Qu'Appelle 
Valley on the south side. And access to that spring . . . a lot of 
people actually draw water, draw their drinking water from that 
spring. And the question that just came this morning: who's 
responsible to maintain access down to the spring? It's 
something that I've discussed with Highways, and I will 
certainly probably bring it to the attention of the Minister of 
Highways as well. 
 
But the constituent who raised the question was told, well it's  



March 10, 1995 

 
801 

Highways; Highways said no, it's not us, it's Parks; Parks said 
no, it's not us, it's Municipal Government. And I'm wondering if 
your department has any information . . . has been receiving any 
inquiries about access. 
 
And what I'm talking about is the fact that this spring is 
available, and as I say, a lot of people in the surrounding area . . 
. in fact you'd be surprised as to where people drive from to get 
water from this spring. And in the wintertime the problem they 
have with this highway; it's just running by right now, and they 
build a bank up on the access and you can't get down to the 
spring to draw your water. And even then, if you do, we have 
icy conditions and they're unable to get up top. 
 
I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you can inform us as to 
maybe the appropriate source we should be going to to provide 
access. I don't believe it's a major, or a costly thing just to . . . 
even maybe to talk to your colleague and have the Department 
of Highways just whip in there with the truck, clean it out, drop 
some gravel, and certainly drop some gravel in the spring. 
 
I wonder if you could just bring us up to date as to where we 
should be maybe going regarding this concern. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you for that question. We haven't 
heard of the problem before. Usually access is a responsibility 
of municipal government, usually the RMs who perform all the 
road work, the infrastructure out in rural municipalities. What I 
would like you to do if you would, would provide us with more 
detail about this and I'll ask our officials to find where this is in 
the . . . in which municipality it is and we'll get back to you with 
an answer. 
 
But from hearing what I heard through your question, I would 
say that the road network is a responsibility, as you know, of the 
rural municipality. If the spring is off a grid road, and then the 
question is who should provide access to that spring if it's off 
the grid road, I don't know that we can give you an answer right 
now but we'll look into it and I'll provide you with an answer in 
due course. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just for your 
information, it's in the RM of Willowdale. And actually the 
access is right off Highway No. 9. It's down towards the bottom 
of the valley on the south side of the river. And I know there are 
some officials have knowledge of the area I'm talking about. 
 
But as I indicated, the concern that was raised with me this 
morning by the individual . . . and this is not just one, we've had 
a number of issues raised last year with regards to gravelling 
and what have you and maintenance of the site. And I guess 
what has cropped up this winter is the fact that as Highways 
goes cruising by to clear off Highway No. 9, a few years back 
they used to just whip down, make a quick run into the spring 
and around and back up and people could get down, could get 
access to it, but now it isn't there. 
 
(1200) 
 

And maybe your department could as well look into it and come 
up with a suggestion, maybe even I guess help me if you will to 
maybe bring it up and suggest to even the Department of 
Highways that for the time it takes, it's something that I think 
we could quickly address. 
 
I think that on the other side it comes to the municipal 
government level where RMs have said, well because that 
happens to be in the RM of Willowdale, maybe you should send 
your patrol down and yet for them it would be . . . you'd be 
probably looking at 15, 20 minutes, even half an hour to an 
hour, just for the patrol to run down, down the highway just to 
this access. And I'm not exactly sure whether that's really their 
responsibility or Highways or Municipal Government. 
 
So like I say, it's kind of a broad and open question and maybe 
we could by working together resolve the concern that 
continually arises out of the access to that spring. 
 
Another question, Madam Minister, comes from the . . . I 
received a letter from the RM of Martin, the rural municipality 
of Martin, and this is another issue that's not just confined to 
the RM of Martin or to other RMs in my constituency. But it's 
regarding to the new . . . it's in regard to the new provincial 
contracting policy and how RMs will be affected by this new 
contracting policy, where unions are basically given union 
preference; and whether RMs will be affected, whether the fact 
that they must conform to the new directives that are coming 
out and what costs will be associated with it. 
 
Because I'm sure you're well aware, Madam Minister, that your 
department has actually been putting a lot more pressure on 
local governments. And while we stand . . . and your colleagues 
would argue in this House that we've balanced the budget and 
we've done it by not placing taxes on taxpayers, by not 
increasing taxes, the local tax base is finding that the mill rate 
has always had to be adjusted as the offload has fallen on their 
shoulders. 
 
And the concern out there within RMs is what problems are 
going to be associated with regards to the new labour legislation 
and the contracting policy, the costs that are going to be 
incurred by local governments such as the RM of Martin, as this 
new policy comes into effect. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well thank you for that question, and 
actually I'm glad you brought it up. Because RMs, municipal 
governments, will not be affected at all by the contracting 
policy that was announced. That policy is only for Crown 
corporations and only for major construction projects that are 
undertaken by Crown corporations. So it does not in any way 
affect the operations at the municipal level. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I think the concerns that 
RMs like the RM of Martin have, come back to . . . And you 
can appreciate the RM of Martin and their concern. They 
happen to . . . As well, the community of Wapella is in that RM. 
 



March 10, 1995 

 
802 

And we just raised it . . . had a question last year that came up 
regarding a contract of developing their water supply and water 
reservoir and the distribution of water, and the fact that Wapella 
ended up with a $30,000 bill on their hands because a 
contractor came to them and took them to court or sued them 
over the fact that they felt that they should have received the 
bid, received the tender, versus the contractor that the council 
went with, due to the fact that the contractor they chose 
happened to be in closer proximity. And they felt if they had 
problems, it would in the long run be cheaper for them to have 
the local person versus the other contractor. And I guess at the 
end of the day they ended up with a $30,000 bill, which for the 
community of Wapella is a substantial cost. 
 
And those are some of the concerns that come up over the 
contracting issue, is the fact that you just indicated that it really 
doesn't affect them. But what if they let a contract? What if a 
union contractor then comes back at them and says, this Act 
applies to you as well and we feel that you have not been fair to 
us? Madam Minister, maybe you could respond on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I thank you for the question, but 
you're really drawing a long bow here. The agreement that we 
have is directly targeted to Crown corporations that are 
undertaking major construction projects. And the example that 
you brought forward we talked about last year in estimates. And 
it had to do with the tendering advertisement that that town let 
out and they were not specific in how they described their right 
to make choices other than the lowest tender. So I think that has 
gone to court. 
 
Last year we talked about it. I don't have the background right 
now with me, but I know last year in estimates you brought it 
up, we responded, we sent out to the municipal governments a 
directive saying that they must be careful when they're 
tendering to make sure that they say in the tender document 
whether there is going to be any limitations on the lowest 
bidder. And we have done that. I don't think there are any 
problems right now, that have come to our attention anyway. 
 
And if . . . we maybe should then send out a letter to all rural 
municipalities and perhaps to municipalities in general, saying 
the new agreement applies to Crown corporations and to their 
major construction projects and it doesn't apply in any way to 
the operations at the municipal level. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think maybe that 
would be appropriate to indeed send the clarification out so that 
RMs themselves . . . and I think at the end of the day what that 
says as well, if they are confronted by any contractor who 
would try to use that against them, they could bring to the 
attention of the contractor that this is a specific agreement and 
that indeed as RM councils we do not fall under that specific 
agreement. And I think that would be an appropriate manner of 
addressing it, Madam Minister, and so I think . . . and I would 
encourage you to indeed take the time to pass on that 
information, if you would. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I look through  

your responsibilities, Madam Minister, there are a number of 
things that come to mind. First of all there is a concern that I 
would, being a former reeve of a municipality and you being a 
mayor . . . regarding by-laws that municipalities — urban and 
rural — put into place, and a ruling recently regarding the role 
of the Human Rights Code in relation to standards set out by 
municipalities. Would you be able to give us your perspective 
of the role that municipalities should be playing in view of this? 
 
There are probably thousands of facilities in the province of 
Saskatchewan that get rearranged every year based on a 
building standard set out by the municipalities, and the Human 
Rights Code having that probably ultimate authority, as they 
have assumed that their rules and laws supersede any of the 
others. And I was wondering whether you'd have a comment on 
that for us today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you. Obviously you're 
referring to the legislation on the universal accessibility 
building standards code and where it might or might not come 
in conflict with the Human Rights Code on accessibility. 
 
There was a case that was before the courts. That case has been 
decided. It is very clear that the Human Rights Code takes 
precedence over all our other Acts. What has come about as a 
consequence of the court decision and that event down at a 
business down in Regina, we have sent to all municipalities 
who are responsible for giving building licences a directive 
saying that they must inform people who are taking out building 
licences in order to renovate property . . . the knowledge or the 
information that they must also comply with the Human Rights 
Code. 
 
And there are certain exceptions or exemptions that can be 
applied, but it is important that not only do they comply with 
the UBAS (The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards 
Act) but they also must comply with the Human Rights Code. 
And in most instances, in fact 99 per cent of the times, those 
two are very compatible; there is no conflict. 
 
Recently there was conflict, as we know, and the courts heard 
that, and I think it's still before the courts. But however as a 
consequence to that, once again I will say to you that our 
department has written to urban municipalities who are 
responsible for this area, telling them to be careful that when 
they give out licences they must tell the people who are doing 
the renovations that they also must comply with the Human 
Rights Code. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There is a possibility of two separate things 
that may occur — the liability of the individual who is doing 
the renovating, and the agency that gives him the licence has a 
possible liability as well. 
 
I recall a number of instances in history where law has been . . . 
or courts have determined that when a rule is made in relation 
to a project — and this case that I'm thinking about was in 
Kamloops where the city was involved in some kind of a by-
law, they initiated something and then they did not go out and  



March 10, 1995 

 
803 

remove that from the property or force or tell the individual to 
move it off the property and get rid of it — and in that case the 
liability was held with the city. I think it was Kamloops or 
Kelowna. 
 
But in any case there is, I believe, some risk here in relation to 
the urban municipalities who do not know all about the 
responsibilities they have. And is that also a part of that 
information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. At the time we sent out the 
information, it really was directed at the UBAS and the Human 
Rights Code, and trying to tell any licencer in the city office 
that they must direct their officials to tell somebody taking out a 
licence to renovate that they must be aware of the Human 
Rights Code. 
 
What you have brought up, I think there are many occasions 
where there are municipalities have been challenged as far as 
whether they have provided adequate notice on a street or road 
that there is a hazard and there have been occasions where they 
have gone to court. And really, I think there is adequate 
provision within The Urban Municipality Act for them to 
understand their role and responsibility and their liabilities. 
 
What they must do is when they're taking out insurance they 
must make sure that they are covered for that. So once again, 
the obligation is not within the Act, but it's within the 
municipality and the administration of the municipality to make 
sure that they have covered themselves against those 
eventualities where there may be negligence on the part of their 
workers or something happens and someone in the public is 
harmed and there is a court case, and they must make sure that 
they have liability to protect them in those cases. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I wonder if you would be able to provide 
some information for me in relation to SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency). Do you know how many 
assessments they do on an annual basis? Have you got any 
volume that you would be able to say, I have 6,853 new 
assessments that were done in the past year? Would you be able 
to give us that information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I remember you were talking about the 
inspections, and we don't have that information. We can get it 
for you. SAMA does reassessments, if you like, on a rotational 
basis. And they usually go municipality by municipality. 
Occasionally there are pick-ups or reinspections that must be 
done as well. 
 
So every municipality really has to have an appraiser working 
there in order to develop their assessment roll each year. Some 
of it applies to evaluation of properties on an ongoing basis, but 
some of it is going back maybe to look at property that had been 
appraised a year or two ago and doing a pick-up on it. 
 
So we don't have that information. We can get it from SAMA, 
if you like. We are not directly integrated into SAMA's 
information. They are an independent organization and they  

operate autonomously from government, and we don't have the 
information that you might like. But if I request it, I can get it 
for you. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well I'd like that. As I see it here, there's a 
revenue-sharing adjustment for SAMA of $1.1 million, and 
then another adjustment of $800,000, and another 4 million, 
and another 1 million. And I think that I'd like to have that 
information. 
 
I'd probably like to have the information of how many people 
are employed with SAMA, seeing kind of how many 
individuals are working there. 
 
I'd also like to know from you whether this has ever been 
discussed within the framework of your department, of making 
SAMA an independent commercial operation, where they 
would be independent of government, seeking an opportunity to 
deal in an independent way as a commercial entity. These are 
probably professional engineers and surveyors. And would 
there be some way of making them completely independent of 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you for that question, and 
there are a number of pieces to it that I would like to answer. 
 
Going back to the estimates and the numbers that we have 
within our department, I want to explain how we have it 
separated into possibly three categories. First of all, there is $4 
million transfer to SAMA as an agency. We transfer that money 
under the legislation. That money is transferred to what we call 
to provide core services, that is, research policy development, 
data information and collection. It's a nucleus of SAMA, and it 
does all of the information and policy and analytical work that 
SAMA needs in order to develop assessment. 
 
There is a $1 million transitional fund this year as well that the 
government is providing for SAMA to pay for field services. If 
you will recall last year when we had the new SAMA Act, we 
divided it into two categories. One was the core services, which 
I just described to you, that provincial government funds. The 
other side are the field services who are the appraisers who go 
. . . or assessors who go out and actually develop the assessment 
rolls. And we provided $1 million for that service to provide 
assistance to municipalities because municipalities now are 
responsible for hiring their own appraisers or else buying that 
service from SAMA. So there was $1 million transitional fund 
to pay down the cost of field services. 
 
Within the Municipal Government as well, we're putting back 
into revenue sharing about $1.2 million, I don't know exactly 
what that number is, one point . . . I don't have my numbers 
here, but there is a number going back into urban revenue 
sharing that we had taken out last year. Again you will have to 
recall last year we took out $2 million from revenue sharing to 
try to pay for SAMA. 
 



March 10, 1995 

 
804 

When we brought in the new Act, what we did then was replace 
that $2 million back into the revenue-sharing pool. And in the 
urban revenue sharing, that amounts now to $1.167 million 
back onto the revenue-sharing side that last year went to 
SAMA, this year is not. And in the case of the rural 
municipalities, that amounts to $8.33 million . . . or point eight 
three three, 833,000. 
 
So that now is going directly into revenue sharing where last 
year it went in to pay for the cost of SAMA. So that's what you 
see here in regard to SAMA and its function and its operations. 
 
In regard to how many people work at SAMA, there are 141 
employees in 1995. Some of those employees will be 
employees who work in the core services doing research and 
data collection, and some of them will be the appraisers who 
work out developing the assessment rolls for the municipalities, 
and we call them field workers. But they belong to the 
Saskatchewan appraisers association. 
 
And as you know, we have an Act coming forward this year 
that sets them up as an independent association. And there will 
be some changes coming forward in the next two or three years 
about their relationship with SAMA and the municipalities and 
whether they want to operate independently or they will still 
continue to operate under the direction of SAMA who will 
continue to provide their services to municipalities on a full 
cost-recovery basis, if that's what they want. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So you're going to wait and see whether there 
would be any initiative on their part to see whether they would 
like to have independence as they go into this restructuring of 
what their responsibilities are. 
 
I guess one of the questions that I would have is, is any of this 
urban revenue-sharing SAMA pool directed at the large urban 
centres who deal and supply their own service in this 
assessment business? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — When SAMA was set up in 1986, the 
four largest cities — Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and 
Regina — were given the responsibility of funding their own 
assessment services. So since 1986 and perhaps earlier — I 
can't be definite about that but I know since 1986 when SAMA 
was established — the four major cities have always paid for 
their own assessment services. 
 
The money that is going back into revenue sharing, some of it 
will go back to the four largest cities because, of course, they 
have access to the revenue-sharing pool, as everyone else does. 
What they do with it when they get their grant is up to them, but 
I would expect some of it would be going into general revenue 
fund and they may let it go to pay for their own assessment 
services. 
 
But we don't know that. It's just the way the grant is transferred 
to them and they have a right to do with it what they want. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Would you be able to give us a breakdown of  

what Saskatoon, Regina, and P.A. and Moose Jaw each get? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. You will recall that the revenue-
sharing formula has been under review for quite some time. A 
lot of municipalities feel that it's outdated; that the revenue-
sharing formula is based on assessment and a population base 
and some equalization is involved in it. And we have 
undertaken a review of that, so this year will be the last year 
that we hope we'll be using this outdated revenue-sharing 
formula. But under the present revenue-sharing formula, Regina 
this year was transferred $10,954,389, and Saskatoon was 
transferred $11,179,565. 
 
Mr. Martens: — You could also give me Moose Jaw and P.A. 
if you've got them there. But I'd like to have the part in revenue 
sharing that was transferred that they spent in relation to the 
SAMA line on the budget here unless you don't have that 
separated out. But you obviously write a cheque for a certain 
amount for that purpose; you should have it lying there 
somewhere. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, the amount I just gave you this year 
for Saskatoon included $339,986 and the amount for Regina 
was $335,544. For Prince Albert the amount was 48,740, and 
for Moose Jaw it's 44,357. That was the amount that came from 
what was originally the SAMA money, and it came back into 
revenue sharing, and that was part of their revenue-sharing 
grant this year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:28 p.m. 
 
 


