













































February 8, 1995  Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 8, 1995 

 

 

27 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the new 

session, we have new petitions, and I will read the petition to 

you and just the prayer later on as we present more that will 

follow: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled, the petition of the undersigned 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

showeth that towns and villages bordering Highway No. 

1 are suffering from increased unemployment, reduced 

population levels, reduced sales, and increased business 

closures, and that these negative factors can be directly 

attributed to the loss of tourism and vehicular activity 

along Highway No. 1; and further that the reduced 

tourism traffic, coupled with an increase in accident 

levels, are due to the fact that hundreds of kilometres of 

Highway No. 1 remain single-laned across the province. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 

and further that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 

than allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projects in the province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come from the community of Fox Valley, Mendham, and 

those communities north of Highway No. 1. 

 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, 

An Act to Amend The Health Districts Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

draw your attention and that of the members to a group of 

students that are seated in your gallery. This is a group of 22 

students from St. Augustine school in the constituency of 

Regina Victoria. They're accompanied by their teacher Doug 

Devernichuk and by chaperon Debbie Warren. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them for questions after our 

question period, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you that based on 

my appearance in their classroom that this is a very bright  

group of kids, and they'll have very good questions. And so I'd 

like the members to join with me to make them feel very 

welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Employment Statistics 

 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I'm 

pleased to announce to the House, as chair of our caucus 

employment and economy committee, that the revised Statistics 

Canada figures that show job growth in Saskatchewan is 

flourishing and growing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — Considering the government's commitment to 

create jobs for Saskatchewan people, this is good news. 

 

Employment in our province averaged 450,000 workers during 

1992, climbed to 455 in 1993, and reached 457,000 in 1994. 

This includes the late year-over-year surge of 11,000 jobs in 

November and 15,000 in December. Youth employment also is 

showing increases, Mr. Speaker. Since 1992, when there was an 

average of 74,000 employed youth, the rate has steadily 

increased to 76,000 in 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I want to make two comments. 

First of all, I think members should give the member the respect 

that he deserves when he is standing and speaking in the House. 

 

Secondly, I wish to draw to the members' attention that 

statements by members are statements that should relate to 

something pertaining to their constituency and not something 

that may be a statement made by a minister. And I am just 

asking members to please keep that in mind. 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, this news today that was released is 

obviously good news for Saskatchewan businesses, 

Saskatchewan economy, and for the constituency of Kinistino 

because it is going to prove that jobs . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key here is that 7,000 new jobs have been 

created by small and medium-sized businesses and it is good 

news for the economy and I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Development 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

morning the Associate Minister of Economic Development and  



 

28 

the Minister of Municipal Government announced the northern 

development fund that is very good news for my area as well. 

The conference took place this morning at La Ronge. I rise this 

afternoon to commend the government for this initiative which 

will direct $4 million into targeted assistance for new and 

existing business ventures in the North. 

 

The fund includes a business loan program, support to new 

community-based regional economic development 

organizations, and assistance for marketing, promotion, and 

research and development activities. 

 

Other initiatives under the fund include establishment of a 

northern review board composed primarily of Northerners to 

give input on the fund's administration and an organizational 

training and business skills enhancement package and provision 

of increased technical and business advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Partnership for Renewal economic plan refers 

to the North's ample opportunities related to its rich resources, 

culture, and heritage. 

 

The northern development fund will provide a new set of 

economic tools to Northerners to help them build on those 

opportunities and to create the jobs and businesses that will 

benefit the entire Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

15 Wing Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in support 

of 15 Wing, Saskatchewan's only military base, located at 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Known to many as CFB (Canadian Forces Base) Moose Jaw, 

Saskatchewan is united in our concern for the future of our base 

as Canada's main training facility for new pilots and home of 

the Snowbirds. 

 

The federal government is reviewing the future of the country's 

bases, and we know that 15 Wing is both sound in its 

infrastructure and efficient in its operation. 

 

We know as well that although Saskatchewan has nearly 4 per 

cent of the nation's population, we see only a little over 1 per 

cent of defence spending here in Saskatchewan, and virtually all 

of that at 15 Wing. 

 

A large group of concerned people have come together, setting 

aside their territorial and political differences, to form a non-

partisan support group called Friends of 15 Wing. And tonight 

CHAB radio 800 has a call-in show on 15 Wing. 

 

Friends of 15 Wing have distributed postcards that people can 

use to express their support for 15 Wing to Defence Minister 

Collenette and Saskatchewan's cabinet minister Ralph Goodale.  

In fact we've had to print more of those cards. 

 

As a friend of 15 Wing, I want to thank the thousands of 

Saskatchewan people who have already sent in their expression 

of support for Saskatchewan's air base, 15 Wing, as Canada's 

main training facility for new pilots and home of the 

Snowbirds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to 

comment on the 15 Wing group of friends of which I'm proud 

to be one. And I'd like to congratulate the member from Moose 

Jaw Palliser who has been very front and centre in leading the 

initiatives to deal with 15 Wing. 

 

And I'd like to also add my congratulations to all of the people 

irregardless of their political stripe or where they happen to be 

in the provincial economy who have supported our efforts. 

 

I was very pleased today to distribute those postcards that the 

member just talked about to all of my colleagues so that they in 

turn can take them to their constituency offices and help with 

this effort. 

 

And I also would like to congratulate the member, Mr. Speaker, 

on doing what is supposed to be done in this period of this time 

that members have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Safety Council Annual Seminar 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it's my pleasure 

to speak of an organization very near and dear to my heart, and 

I want to congratulate the Saskatchewan Safety Council for 

holding its 22nd annual industrial safety seminar which 

concludes today in Regina. 

 

For the past 22 years, Mr. Speaker, the council's occupational 

division has organized the industrial safety seminar which 

focuses on safety related information and training. 

 

The seminar involves health and safety professionals from 

across Canada and the United States, as well as safety 

committee members and workers from Saskatchewan. It also 

includes one of the largest safety equipment displays in Western 

Canada. 

 

We all know that employees can be injured or killed in the 

industrial workplace because of accidents, and this kind of 

education has proven to be invaluable in preventing injuries and 

fatalities and also in improving the operations of business. 

 

This seminar gives Saskatchewan workers access to the latest 

tools, techniques, and research necessary for dealing with the 

safety concerns arising in the workplace. The Saskatchewan  



 

29 

Safety Council was formed some 40 years ago in Regina and 

has been a leader in promoting all aspects of safety throughout 

the province. 

 

I am proud to be one of over 450 Saskatchewan Safety Council 

members, who represent all of the major sectors of 

Saskatchewan business, government, and industry. Mr. Speaker, 

it is through the efforts of this council that safety in the 

workplace is getting the attention it rightly deserves in the 

Saskatchewan workplace. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

International Development Week 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across 

Saskatchewan, and in fact across all of Canada this week, 

International Development Week is being celebrated. And 

Saskatchewan has an important role to play in the world 

community. This is a very good opportunity for us to recognize 

Saskatchewan residents who are working in this regard. 

 

In fact on Saturday the Saskatchewan Council for International 

Cooperation will present its 1995 global citizen awards here in 

Regina. Each year the council recognizes two or more people 

who have supported global development issues at home and 

overseas. There are three recipients this year: Sister Thomas 

Bernhard, Nettie Wiebe, and Wendy Manson. 

 

Sister Thomas has helped to bring public attention to injustices 

in Africa and Latin America. She has also drawn attention to 

the concerns of Canada's first nations people and spent three 

months in Brazil writing about people's struggles in that 

country. 

 

Wendy Manson and Nettie Wiebe have worked toward 

meaningful participation of women in developing farm policy 

and practice. Both have served as elected officials with the 

National Farmers Union and have been active in organizing 

programs to promote the exchange of ideas and actions between 

the NFU (National Farmers Union) and the national union of 

farmers and ranchers in Nicaragua. 

 

And so today I want to congratulate SCIC (Saskatchewan 

Council for International Cooperation), the recipients of the 

global citizens awards, and all others who are making a unique 

Saskatchewan contribution to international development. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are directed at the Minister of Labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before the opening of the legislative session,  

the former minister of Labour announced the proclamation of 

the labour standards amendments. Not included in this . . . in 

the proclamation were seven or eight contentious amendments 

which would have had a devastating effect on business and job 

creation in Saskatchewan. These include most available hours, 

severance provisions, and lay-off notices. After continual 

lobbying from business groups and opposition from the 

member from Maple Creek, the former minister of Labour 

finally saw the light. 

 

My question is now to the current Minister of Labour. Mr. 

Minister, while many harmful amendments remain, I'm 

wondering if you fully support the position and actions of your 

predecessor, the former minister of Labour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

Leader of the Opposition for the question. And I would want to 

go on record as saying I fully support the previous minister of 

Labour in the work that he's done in trying to bring into place a 

very controversial piece of legislation, which was not assisted 

by either your party or the Liberal Party in this legislature. 

Nevertheless, we feel it represents a good balance between 

working people and employers within this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I'm very 

pleased to hear that you support the removal of those offending 

amendments. But unfortunately it appears that the former 

minister's actions are thin, paper thin, literally. In fact every one 

of those amendments remains on The Labour Standards Act and 

are merely marked as amendments not yet to be proclaimed. So 

these Draconian measures have not been done away with, as 

most business people would believe. It appears they've just been 

postponed. And they can be brought forth into law with the 

stroke of the Premier's pen. 

 

Mr. Minister, very simply, given your support for the removal 

of these amendments, will you now support legislation 

repealing those sections of the Act and pledge not to implement 

them at any time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, first off I'd want to point 

out to the hon. member that the measures, the legislation, the 

regulations, are not Draconian because to be Draconian they 

would have to be held in great secrecy to deceive people in 

some way. 

 

There was no deception in terms of The Labour Standards Act 

or other pieces of labour legislation that have come before this 

Legislative Assembly. There was full, open, public debate in 

this legislature and the debate that will likely continue. And we 

want to make sure that the labour legislation in this province 

neither overly balances towards labour and working people, or 

overbalances towards the business community. We want to  



 

30 

make sure that the rights of working men and women in this 

province are protected and that businesses can, in fact, feel 

confidence that they can do their job in the economy of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, as the 

new Minister of Labour I would have hoped that you would 

have been totally honest with the business community and those 

looking for employment in this province. If you agree these 

laws are detrimental, if you support their exclusion from The 

Labour Standards Act as you've already admitted, why not 

support repealing legislation? 

 

We'll be introducing a private members' bill which was 

originally designed to do away with all of the amendments. But 

we'd be more than happy to repeal only those items which are 

now excluded. Put the taxpayers' money, Mr. Minister, where 

your mouth is. Will you support repealing those amendments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's not my intention to bring any further 

labour legislation this session concerning labour legislation in 

Saskatchewan. It's not my intention to do that. My intention is 

to make sure that the business community and the working men 

and women of this province can work within the laws and 

regulations that have already been established. 

 

I would see little benefit to opening up the debate which creates 

some flamboyance on your part and also the Liberal Party in 

this House. I think we're better served by the Saskatchewan 

community as a whole to figure out exactly how we can make 

this legislation and the regulations work to the benefit of all 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, clearly 

the only reason you are refusing to repeal those amendments is 

because you and your ex-NDP (New Democratic Party) Premier 

want to play politics. Plain and simply. 

 

You'll go to the chamber of commerce breakfast meetings and 

claim what a good friend to business you are. Then you'll go 

over to lunch at Tommy Douglas House with your union leaders 

and say, don't worry, we'll promise to proclaim those 

amendments if you support us during the next election. It's a 

system of carrots and clubs that you and the NDP have used 

very successfully in the past, Mr. Minister. 

 

If you won't act, Mr. Minister, at least be truthful with the 

people of Saskatchewan. Will you admit that there's a strong 

likelihood that these amendments will be brought in into law 

and probably sooner than later? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is as 

inaccurate in his description of what this party stands for, this 

government stands for, as he is when he says the ex-premier of 

the province of Saskatchewan. The man from Riversdale is the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and I wish you would 

stop . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I wish you would stop misconstruing 

the facts about labour legislation and the business community in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Tendering Policy 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition leader speaks of the political games being played by 

the Premier with the business and union communities. Political 

games are what the Premier do the best. 

 

A few days ago we had received a late copy of the government's 

so-called fair wage policy for government Crown contracts. In 

actuality this is a union preference policy for government 

contracts. My question is to the Minister responsible for Crown 

Investments. Mr. Minister, would you confirm or deny that your 

government is pursuing a union preference policy based on the 

documents we released to the public just a short time ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer 

is that we are not pursuing the policy which I understand the 

member to be alleging. We have had a policy in place for some 

time which attempts to seek a balance between the trades 

people — and keep them in the province — and management. 

And we think it's working reasonably well. But the answer is 

that we have a policy which we think is satisfactory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, look who stands up  

my old friend the former minister of Labour. Looks like we 

haven't parted company just yet, eh, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 

Minister, the union preference policy you're cooking up would 

see private companies forced to hire 75 per cent labour force 

from the union halls and 25 per cent non-union workers would 

still have to pay union dues. The other 25 still having to pay the 

dues. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that's not fair. That, Mr. Minister, is 

extortion, plain and simple. Now you have talked about a 

review. Will you give us the exact date when this so-called 

review will be completed and when you will be tabling the final 

version of your union preference policy? Can you give us a time 

frame, Mr. Minister, of when this is going to happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



 

31 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Just first of all let me say I'm 

somewhat disappointed that he referred to me as his former 

friend. I've always held the member from Maple Creek in the 

highest regard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm a little disappointed in the use of 

that adjective. But nevertheless to your substantive question, let 

me assure you, the member from Maple Creek, let me assure 

you that if government policy is formulated, I want to give the 

member my solemn assurance it will be announced in due 

course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, I 

didn't think you'd have to bail your new colleague out of hot 

water so quickly. But anyway, to get on with it, Mr. Minister, 

260 Saskatchewan companies, both large and small, wrote to 

the Premier in opposition to a union preference policy of 

tendering. The ad hoc labour fund committee recently wrote to 

all rural and urban municipalities, schools, and hospital boards, 

alerting them to the dire consequences of such a policy. They 

wrote and I quote: 

 

 The intent is to formally replace the current public 

tendering policy of awarding contracts to lowest 

qualified bidders with a policy designed to ensure most 

provincial capital works projects are built using union 

labour. It is also apparent the policy will ultimately 

provide for more workers to become unionized and 

make the general public, the taxpayers, finance the 

higher construction costs. 

 

Mr. Minister, if your review is indefinite, is this policy not 

designed to bolster your ties with the union leaders in this 

province just before an election? Will you confirm that the 

games behind this policy is to bolster your election team by 

placing a carrot in front of Barb Byers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member opposite is describing 

some sort of a policy. It's certainly not ours. I'm not sure if it's 

theirs, but it's certainly not ours. 

 

We have attempted . . . Let me try to explain to my current 

friend from Maple Creek. We have attempted, as I said, to 

achieve a degree of balance as between management and 

labour. And I believe with the major Crown corporations we've 

really succeeded in doing that. 

 

About half of the work goes to union firms. About half of the 

work has gone to non-union firms. And that, I understand, is 

about the mixture that occurs in other provinces as well with 

these major utilities. So we think we have achieved a 

reasonable balance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Youth Unemployment 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to table the summary of a discussion paper we 

released today that actually provides workable ideas to help 

remedy the youth employment crisis in Saskatchewan. The 

government needs alternatives, Mr. Speaker; we will give them 

alternatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the most recent Revenue Canada 

statistics this NDP government lost 4,000 young taxpayers in its 

first year of office. This is not StatsCan. This is Revenue 

Canada. What is it about your government's policies, Mr. 

Premier, that have resulted in 4,000 young people not being 

able to contribute to the income tax base in this province? 

Remember these are Revenue Canada statistics. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, many people around the 

province of Saskatchewan have been telling me that the Liberal 

Party simply does not know what it's talking about on many 

issues, and I want to tell you that this is proven by this very 

question. 

 

Yesterday the . . . in fact not yesterday, as early as this morning 

the Leader of the Liberal Party was alleging that the 

Government of Saskatchewan was responsible for the loss of 

9,000 jobs, according to StatsCanada. Now she's changed from 

StatsCanada to Revenue Canada when the figures are out today, 

that in fact we have increased by 10,000 jobs of December '94 

to December '91. All of a sudden the member gets up and says, 

well we moved from StatsCanada to Revenue Canada. And 

after Revenue Canada clarifies it, they'll move to wildlife 

Canada, and after wildlife Canada, they'll move on to 

something else. 

 

Look, you people are supposed to be the new wave of politics 

in Saskatchewan. Why don't you stand up and admit that you've 

been misleading the people of Saskatchewan, that you were not 

telling them the truth about the figures, that there have been 

10,000 more jobs in three years? Admit you were wrong. And 

also tell the people of Saskatchewan  confirm it  you 

simply don't know the first thing about job creation, you don't 

know your numbers, and you cannot be trusted or relied upon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — What is evident, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Premier doesn't care about the youth of Saskatchewan. The 

question I ask, Mr. Premier, is what is it about your 

government's policies that have resulted in 4,000 young people 

not being able to contribute to the income tax base in this 

province? These are Revenue Canada statistics of the income 

tax paid in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



 

32 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I do not accept the 

numbers given by the Liberal Party this afternoon on Revenue 

Canada any more than I accepted the numbers of the Liberal 

Party when they used StatsCanada for three years. When the 

Liberal leader for three years got up, and still travels, all over 

Saskatchewan citing StatsCanada saying that there had been job 

losses — and by the way, today they moved from StatsCanada 

to Revenue Canada — I didn't believe it then and I don't believe 

it today. 

 

And I want to tell you something: the people of Saskatchewan 

don't believe you either. You simply don't know what you're 

talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, those statistics 

that you manipulate will not satisfy the young people of 

Saskatchewan. Not only has Saskatchewan lost young taxpayers 

at a rate 19 times greater than the total population, but 62 per 

cent more youth are on welfare. That means 11,000 

Saskatchewan youth are social service recipients. How did you 

let this happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is of course the right 

of the Liberal Party to decide who asks these questions, but I 

want everybody in Saskatchewan to note that the Leader of the 

Liberal Party is not asking these questions today for a very good 

reason. Because for the last three years she's been using 

Statistics Canada when she knew or ought to have known that 

the numbers she was giving were absolutely false. 

 

She was going around as a typical old-line politician, finding 

doom and gloom when there was none there to have. Doom and 

gloom. Now she's abandoned StatsCanada, has put out a so-

called youth paper which, if I may say so, is virtually a direct 

steal of programs which have been in place by the Department 

of Education over the last three years, and now moves from 

StatsCanada to Revenue Canada. 

 

The Liberal Party does not know StatsCanada from Revenue 

Canada to wildlife Canada. Admit you don't know what you're 

talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Premier, you still are not listening to 

what the youth of Saskatchewan are saying and what trouble 

they're in. Saskatchewan is well above the national average for 

youth on welfare. When you came into power, 24 per cent of 

the social assistance cases were youth; now it's 28 per cent. The 

national average is 21 per cent. The minister can make whatever 

excuses he wishes, but the government is responsible for this 

decay. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you admit that your government has failed our 

youth and has no plan for full-time, permanent youth 

employment opportunities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege 

of being in this House for a number of years and I have to tell 

you that this is the first time that I have seen — with the 

greatest of respect to the rookie member, and I say that to be the 

case — this line of questioning. 

 

By the StatsCanada figures which came out today, on average 

in 1992 there were 74,000 jobs for young people — 75,000 in 

'93, and 76,000 in 1994 — an increase of 2,000 more jobs, by 

StatsCanada. Now you will not accept these figures. 

 

Your leader has been all around the province of Saskatchewan 

as early or as late as this morning, saying that according to 

StatsCanada, 9,000 jobs. Will you ask her to stand up and say 

she made a mistake. Will you get up and say you made a 

mistake. How can you deny these StatsCanada figures? 

 

I tell you there is a large credibility problem with respect to the 

Liberal Party in respect to your numbers. And I don't accept the 

Revenue Canada numbers no more than I accepted your 

interpretation of the StatsCanada numbers. And I want to tell 

you, neither do the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We need to do more for jobs, for youth, and for everybody. 

We've got the strategy to do that. We've got a game plan to do 

that. But I tell you what we don't need: are politicians like the 

Liberal Party going up and down the province of Saskatchewan 

in order to maintain their political jobs looking at every dark 

side when everybody in Saskatchewan sees the prosperous 

turnaround in 1995. Come on, get with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, you like to play 

with figures. Let's cut to the chase. Will you table in this House 

today a strategy of your government to respond to the desperate 

situation faced by the youth of Saskatchewan today? Will you 

table that now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, on January 18, 1995, the member opposite met 

with the Department of Education, Training and Employment 

and we spent some time with that member going over the 

strategy for Education, Training and Employment for the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I think she'll acknowledge that. 

 

I find it curious that the Liberal policy for the youth of this 

province reflects many of the items — most of the items — that 

were discussed in that meeting. I'm pleased, I'm pleased that the 

Liberal Party is joining the Government of Saskatchewan in 

addressing post-secondary education issues in this province and 

I'm pleased that they have decided to table this document in this 

House for all to see because their policy reflects what we've 

been doing for some time now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you make it 

sound like I got my ideas from you. I consulted with 26  



 

33 

stakeholders around the province who provided these ideas 

because they were not happening from your department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to table today the list of people I've 

consulted with. This is where the ideas come from. They come 

from the stakeholders around the province who want to see this 

happen. The cut-backs of this government in the past three 

years have resulted in a deficit in student opportunities. I'd like 

to ask the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I would ask the 

government members to please just calm it down a bit so I can 

hear the question at least. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — I'd like to ask the minister if she does have a 

plan. If she does have a plan, when will she table it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I am pleased that the member has asked 

me that question. We have signed a multi-party training 

agreement with northern Saskatchewan to deliver training and 

employment, and that was signed some time ago. 

 

We have signed a labour force development agreement with the 

federal government — our work, much of it contained in this 

document, signed some time ago. We have announced Future 

Skills, announced in November. And young people are getting 

training for real jobs that exist now because we have developed 

labour shortages in the province. Soon you will hear in the 

budget, which was referred to in the throne speech, a program 

called JobStart to assist young people in getting the jobs and the 

training that they require. 

 

Listen to the budget. You talk about distance education. You 

talk about career counselling. You talk about credit transfer. All 

of this information is public knowledge. It was given to the 

member by the Department of Education, Training and 

Employment. And you know what happens to students that 

plagiarize? Students fail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your Future Skills 

program . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Madam Minister, your Future Skills 

program is a 20-week training program. It gives much 

opportunity to unload those social assistance cases on to the UI 

(unemployment insurance) rolls. 

 

The JobStart that you have talked about, you have not tabled 

your plan yet. You talk about summer employment for students. 

In 1991 you provided almost $1.9 million to the summer 

employment program. By 1994 that was $1 million. You cut it 

by 43 per cent. 

 

And I expect that what the JobStart program will be is a new 

summer employment, a make-work job for you, not for the  

future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the member for the question. I have a great deal of regard 

for that member. I'm sorry that you've had to be put up to this 

because your Statistics Canada stats that you've run across the 

province with weren't borne out by the facts. I'm sorry about 

that. 

 

If you pay attention to Future Skills, what we are endeavouring 

to do, contrary to what Liberals and Tories have done all across 

this country, is to match training to real jobs, training to real 

jobs; training that is publicly recognized by post-secondary 

institutions. It is challenging business and public institutions to 

work together in delivering skills for jobs that exist; skills that 

the individual person can take on with them when they go to 

other jobs. The times of training people for no jobs are over. 

And Future Skills is about training people for jobs that exist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

where is the plan? You have not in the last three years 

implemented any plan. It has resulted in great unemployment 

for young people and there are close to 6,000 young women on 

welfare with their children at risk. Saskatchewan's own Health 

Council says children of these women are at risk. What are you 

doing? What will you be doing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, I'm really sorry that you 

have to ask these questions, because the Leader of the Liberal 

Party can't seem to get up and ask the questions. I'm sorry about 

that. 

 

Now what I want to say to you . . . I just want to reiterate what 

I've said to you already. 

 

We've signed a multi-party training agreement with people in 

northern Saskatchewan and Northerners are being trained for 

jobs that exist. We've signed a labour force development 

agreement that gets money back into this province for training 

for jobs that exist. 

 

We've announced Future Skills, a program to train individuals 

for jobs that exist. And you will hear shortly what we plan to do 

with young people in this province when we announce more 

details about JobStart. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: — I'd like to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker, sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: — Thank you, sir. Behind the bar over here is Mr. 

Allen Engel who is the previous member for Assiniboia-

Gravelbourg, 1982 to 1986. And I'd like to point him out to the  



 

34 

members of the House and introduce him and thank him for 

coming tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to table 

in the legislature according to section 222, The Election Act, a 

report respecting election expenses of candidates. I would like 

to table respecting the election expenses of candidates and their 

business managers and of registered political parties at the 

Regina North West by-election held on February 4, 1994. 

 

I would also like to table today, from the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Library, a report ending for the period March 31, 

1992. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to make 

a Speaker's statement. 

 

On February 7 the member for Rosthern raised a point of order 

concerning the accuracy of a Hansard report of the Speech 

from the Throne. The member correctly identifies certain words 

from the prepared text of the speech which the Lieutenant 

Governor did not state orally. 

 

As Speaker, it is my duty to ensure the accuracy of our 

parliamentary publications, whether it be the Votes and 

Proceedings or the Hansard debates. As the member suggests, 

our Hansard is a complete verbatim report of what is said in 

this Chamber by members. It has been this way since 1983. The 

same is not true of the Hansard report of the Speech from the 

Throne, as the member from Rosthern has realized. It is not 

strictly verbatim. 

 

By the traditions of this Assembly, which stem from the 

traditions of the House of Commons of Canada, the Speaker 

obtains a copy of the Speech from the Throne which is then laid 

on the Table with the words: 

 

 I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to prevent 

mistakes I have obtained a copy of the Speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor, which I now put on 

the Table. 

 

Accordingly, in order to avoid mistakes, it is the text of the 

tabled speech which is published in our Votes and Proceedings. 

It is for the same reason that Hansard has continued to edit the 

verbatim to ensure that repetitions, redundancies and errors are 

corrected. 

 

I remind members that the Speech from the Throne is a 

constitutional requirement. This Assembly has not the authority 

to open a session on its own accord, nor can it conduct any  

business until the causes of summons are declared. 

 

(1415) 

 

In presenting the Speech from the Throne, the Lieutenant 

Governor is carrying out a constitutional role and is acting on 

the advice of his advisers, the president and the members of the 

Executive Council. 

 

Given the importance of the accuracy of the Speech from the 

Throne, at the House of Commons the copy of the Governor 

General's speech obtained by the Speaker is published in both 

the Hansard debates and the Journals. 

 

After considering this matter, I have come to the conclusion 

that to avoid future misunderstanding, Hansard should no 

longer transcribe the Speech from the Throne. Accordingly I 

have asked the director of Hansard to publish the official text 

of the speech exactly as it is tabled in the Assembly by the 

Speaker. 

 

I hope this explanation and the action that I have taken today 

will be of some assistance to the Assembly. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise on a 

point of order. During statements by members, you challenged, 

or commented to, the member for Kinistino on the content of 

his private member statement. And you said — here I have to 

roughly paraphrase you — you said the private member 

statements should relate to their constituency or not be 

something that a minister could make a statement on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm asking for some clarification and some 

consistency in your guidelines on this and I would ask you to 

review the various private member statements that have been 

made in this session of the legislature. 

 

Yesterday for instance, the member from Regina North West 

made a statement on Langenburg east drainage project. I do not 

believe that Langenburg is in the constituency of Regina North 

West. 

 

Today the member for Regina Albert North made a statement 

about the Saskatchewan Safety Council. I do not believe that 

the Saskatchewan Safety Council is of concern only or solely to 

the members of Regina Albert North. 

 

Similarly, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland made a 

statement on international development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House of Commons allows members to 

express their opinions on a variety of topics and for that reason, 

we have decided to expand our orders and rules and procedures 

in order that our members can do that as well. I would like to 

draw your attention to the new rules by statements for members 

that read, section 9.1(3): 

 

  



 

35 

Members may make statements about any subject of 

interest or concern. 

 

Any subject of interest or concern. And 9.1(5): 

 

 A Minister of the Crown may not use the time allotted 

for "Statements by Members" to remark on matters 

relating to government policy or ministerial action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kinistino was commenting on 

StatsCanada job statistics. That is not something that is under 

the purview of a minister of this provincial legislature. So I 

would ask you to review the statements that have been made by 

private members in this statement and bring back some 

clarification of your ruling. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I listened 

in amazement as the member from Saskatoon continued on, 

challenging your ruling in that fashion. Mr. Speaker, I would 

remind all members — and particularly those of us that were on 

the Rules and Procedures Committee that met over the last 

couple of years in introducing this new procedure of members' 

statements, Mr. Speaker — the intent, the sole intent of that 

member's statement, was to give individual back-benchers an 

opportunity to discuss issues that were significant to them in 

their constituency. That was the intent, Mr. Speaker; there is no 

doubt about that. 

 

And as we listen here from day to day, back-benchers getting up 

and making ministerial statements on behalf of ministers is a 

total abuse of the privilege which we intended to give to back-

benchers. Mr. Speaker, I thoroughly support your stand on this 

issue and I hope that you will enforce the rules stringently in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I will take under advisement the comments 

that have been made and bring forward a statement in the very 

near future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to, before 

orders of the day, proceed to a condolence, which I think has 

been agreed by the House leaders. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of sadness that I rise today to 

note the passing of a former member of this Assembly, Henry 

— or as he was known to us who knew him, Hal — Coupland, 

Henry E. Coupland. 

 

Hal Coupland passed away peacefully on December 26, 1994 at 

the Meadow Lake Union Hospital. Though Hal Coupland was 

predeceased by his wife Ina, our hearts go out to his children: 

Don, Russ, Jean, and Shirley Ann, and other members of his 

family and his friends. 

 

It was my pleasure to serve in the legislature with Hal 

Coupland. He represented the constituency of Meadow Lake 

from 1964 to 1975. I entered the House first in 1967 and served 

four years in opposition to the party that he was a member of, 

that of the former premier, the late premier, Ross Thatcher. 

 

I can tell you that Hal Coupland, in my judgement, epitomized 

in public life, honesty in positions, integrity in the conduct, 

speaking up for constituents and constituency matters, 

representing the philosophy and the movement of his political 

party, supporting his government. And he was the kind of a 

person who you could meet informally after the hurly-burly, if I 

may use that cliché expression of this legislature. When the 

debates subside, Hal Coupland was always present for a 

friendly word or two, an ability to put aside partisanship and an 

ability to understand that while we do disagree, we all try to 

serve higher values and higher goals. 

 

I am sure the residents of that community, Meadow Lake, will 

join us today in recognizing his dedication to the people of 

Meadow Lake and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He and his wife farmed in the Goodsoil area after their marriage 

and moved to Hamilton, Ontario, in the late war years. They 

then moved back to Meadow Lake and began farming in the 

Dunfield district. After moving into the town of Meadow Lake, 

Mr. Coupland worked for the Pioneer Grain Company before 

purchasing a feed mill. He and his wife later purchased a chick 

hatchery and as well, a real estate agency which they ran until 

their retirement. 

 

Mr. Coupland's community-mindedness was also demonstrated 

by his interest in local politics. From 1976, after he left the 

legislature, he served for four years to 1980 as mayor of 

Meadow Lake. This indicates his lifelong devotion to public 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend my own personal, heartfelt 

sympathy and condolences to the family and friends of the late 

Hal Coupland. His contribution to Saskatchewan public life is 

greatly appreciated and he will be missed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members will join in 

supporting the following motion which I'm going to move, 

seconded as tradition dictates by the hon. member, the Leader 

of the Opposition, the hon. member from Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move therefore, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to this community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

 Henry Ethelbert Coupland, who died in Meadow Lake 

on December 26, 1994, was a member of this 

Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Meadow 

Lake from 1964 until 1975. Mr. Coupland was born in  



 

36 

Yorkton on December 28, 1915 and was educated at 

schools in Yorkton and Prelate. 

 

 In the early 1930s he moved with his family to Golden 

Ridge where they homesteaded. He married Ina Maxime 

Campbell on November 12, 1940 and together they 

farmed near Goodsoil before moving to Hamilton, 

Ontario in the late war years. 

 

 They returned with their family to farm in the Dunfield 

district and in 1948 moved into Meadow Lake. In town, 

Mr. Coupland initially worked for the Pioneer Grain 

Company. Later in 1953, he left the company after 

purchasing a feed mill. He continued to be self-

employed until his retirement, subsequently operating a 

chick hatchery, and a real estate and insurance company. 

 

 Mr. Coupland's adult life was characterized by service 

to his community and to his church. He served as 

chairman of the Golden Ridge school board for three 

years and as a town councillor in Meadow Lake for six 

years. He was a member of the chamber of commerce. 

 

 Service groups also benefited from Mr. Coupland's 

involvement. He belonged to the Masonic Lodge, the 

Eastern Star, the Benevolent and Protective Order of 

Elks Lodge, and was the zone commander of the Royal 

Canadian Legion. 

 

 His continuing interest in farming was demonstrated 

through his membership in the Meadow Lake 

Agriculture Society. As well, he was a board steward 

with Grace United Church. 

 

 Mr. Coupland ran unsuccessfully in the 1960 provincial 

election, but was elected to the legislature in 1964. He 

was re-elected for two more terms in 1967 and 1971. 

After leaving provincial politics, he served as mayor of 

Meadow Lake from 1976 until 1980. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathy with members of the bereaved family. I so 

move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Kindersley, the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to rise in my place and second the motion that the 

Premier has put forward in remembrance of Henry Coupland. 

Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of having known Mr. 

Coupland as a personal friend and, as the Premier mentioned, 

he was not of the same political philosophy that I hold, but our 

friendship was such that we could visit and joke back and forth 

with each other and I think that's a pretty good measure of 

friendship. 

 

I had the pleasure of meeting with Mr. Coupland this early fall 

and had a nice long visit with Mr. Coupland. And it is certainly 

with sadness that I take part in this condolences today. 

 

As the Premier said, Henry Coupland was a man who gave 

much to his community. He was a man who cared. 

 

Mr. Coupland was involved with many of the different 

organizations as mentioned by the Premier: the Masonic Lodge, 

of which I'm a member; the Eastern Star; and the Benevolent 

and Protective Order of Elks of Canada, of which I'm a life 

member. So we had a lot of things to visit about when we did 

get together. 

 

Henry Coupland was also zone commander of the Royal 

Canadian Legion and a member in the Meadow Lake 

Agriculture Society. If there was ever a legionnaire or a 

comrade that needed a spokesman, all he had to do was turn to 

Hal Coupland. Hal was one of those people who always and 

ever would find time for someone who needed someone to 

speak up for them and take their case in hand. 

 

After doing all these things, he still found time to be a 

participant in sports. He was a great sportsman. Henry played a 

lot of pretty good baseball up in that country and I'm sure that 

one of your local members over there will remember them early 

days up in the North. 

 

And, as well, as the Premier mentioned, he served on the 

Golden Ridge school board for three years. He was a town 

councillor in Meadow Lake for six years. And he furthered his 

political career by being elected an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) in 1964 and, as was mentioned before, 

he was elected for two more terms, 1976, or '67, I'm sorry, and 

1971. 

 

And even after leaving provincial politics, Mr. Coupland served 

as mayor of Meadow Lake from 1976 to 1980. The Premier 

covered a few of the things I was going to say so I will not carry 

on through. 

 

Mr. Coupland demonstrated through example, the kind life all 

of us strive for: a life filled with integrity and honesty, a life full 

of working and giving to others. 

 

He certainly will be missed by his family and by many of the 

people in Meadow Lake and surrounding districts. Mr. 

Coupland's influence in the legion goes through the whole area. 

I met him not as a legion member, although I am an associate 

member, but my brother and Hal were two very dedicated 

people towards the legion movement. And so I was there and 

saw the many things that Hal had time to do for many of the 

legionnaires who needed help. He'll be sorely missed by us as 

well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 



 

37 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 

the Premier and other members as we pay tribute to the former 

member, Mr. Henry (Hal) Coupland. On behalf of the Liberal 

Party of Saskatchewan and the members of our caucus, I extend 

to the family of Hal Coupland our most sincere and heartfelt 

sympathies. 

 

I had the opportunity a few days ago to share reminiscences 

with Mr. Ian MacDougall. And Ian, of course, was a fellow 

mate in this legislature, of Hal Coupland's. Ian MacDougall 

represented the constituency of Estevan, and he shared some 

stories with me about the seven years when he, Hal Coupland, 

Frank Radloff, Percy Schmeiser, and John Gardner roomed 

together in Regina during three legislative sessions. 

 

He told me of the one time in their early rooming years when he 

was making breakfast. And Frank Radloff thought that he 

would help out by pushing down the toaster without Ian's 

knowledge, and then left the room. Hal — or Coup, as he was 

known to them — entered the room to find the toaster and part 

of the kitchen wall in flames. Now he calmly decreed, Frank, 

from now on you're in charge of cleaning the sidewalks, and 

you must stay out of the kitchen. And then he went on to 

extinguish the blaze. 

 

Duties were thereafter assigned, with Ian left in charge of the 

cooking, Hal in charge of the kitchen clean-up, and Percy 

responsible for the housecleaning and vacuuming. And no, 

Frank Radloff was never allowed to help out in the kitchen 

again, but stuck to his sidewalk cleaning duties. 

 

Now Mr. MacDougall told me that Hal Coupland was a very 

tall, very serious looking man with quite a droll sense of 

humour. In fact all of these gentlemen room-mates shared 

several characteristics, height being one of them with the 

exception of one individual, Hal Coupland being six and a half 

feet tall, Mr. Radloff and Mr. Schmeiser being over six feet. 

And, well, for anyone who knows Ian MacDougall, that's not a 

characteristic in which they all shared. 

 

Something else of interest is that all of these gentlemen at one 

time or another served as a town councillor or a mayor for their 

communities. As the Premier mentioned in the condolence 

motion, Mr. Coupland served as both councillor and mayor of 

the town of Meadow Lake. 

 

Everyone in this Chamber can appreciate the kinds of living 

conditions members often endure in order to serve this 

Assembly. Spending days and weeks away from one's family 

requires a sacrifice that few can understand or appreciate. Part 

of the benefit of our work is making the very, very good 

relationships such as the one that existed between these friends 

that roomed together for so many years. I want to thank Ian for 

sharing his memories about the late Hal Coupland with me and 

with this House. 

 

Hal Coupland was seen as a very kind man who was a 

dedicated Liberal member. He worked hard in the legislature 

and he worked with great diligence for his constituency. He  

loved little children and often played hours in the corridors of 

this very building with the children of other MLAs when they 

came to visit their parents during the sessions. His children and 

grandchildren were very, very special to Hal and his late wife 

Ina. 

 

I want to mention today his children who mourn the loss of 

their father. Don and his wife Leona of Meadow Lake; Russ 

and his wife Eleanor, also of Meadow Lake; daughter Jean of 

Meadow Lake; and Shirley Ann Wensley and her husband Ray 

of Calgary. He also leaves to mourn a sister, Audrey, in 

Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, and a brother, George, in Port 

Coquitlam, B.C. His presence in their lives will be sorely 

missed, and especially by his 12 grandchildren, his six great 

grandchildren, and many nieces and nephews. 

 

On behalf of our party and our caucus, the people that he 

represented so well, as well as served in his constituency, I 

express my gratitude and appreciation to the life and work of 

this public servant, Mr. Hal Coupland. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Premier and other members in extending my 

condolences to the Coupland family also. On December 26, 

1994, Henry Coupland, or Hal as he was known to everyone, 

passed away peacefully at the Meadow Lake Union Hospital. 

 

In the early 1930s he and his family moved to the Golden Ridge 

area and took up homesteads there. This is where our families 

first met. Golden Ridge is located just a few miles south of 

where I was born and where my parents still reside. Over the 

years I often heard my father referring to the good old days and 

playing ball in Golden Ridge with everyone, including the 

Couplands. 

 

In 1940 he married Ina Campbell, and in 1948 they moved to 

Meadow Lake where he lived until his recent passing. 

 

Hal was always interested in politics, Mr. Speaker, and in 1964 

he was elected as a Liberal MLA from our area into the Ross 

Thatcher government. Hal must have been well liked because 

he was re-elected two more times and did not end his career in 

provincial politics until 1975. 

 

I can remember Hal coming to my parents' place on the farm in 

Goodsoil to solicit their support. As a child, I can still picture 

the big cowboy hat that he used to wear. Hal was a tall, lean 

man. And from my then tiny perspective, he seemed to be at 

least 20 feet tall with that big hat on top of his head. 

 

I'm sure my father did not succumb to his political arm twisting, 

but I suspect that there were other family members who over 

the years probably did. I guess only Hal really knows that now 

for sure though. 

 

Hal's popularity remained because in 1976 he was elected as 

mayor of Meadow Lake. He held this position until 1980. He 

battled some major health problems including an incredibly 

painful skin disease a number of years ago. He continued  



 

38 

having problems with his circulation and had many operations. 

Eventually he had both legs amputated. 

 

I visited Hal several times in the hospital in Saskatoon on my 

way here to the legislature. I cannot tell you, Mr. Speaker, how 

moved I was by this man. In the face of all this adversity and 

from his hospital bed he kept an amazingly positive attitude. He 

was always smiling and laughing and talking of what he would 

do when he got home. 

 

The only time I ever heard him be negative in any way, Mr. 

Speaker, was when he took the opportunity to take the 

occasional shot at our government. This was, however, 

obviously not a common occurrence. The problem was he was 

usually smiling so much you never really knew for sure whether 

or not he was criticizing you. 

 

Since I lived in Meadow Lake, I got to know this family even 

better and became friends with his son Don and wife Leona, his 

daughter Jean, who looked after Hal after his wife Ina passed 

away several years ago, and his son Russ and Eleanor. Also left 

behind was his daughter Shirley Ann and her husband Ray who 

I did not know. 

 

It became very obvious as I visited with family members over 

the years that they were intensely proud of their dad, and well 

they should have been. I had great admiration for Hal, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to relate one event that will be etched in my 

mind for ever. 

 

As I was campaigning in the provincial election in the fall of 

1991, one of the places that I was asked to stop at was at Hal's 

place. It was with some consternation that I walked up to his 

house and knocked on the door. I anticipated a seasoned 

politician who would probably attempt to tear our platform to 

pieces. Mr. Speaker, I couldn't have been more wrong. I think 

he . . . I should say, I think he could tell that I was nervous and 

a bit tired from campaigning. Instead, he invited me in for 

coffee and he couldn't have been gentler. He talked of his 

campaigning days and how hard it was to get around and visit 

everyone. He spoke of the sacrifices that his family had made 

for him in politics. I would like to believe some of his 

friendliness came from a general acceptance of our platform as 

well but I will not be presumptuous. Rather, I suspect it because 

. . . I suspect it was because he was just a good person with a 

kind and gentle heart. 

 

Hal, you will be missed by all of us. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today as 

well to pay my respect and celebrate the life of Hal Coupland. I 

not so much speak for the members of the Assembly but for the 

family, for the children, and especially to Jean, his daughter, 

who I attended school with. 

 

I first met Hal Coupland back in about 1958 or '59. And he 

came to our house, where we lived, and I had a niece who was 

staying with us who lived in a rural area and was attending high 

school. And the niece that stayed with us, my cousin, and Hal's  

oldest son, Don, and two other teenagers at high school were 

causing some problems, as teenagers sometimes do. And I 

remember Hal coming to talk to my mother about the situation 

that the kids were creating at school, which was not always a 

happy one. And he was an imposing man. He stood so tall, 

especially to a youngster. And I think he was wearing a hat, 

likely the cowboy hat that the member from Meadow Lake 

referred to. 

 

And I remember I worked in a grocery store as a clerk during 

the time of the second election where Hal Coupland was 

elected, and the vigour of the campaign. And his campaigns 

weren't so much an individual effort, but they were a family 

effort where all his children and his family and his wife Ina 

were always very supportive of the election campaigns and the 

work that was done as an MLA. 

 

In terms of the family, Ina, who has passed away previously — 

I don't think I could find a kinder, gentler person, and very 

supportive of her husband being a member of the Legislative 

Assembly. Something that's always very supportive to any of us 

is to have support of spouses in terms of our careers, whether 

they're a short career or a long career. 

 

Hal, as has been mentioned, represented the Meadow Lake 

constituency from 1964 until 1975. And I remember I talked to 

Hal Coupland often as I grew up and became involved in 

politics — a different political party, but Hal always had time 

for people. And I remember Allan Blakeney would always refer 

to the period from when the Liberals came into office until they 

left office as the long, lean years. And I mentioned this to Hal 

Coupland one time, and I think he was still smoking the pipe, 

and he puffed on his pipe and he smiled and he said yes, he 

said, good years. 

 

The acquaintance I had with Hal Coupland also came not to 

confrontation but to opposition sometimes. I was the campaign 

manager for the NDP candidate in Meadow Lake in 1975 when 

Hal was defeated. And it was a good campaign, it was a close 

campaign, and sometimes, regardless of the candidates, we all 

win and lose. Sometimes I think we think of ourselves as 

politicians as the most important focal point, but there's much 

more that goes beyond the individual as to whether you get 

elected or defeated. And even after the election campaign Hal 

would bear no ill will to others who had opposed him during 

election campaigns, and we had many conversations together 

about politics and about our home community of Meadow Lake 

and about a number of things that people talk about. 

 

Hal Coupland was always very dedicated also to his political 

party and he believed in it; he believed from his heart. After the 

'75 election where Hal was defeated, he actually went and ran 

as a candidate in the next election in the constituency of 

Athabasca. And I don't think that he went there with the 

intention that he was going to win, although we all go into 

elections with the intention of winning. But I think, more than 

anything, that he did it to serve his party that he believed in and 

he wanted to further a cause that he believed in, and he was 

very dedicated to that. 



 

39 

I'm sure that the residents of the Meadow Lake community and 

that area join us today in passing on our condolences to the 

children — to Don and Russell and Jean and Shirley Ann. 

 

I also think of Hal Coupland, when it was mentioned earlier 

today that he farmed at one point in time in the Dunfield 

district. My wife has an aunt and uncle at that time who lived in 

that district as well, Dick and Viola Chuhaniuk. And as far as I 

know, that family was always New Democrat. And the 

Couplands though, Hal and Ina, were good friends of theirs and 

they would visit back and forth. And I remember after the 1980 

federal election, when I was elected as a Member of Parliament, 

one day Mona and I drove into the yard at the Chuhaniuk farm 

and Viola met us at the door. And she said to us, don't talk 

politics because Hal and Ina are here. Well Hal and Ina and 

myself and Mona had talked politics many times in the past but 

never in a really confrontational way, and so I appreciated what 

Viola Chuhaniuk was saying to me. She didn't want arguments 

within her house at the kitchen table over a cup of coffee. And 

so we got into the house and I sat down and Hal wanted to 

know how things were going for me as a Member of Parliament 

and so we got into talking politics in any event and it was a 

good afternoon and conversation that were had. 

 

I do want to say in closing that Hal Coupland was an altruistic 

man. I don't think he did things to serve his own benefit. He did 

things to serve his family, but more important his province and 

his community. He was an honourable man and he was always 

calm and collected and a very dedicated man. And I join with 

the members here today to pass on my condolences, especially 

to his family. Thank you. 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 

want to extend my condolences to the Coupland family today. I 

grew up in Meadow Lake as well, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Coupland name was a very well-respected name and a very 

familiar name in the community. 

 

When the member from Meadow Lake said that he thought that 

Mr. Coupland was a good person with a kind and gentle heart, 

he could not have said truer words. My impressions of Mr. 

Coupland as a young person in the community at the time, was 

that he was very kind, he was very approachable, and he was a 

gentleman. My parents spoke of Mr. Coupland with a great deal 

of respect in their voice at every time that they discussed Mr. 

Coupland and his role in the community. 

 

So today on behalf of my family and on behalf of my mother, 

Antoinette Simard, and on my behalf, I wish to extend the very 

deepest sympathy to the Coupland family in their loss. And I 

hope that it will be some consolation for them to know that 

their father was a very respected man and made a substantial 

contribution not just to the community of Meadow Lake and 

area but also to the province. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I would like to move, seconded by the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose: 

 

 That the resolution just passed, together with a 

transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 

be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of 

this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley and seconded by Mr. 

Knezacek. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, hon. colleagues of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly, I rise not only to respond to the Speech from the 

Throne on behalf of the official opposition, but for the first time 

in provincial history I rise to deliver a clear alternative to the 

policies of the current administration. 

 

Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to acknowledge and 

welcome Margaret Woods in her new position as the Clerk 

Assistant, and would also welcome and congratulate the new 

group of pages who have been selected for this session. 

 

We have a very proud and rich tradition of parliamentary 

democracy in Saskatchewan and your participation in all our 

endeavours is greatly appreciated. I'm sure you'll all enjoy your 

tenure with the Legislative Assembly. And on behalf of the 

official opposition, I wish you all the best. 

 

I would also like to welcome and extend our best wishes to the 

province's new Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. Jack Wiebe. This 

role is very much more than ceremonial. Indeed we have been 

blessed with many lieutenant governors who have made a 

significant contribution to our province, and I'm sure His 

Honour will carry on that tradition. Again on behalf of the 

official opposition, I wish the new Lieutenant Governor all the 

best in the first session. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the past few months have seen a lot of 

firsts. For the first time in Saskatchewan a political leader has 

been chosen by universal suffrage, one member one vote. And 

in the largest vote held by any political party in this province I 

was honoured to be chosen by the members of my political 

party, the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 

40 

The process undertaken by my party was the most open and 

democratic way to choose a leader. And it was accomplished by 

using modern computer and telecommunications technology 

available anywhere. It wasn't the old, tired delegate selection 

system, Mr. Speaker. It was a fresh innovative . . . it was 

exciting and it represents the engine of renewal that will drive 

the new and open way to govern across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we began the new year by releasing our caucus's 

audited books to the public, something the members opposite 

have failed to do to this point. And we will be asking and 

continuing to ask, and I'm sure the media will be asking the 

government caucus chairperson when they're going to be doing 

that. 

 

The Liberals gave a look, I guess what you could consider it as 

sort of a peekaboo look, at their caucus's books. Sort of. It was 

here it is but you can't have a copy of it. As I understand, that 

was their way of releasing theirs. 

 

We released it in general form to anyone who wants a copy of 

it. And we are very proud of the content of it. 

 

We continued by implementing and acting on our party's policy 

of zero tolerance with respect to wrongdoing on behalf of 

elected officials. Again something the Premier of this province 

has failed to act upon as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members of our caucus will once again 

lead the fight for democratic and legislative reform. Last 

session we introduced five private members' Bills aimed at 

making Saskatchewan elected officials more open and 

accountable. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

chose to block these Bills and they didn't see the light of day. 

 

How ironic now, Mr. Speaker, that the government's own 

polling shows that the vast majority of Saskatchewan people 

support those very initiatives. And I'm not talking about 60 or 

70 per cent, but in most cases 80 to 90 per cent of 

Saskatchewan people support those initiatives. These results tell 

me they just don't approve of democratic reform — they're 

absolutely demanding democratic reform. And as such, Mr. 

Speaker, we'll be reintroducing all five of these private 

members' Bills and we'll be pushing to see that they're 

implemented. 

 

Number one, we'll be proposing an all-party committee to make 

appointments to government boards and commissions. We think 

that all parties should have a say in important government 

positions so that the president of outfits like the SaskPower 

doesn't have the kind of authority and power that he seems to 

have to even overrule the previous minister as he did on a 

number of occasions in the last session, Mr. Speaker. And I'm 

not surprised that the former minister of SaskPower is happy to 

be out of that portfolio and having to deal with Mr. Messer. But 

it should be such that all members have a say in important 

appointments to government boards and commissions. 

 

Number two, we'll introduce legislation to establish an all-party  

committee, open to the public and the media, to review 

proposed utility rates, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that's 

extremely important. And we congratulate today the 

Government of Saskatchewan for rolling back the SaskEnergy 

prices. And it's only a gain I think as a result of the pressure 

from the opposition as well as the public that was exerted on 

this government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Had to change the minister to do it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Had to change the minister, exactly, to get that 

thing accomplished, Mr. Speaker. But at least they finally 

listened to the public of Saskatchewan and the rate for 

SaskEnergy has been reduced by, I understand, 6.5 per cent 

today, Mr. Speaker, as a result, a direct result, of the opposition 

that we presented in this legislature and to the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we think what should have been done by the minister  

and he's here, Mr. Speaker  what should have been done by 

the minister is create an all-party committee or a commission to 

set the rates for utilities across this province, to remove it from 

government control the way it is today, Mr. Speaker, so that you 

have representatives of business and labour and farm groups 

and a number of groups across this province to have a say in 

those utility rates because they're so important in Saskatchewan 

today, rather than simply a government hoisting them at every 

opportunity they can, and finally, after tremendous pressure, 

reducing those rates, even though it isn't by a great deal, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Forty per cent reduction in the well-head price of natural gas in 

Saskatchewan and we see it being passed on — at least 

somewhat passed on — to the people of Saskatchewan in a very 

modest fashion. Alberta reduced it by 10 per cent, incidentally, 

Mr. Speaker. And we know the importance of this legislation 

because of the well-head reduction, as I said. 

 

Number three, we'll be moving amendments to The Legislative 

Assembly Act to follow fixed election dates every four years. 

Again we think that's extremely important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Number four, we'll be seeking a legislative reduction in the 

number of cabinet ministers, specifying that the number be 

proportionate to the number of MLAs in the legislature. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province had opportunity in 

this last cabinet shuffle to reduce the number of cabinet 

ministers. It would have saved something in the magnitude of 

$2 million for that move, Mr. Speaker, but again they chose not 

to do that because of the political necessity that they feel all the 

time. 

 

Number five, Mr. Speaker, we'll be seeking to convert votes on 

all pieces of legislation into free votes by stipulating that a 

government may only be defeated on a specifically designed 

vote of non-confidence. And that's what the people across 

Saskatchewan are calling for. 

 

They're demanding that type of democratic reform, where the  



 

41 

people of the constituencies have some degree of control over 

their member, where the member votes the wishes of their 

constituents, rather than simply the wishes of the Premier of 

this province. And we'll be bringing again questions of 

Saskatchewan people to the floor of this Assembly through the 

Mr. Premier, I want to know . . . initiative, as we brought it 

forward last session. 

 

Not only could people write a question on the thousands of 

cards distributed around this province but they can phone or fax 

and for now, the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, a 

growing number of people on the information super-highway 

will have direct access to the opposition caucus through 

electronic mail. 

 

We can be reached at PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus at 

microcity.com. The Mr. Premier, I want to know . . . program 

has been extremely popular in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 

I'm proud to announce the official opposition in Nova Scotia 

has adopted and implemented our model during the last 

legislative session, with great success. 

 

And there is a very simple reason for that kind of success. It 

improves accessibility and accountability. It minimizes partisan 

bickering and political posturing. It's clearly the wave of the 

future and I'm proud to say our caucus and this legislature is 

leading the way. 

 

I know the Premier and the cabinet ministers opposite always 

look forward to answering direct questions from the people of 

this province. Mr. Speaker, we are proud of these democratic 

reform initiatives, but clearly the end is not only there as well. 

We'll be bringing forward much more during this session. 

 

(1500) 

 

The measures I'm about to outline represent the most extensive 

legislative session package ever brought forward by an 

opposition party into the Saskatchewan legislature. Our goal is 

to present a clear alternative to big-government approach of the 

current administration — an alternative based on smaller 

government, fiscal restraint, small business as the catalyst of 

economic growth and job creation, and a greater emphasis on 

individual rights and responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in bringing these private members' Bills forward 

we are showing the government opposite what they are doing 

wrong, and the people of Saskatchewan is right on this issue. 

 

During this session, the official opposition will introduce 

balanced budget legislation which includes a clause making it 

illegal to raise taxes without the consent of Saskatchewan 

voters through referendum. Time and time we have seen this 

government restrain its citizens’ spending through one tax 

increase after another. We think it's time the people restrain 

government's spending rather than the other way around. 

 

We think the government should have to ask permission if it 

wants to run a deficit or raise taxes, and that's exactly what this  

legislation is designed to do. 

 

I'm anxious to compare our legislation with the one that's being 

promised by the members opposite because in the end, Mr. 

Speaker, legislation means nothing to the government opposite. 

If they don't like it, they just change it retroactively. They've 

done it to farm families, they've done it to judges, to co-op 

members, and given the opportunity, they'll do it to every single 

taxpayer in this province. Our legislation, Mr. Speaker, will 

have teeth, taxpayers' teeth. It'll take the bite out of the 

politicians instead of out of working people. 

 

During this session we'll move a motion under The Referendum 

and Plebiscite Act requiring that a referendum on gambling 

expansion be held in conjunction with the next provincial 

election. That is a question that you people should be asking the 

people of Saskatchewan before you go ahead with any further 

gambling expansion. Do the people of Saskatchewan support 

expanded gambling? It's never been asked. We do not know the 

answer to that question. Before there's any more harm done 

with gambling in this province, we should ask that fundamental 

question of the people of this province. Do they want gambling 

or not? 

 

The motion will include a moratorium on any further gambling 

expansion until that referendum is held. This is a far more 

responsible action than those presented by the Liberal leader, 

who appears to be in a bidding war with the government 

opposite over who will give away most gambling revenues in 

order to get elected. Cold, calculating, dishonest, as the Liberal 

leader's style is, Mr. Speaker  as cold and callous as a casino 

pit boss's heart. 

 

And we see it again today, Mr. Speaker. First the Liberals 

plagiarize the Department of Education's discussion papers. 

Then they claim it for their own, do not bother to cost them out. 

Their spending promises to date have been calculated at $350 

million; the Liberals' spending promises to date — $350 

million. And that's before, that's before the latest spending 

promises of today. The so-called, self-proclaimed fiscally 

conservative Liberal leader is anything but. And going into the 

next election campaign my guess is, Mr. Speaker, that Liberals 

will be in a bidding war against the government members 

opposite, to see who can win the hearts and the pocketbooks of 

the population of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As I announced last month, we'll introduce Bills to repeal the 

NDP's changes to The Trade Union and The Labour Standards 

Acts. And we asked questions of the minister today about that, 

Mr. Speaker, and we said to the minister, those provisions are 

still within that legislation; they're just simply there, sitting 

there with a note above them that says not to be proclaimed 

until a later date. And we believe, Mr. Minister, that those 

things should . . . those offensive amendments should be taken 

off, taken out of that piece of legislation. And you would have 

the full cooperation of the official opposition if you were 

willing to do that, Mr. Minister. 

 



 

42 

Even though our economy has been strengthened by 

improvements in prices for agriculture and oil and gas products, 

even though Canada has pulled out of the recession and over 

300,000 new jobs were created across Canada last year — 

Saskatchewan continues to limp along with a net loss of 1,000 

jobs since 1991. Not a gain — not a gain, as the Premier would 

try to have us believe. It's truly remarkable that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan would have the audacity to try and convince the 

people he serves that he has created 12,000 new jobs since 

1994. 

 

Even in your revised Statistics Canada figures today released, 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy managed to create a 

paltry 2,000 jobs in 1994 — not 12,000 as the Premier is 

saying, Mr. Speaker. And when you compare that to other 

jurisdictions across Canada — like Alberta, for example — 

there have been 80,000 jobs created in the last two years in 

Alberta — 2,000 in Saskatchewan; 80,000 in Alberta. And the 

Premier stands and crows about the job that they're doing, in the 

throne speech, Mr. Speaker, about how good a job they're doing 

in job creation — 80,000 in Alberta; 2,000 here. And they stand 

and somehow and other want to take credit for that kind of 

record, Mr. Speaker. Incredible. 

 

It's no secret why Saskatchewan has such a dismal performance, 

Mr. Speaker. Economist Eric Howe of the University of 

Saskatchewan put the blame squarely on the NDP, saying it was 

taxes and higher utility rates that weakened job growth in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So what is the government's response? Throwing more 

taxpayers' money at the problem through programs like JobStart 

and Future Skills. It appears that they have not learned from the 

mistakes of others. It's the same old big-government reaction to 

a problem. Governments, Mr. Speaker, do not create jobs. 

Business does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — And what we need is a government that will get 

out of the way of business — that will get out of the way of 

business across this province. Less government, not more 

government. Yet we see new labour laws that will drive even 

more jobs out of our province in return for little, if any, 

apparent benefit. And now we hear of more insanity as it relates 

to the so-called fair wage tendering policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is nothing fair about this policy at all, unless 

you are a union leader. This program would simply see the 

government Crown contracts go to the employers who must 

employ 75 per cent of their workforce through union halls. The 

remaining 25 per cent don't have to belong to a union but they 

have to pay union dues. That's not fair, Mr. Speaker; that's 

absolute extortion from those people. And guess where a lot of 

the union dues go, Mr. Speaker? To the New Democratic Party. 

First of all they extort them from the people who don't want to 

belong to the union, and then they pay them to the NDP Party 

of this province, Mr. Speaker, for election purposes. How very 

convenient. Just in time for another election. 

We simply cannot to afford to continue losing jobs for political 

reasons in this province. The labour Bills, Mr. Minister, must be 

repealed and the union-only contracting must be stopped. It 

should be a policy of the lowest tender, simply lowest tender, 

union or non-union — full stop, period. 

 

We'll introduce a number of welfare reform measures aimed at 

reducing welfare fraud and putting able-bodied welfare 

recipients back to work. These will include measures I've talked 

about during the leadership campaign such as cheque pick-up, a 

1-800 tip line, enhanced fraud investigation, and work-for-

welfare programs for employable individuals. 

 

As a matter of interest, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba they 

introduced a 1-800 tip line where people could call in and 

suggest . . . essentially turn in people who they thought were 

committing fraud against the welfare system. And Premier 

Filmon told me that during the first 30 days of operation they 

saved $700,000 of taxpayers' money — in 30 days. 

 

And in Saskatchewan we have not one single fraud investigator 

looking into problems associated with the welfare system in this 

province any longer — not one. It's simply a case of writing the 

cheque to anyone who comes in the door. 

 

We’ll introduce a motion calling for a pilot project boot camp 

for young offenders, an idea that has worked well again in 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. It's simply a case of having young 

offenders be rehabilitated in a very strict and regimented form, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact we find in Manitoba today, Mr. Speaker, 

that it's so strictly regulated, the young offenders' program, that 

there are actually young offenders making application to go to 

maximum security jails because it's less restrictive in a 

maximum security jail today in Manitoba than it is in one of the 

young offender boot camps. 

 

We’ll introduce stronger laws to deal with child maintenance 

enforcement. We think there should be tougher penalties for so-

called dead-beat parents. And I think all of us as MLAs know 

the problems associated with single parent families in 

Saskatchewan. It's one of the things that we are called most 

frequently, as members, from constituents about. I certainly am, 

and I'm sure other members can say the same thing about that, 

members . . . or, pardon me, people in society that aren't paying 

their way for their children. And we think that should be 

stopped. 

 

A greater exchange of information between provinces in order 

to track down those individuals who are trying to avoid 

financial responsibility for their children. Unfortunately some 

individuals choose not to live up to their financial 

responsibilities for their families, and it is the children, Mr. 

Speaker, who wind up paying the price. These measures will be 

designed to address that problem. 

 

We'll introduce a motion opposing the national gun registry and 

calling for a made-in-Saskatchewan gun laws. After all of the 

chest thumping we heard from some of the members opposite 

over the useless gun laws about to be enacted by the Liberal  



 

43 

government in Ottawa, we saw absolutely nothing about it in 

the throne speech — absolutely nothing. It was a glaring 

omission, an omission that we will take the government to task 

over, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were other exclusions, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely no 

mention of the line-ups for surgery, the line-ups to get into a 

hospital bed, the waiting-lists for our most disabled seniors into 

nursing homes — no mention of these things because they want 

to have people try and forget about them and their problems. 

 

No mention about the NDP rip-off that was perpetrated on 

Saskatchewan farmers through the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program). No mention of the 80,000 people-plus in 

Saskatchewan that are on welfare — nothing, not even a 

whisper about the welfare recipients of this province in the 

throne speech. 

 

These are areas that we will certainly explore, Mr. Speaker. But 

we feel this agenda will move us beyond the role of traditional 

opposition and showing the people of Saskatchewan that we are 

ready to govern. We expect this to be a do-nothing session on 

behalf of the NDP who are more concerned about meeting their 

political agenda than dealing with the problems of 

Saskatchewan with respect to the economy and social problems. 

The NDP's lack of positive action is going to leave a huge void 

to fill, and we intend to fill it. 

 

This agenda clearly sets us apart from the big-government 

approach of the NDP and the approach of the Liberals who 

have fallen upon the old-style pattern of opposition, simply 

opposing without alternatives — and when they do put forward 

alternatives, they've been taken from somewhere else — and 

trying to be all things to all people. Those days, Mr. Speaker, 

are gone. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, we offer a new vision for Saskatchewan. 

We offer a new contract with the people of Saskatchewan 

which is based upon these fundamentals, Mr. Speaker. We 

believe in the almost-unlimited capacity of the individual and 

that government should allow the individual the maximum 

freedom to create and achieve and prosper. 

 

We believe in individual rights and responsibilities and 

freedoms. But we also believe that with every right comes an 

equivalent amount of responsibility and that people must take 

responsibility for their actions. We believe in law and order. We 

believe that we should start restraining government instead of 

restraining the individual. 

 

We believe in small business as a catalyst of our economy and 

that small-business men and women do not need direct help 

from government to help build our economy or create jobs. All 

they need is for government to get out of their way. 

 

We believe in the government's . . . that government's 

compassion should be measured not by the number of people 

receiving government assistance, but the number of people who 

no longer require government assistance. And we believe the  

most important social structure in society is not government; it 

is the family. And most government programs aimed at 

families, no matter how well intentioned they may be, that 

government programs do not build stronger family values, but 

in many cases serve to erode those strong family values. Mr. 

Speaker, that's what each of our actions will be measured 

against. 

 

Today I've set forward a general direction, with more detailed 

announcements to come forward later as each measure is 

introduced into the House. Mr. Speaker, they are not done for 

political reasons, they are done because it is the right thing for 

Saskatchewan. It is the right thing for the people of this 

province; it is the right thing for the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, colleagues, at the end 

of the day when we have delivered, when we have joined 

together to do what is the right thing, then every member of this 

Assembly will be able to stand in their place and take a bow for 

a job well done. Every member will be able to occupy their seat 

with pride, honour and respect which once graced the position 

of Member of the Legislative Assembly. Let's not miss this 

opportunity. Let's do what is right for the people of this 

province. Let's do what is right for the taxpayers of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would submit to the government today that all of the motions 

and the Bills that we are bringing forward are in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people, in the best interests of 

taxpayers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your attention and for your 

consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 

pleasure to rise here today in response to the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

I want to first of all welcome you, Mr. Speaker, back for this 

session and wish you the very best in your deliberations in this 

particular session. I also want to welcome all the other members 

of the legislature. 

 

And I also want to pay special recognition to Ms. Margaret 

Woods who will be working as Assistant Clerk, I believe. I had 

the opportunity to work with Margaret on the Select Driving 

Safety Committee, and she certainly approaches any task with 

professionalism and a sense of strong commitment. 

 

As well I want to welcome the ushers who are going to be 

working with us in this particular session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest and entertainment to the  



 

44 

speech from the Leader of the Opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to bring the . . . I guess I want to talk today about the 

renewal process and the revitalization that is taking place in 

Saskatchewan. A new day of hope and opportunity — Mr. 

Speaker, and fellow colleagues, that is the title of this year's 

throne speech. And in that particular phrase I think it says it all 

about the atmosphere and the attitude of Saskatchewan people 

and Saskatchewan communities right across this province. 

 

Three and a half short years ago, Mr. Speaker, when we took 

office, we faced an almost insurmountable challenge and task 

ahead of us. For many, many years there had been, I guess, 

irresponsible spending on behalf of governments that had 

culminated in a massive accumulated public debt. And when we 

were first elected, we faced the reality, the stark reality of just 

how large that financial challenge and that financial situation 

was. 

 

We moved immediately, Mr. Speaker, to establish a process in 

which we would demonstrate to the people and show to the 

people of Saskatchewan exactly what the financial picture of 

Saskatchewan was. And what we did, we established an 

independent commission to review the books of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think all members know and the people of 

Saskatchewan have heard of the Gass Financial Review 

Commission. 

 

And what this commission did was take a look, an in-depth 

look, an examination of Saskatchewan's finances. And there 

was no interference by the government. They were able to 

exercise their duties without interference, free of any pressure. 

They were totally independent. And what they brought back to 

us, the legislators, was the exact situation in Saskatchewan of 

the finances. And believe you me, they were dark and I guess 

discouraging. And it was rather a formidable task to reverse that 

situation. 

 

The commission set out some very clear recommendations as to 

what government should follow when implementing a fiscal 

plan. And what did we do? We could have just overlooked the 

recommendations and went our own way and did what we 

thought was best. But no. We followed the recommendations of 

the Gass Financial Review Commission, and I'm proud to say 

that three and a half years later we're here and we're on the eve 

of delivering a balanced budget for the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is directly related to the recommendations and to this 

government following those recommendations and setting out 

at the beginning of its mandate a balanced budget plan and 

following it. And I'm proud of that. And I want to commend all 

of my colleagues for having the courage and the leadership to 

take on the major decisions, the tough decisions that had to be 

made. 

 

I also, though, want to commend and want to thank 

Saskatchewan people for understanding and sticking with the 

government as we went through this very difficult process. 

They are the ones that need to be thanked, because they had the  

vision and the understanding to support us. And certainly that 

made our job a lot easier. 

 

Now of course with the balanced budget will come — certainly 

a balanced budget will come — the ability for us to take a look 

at different areas of government expenditures; to take a look at 

how we're raising revenues. And definitely in the future you 

will see that again we will be following a specific fiscal plan. 

And it's not going to stray away from what we have set in place. 

We're not going to be balancing for one year; we're going to be 

balancing on a sustained basis for the future, because that's 

what Saskatchewan people are saying. And we will be doing 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In keeping with that, our government is going to be introducing 

the balanced budget Act. And I think it's very important to note 

that this Act comes after, as I said, much sacrifice by 

Saskatchewan people. But it's important that we put in place 

this kind of Act. 

 

It's important that this Act also have the flexibility, because we 

realize in a province like Saskatchewan where we're buffeted by 

all kinds of forces that we may not have control over . . . In a 

resource-dependent province, we have to be able to have the 

flexibility to be able to maybe change course if need be. If all of 

a sudden that there was forces beyond our control, we need to 

be able to exercise some kind of flexibility. And I think this Act 

will specifically achieve that end. 

 

We are also, Mr. Speaker, putting in place a more accountable 

system for MLA salaries and allowances. We've established an 

independent commission that will review this. And it's going to 

be again, an opportunity for the public, an opportunity for us in 

the legislature, to speak about and take a look at this particular 

system that we have in place and how we can make is simpler 

and more accountable for the public. 

 

I noted that the Leader of the Opposition made reference to our 

party, our government caucus expenditures, and that we have 

not released details of those expenditures up to this point in 

time and that his caucus has released the details of their 

particular expenditures. I would just like to clarify for the 

Leader of the Opposition that we will be releasing the details of 

those financial expenditures in the near future. However I want 

them to also note that there is a categorical difference with the 

way we are going to be releasing, and also making more 

accountable, the examinations of those particular expenditures 

in years to come. 

 

The opposition of course released their particular expenditures 

to the media in the halls of the legislature. What we are going to 

be doing is taking a look and trying to recommend a more 

defined, orderly process on how we review and we release these 

particular financial expenditures. And we will be making a 

submission to the independent commission as we release our 

financial expenditures for caucus, and that will be done in the 

very near future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can say that on the fiscal policy side, our  



 

45 

government again has shown leadership, has shown courage, 

has shown the ability and the difference in reaching a balanced 

budget compared to other jurisdictions. And the difference is 

that we have shown and demonstrated that we can balance 

budgets in a compassionate, a sensitive, and in keeping with the 

Saskatchewan principles of caring, sharing, which are very 

important in this province. 

 

I want to speak about jobs and economic development because 

that is a major thrust of our throne speech. And as was 

demonstrated before and as we heard before, Statistics Canada 

of course have revised their estimates for jobs in Saskatchewan, 

and I noted with interest that the Leader of the Opposition is 

still playing fast and loose with job figures. 

 

And of course I note yesterday and I quote that yesterday he 

said, and I quote, that Saskatchewan has lost nearly 1,000 jobs 

last year, the only province in Canada to do that. And yet 

StatsCanada now has revised and said that there was a net job 

creation of 2,000 jobs in Saskatchewan last year. I think the 

Leader of the Opposition should be more careful about again 

playing fast and loose with job figures. 

 

I want to tell you that again in keeping with the planned, orderly 

approach that we have applied to every area of government, in 

the economy we have pursued the same kind of strategy. We sat 

down at the beginning as government, and we sat down with 

the stakeholders in the economy. And we said, let's get together 

in the big tent, and let's try to draw some kind of consensus 

here. Let's try to draw some kind of contract up that we can all 

live by. And we got that kind of agreement, and we are now 

seeing the benefits of that kind of cooperation and partnering 

that took place right at the beginning of our mandate. 

 

The document of course that I'm talking about that has been the 

catalyst for the kind of optimism and the kind of growth that 

we're seeing in the economy today is of course the Partnership 

for Renewal economic development strategy that the minister 

released some time ago. 

 

And again what we did at the beginning was of course to set out 

the vision, the vision for future economic growth in this 

province, and bearing in mind of course and keeping in mind 

what has made Saskatchewan prosper to the level that it has: 

cooperatives, the private sector, the public sector, all working 

together. And that's where we went. Those were strengths that 

we put in place, we kept. 

 

Next I guess we looked at the goals that were needed to 

maintain to of course achieve some of our objectives. And some 

of those goals were to create a positive economic . . . a positive 

environment for economic renewal. And part of that of course 

was to get some balanced budget . . . work towards a balanced 

budget. Because if you keep incurring large deficits, it's very 

difficult to stimulate the economy because of course it's taking 

more and more tax dollars to pay for these larger expenditures. 

 

So we've achieved part of that environment on the eve of a 

balanced budget. 

Another goal that was very important to the province and to 

stakeholders was to secure and build on existing strengths, 

based on sustainable economic development. And this is key for 

the future of Saskatchewan. We have seen too many times in 

the past few years, in particular in the 10 years when the 

Conservatives were in power, we have seen too many examples 

of money that was put into projects that were unsustainable. 

 

(1530) 

 

And what happened to these projects? We've seen them fail, 

and they are a part of the legacy of the debt of this province. 

Business and stakeholders said that that must not happen any 

more. We must have sustainable economic growth and 

sustainable economic development, and that's what we have 

strove to put in place. 

 

Another goal that we identified was to seek full employment. 

And I'm proud to say that with the numbers that Statistics 

Canada has released, we are seeing the growth and the 

expansion of jobs in Saskatchewan, and we're very hopeful that 

the target we have set by the year 2000 will be achievable. 

 

As well, in our economic blueprint we set out some very clear 

objectives on how we would achieve all of our goals. And 

again, we're keeping to the particular plan and working on each 

and every one of these objectives to ensure that we meet them 

and their specific time lines. 

 

I want to talk about one aspect of Partnership for Renewal that 

I firmly believe in and I see it expanding and developing, and 

that is of course the implementation of regional economic 

development authorities. And I think we had reference to them 

in the throne speech, and some of the members have 

commented on how regional economic development authorities 

are already creating wealth in their particular regions. 

 

And what regional economic development authorities are in 

actuality is forms of cooperatives. Regional economic 

development authorities identify a particular region and the 

stakeholders, the economic stakeholders, come together in that 

region. They identify existing strengths. They identify potential 

opportunities for expansion, economic expansion and job 

creation. And then the stakeholders come together to work and 

try to meet the objectives that they have set out. And this is 

important. You will always have . . . you will see a continuing 

community and self-determination. 

 

And regional economic development authorities do not take 

away from that self-determination. On the contrary, you must 

continue to have that but on a regional basis. The communities, 

individuals, businesses, stakeholders must come together and 

again identify the strengths. Identify the financial inventory and 

other inventories in their region and then work together 

collectively in a new partnership to expand that region. 

 

And we're seeing already tremendous benefits from these 

particular authorities. And I'm sure that you're going to see, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the next few months there will be many, many  



 

46 

announcements, and most of them will be due to the hard work 

and diligence and ingenuity of regional economic development 

authorities and the benefits that they bring to the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

I want to talk a bit about agriculture and the importance of 

agriculture to this province and how it is going to contribute to 

the economy. It has contributed, it is contributing now, but it’s 

going to play a major, major role in the future development of 

the Saskatchewan economy in particular as we prepare for the 

21st century. 

 

I just want to say that our government has initiated the change 

of attitude, has been the ones . . . this government has made 

farmers and made agri-business take a look at itself and say, 

how are we doing business, and should we be doing business in 

a different way? 

 

The program changes that we brought about — a change, as the 

Leader of the Opposition bemoans, about GRIP — the changes 

to GRIP that we made, in large part have been the catalyst for 

some of the changes that we see now occurring. The $948 

million of net realized farm income in 1994 are because of the 

diversification that has taken place on Saskatchewan farms. 

 

And why? Because farmers now are realizing that they have to 

take the messages and the signals from the market-place. And 

they're adapting to that. The expansion of pulse crops in this 

province is something to be admired and encouraged, and 

hopefully it will continue. 

 

But what it is doing on the pulse side is you are building the 

critical mass. You're building the critical mass in pulse 

production, and that is going to bring in the other spin-offs, the 

value added spin-offs that we've been talking about. Because 

until you built that critical mass, there wasn't going to be the 

kind of interest in expanding the value added side. 

 

So we're seeing that. And that's exciting, and that's renewal in 

agriculture. And that's exactly what this province needs is more 

emphasis on processing of raw materials right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan and shipping out processed goods 

instead of raw materials and exporting jobs to other regions of 

Canada or North America. 

 

Had we not changed, Mr. Speaker, had we not changed the 

direction of agriculture, change would have been inflicted on 

the industry. It would have been inflicted on the industry. And I 

do not believe, and I know farmers do not believe across this 

province that they would have been prepared for the change. I 

think because we have initiated the change, they will be better 

prepared for the future and are going to be better prepared to 

compete effectively in this new global economy that we're 

encountering. 

 

So it was tough to make those choices and it was tough 

decisions, but again it demonstrated the leadership, the 

leadership of this government, the foresight and the 

decisiveness of this government to make those tough choices  

for the benefit of Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan's . . . 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Part of our diversification, agricultural diversification initiatives 

announced in the throne speech will be the agri-food innovation 

fund Act which will encourage producers, the private sector, 

co-operatives, and governments to invest in a variety of areas 

including biotechnology and food processing. 

 

And I want to talk about biotechnology because it's something 

that I firmly believe in. We have now in Saskatchewan between 

35 to 40 per cent of all the ag biotech in Canada, and that is 

exciting. We hope by the year 2000 that we'll have 70 per cent. 

And the reason that we are pushing and trying to attract these 

knowledge-based industries, in particular in the biotech field, 

ag biotech field, is that again once you've built the critical mass 

of knowledge  and that's what we are building in Saskatoon, 

is that critical mass of intelligence and of knowledge  and 

what will happen, the spin-offs that will occur because of that 

will be immense and will be profound for the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

And we're already seeing examples of that. Canamino products 

in Saskatoon, a company that is going to take oats and it's going 

to process it into cosmetics, is going to create something like 60 

to 70 full-time jobs. That was not there if it had not been for ag 

biotech. So those are the kind of examples that are out there. 

 

We've seen the biomass fermentation announcement recently by 

the Premier and the federal Minister of Agriculture. Again 

another spin-off, another alliance that has been brought into the 

province because of that critical mass which is located in 

Saskatoon. And it's going to continue, I tell you. And it is going 

to mean jobs. It is going to mean economic development. It's 

going to mean creation of wealth for the province and the 

people of this province. And that is good news. And we should 

be working harder to ensure that that continues. 

 

Another initiative, of course, is The Agricultural Operations 

Act, which will help to diversify the livestock sector and protect 

producers, while sustaining our land and water resources. And 

again in that particular area, we've identified the livestock 

sector as a major contributor to the provincial economy. 

 

And we look on the hog side and we're saying we again have to 

build to the critical mass. At 1 million hogs in Saskatchewan we 

are not going to be able to attract the investment in the 

processing side that should be here. If we expand the hog 

industry  and I know that it will, because we're seeing the 

signs already, producers saying and taking the initiative to build 

newer, modern facilities  what will follow will be the capital 

needed to expand the livestock processing end. So again, 

because you have the primary production, you will attract the 

value added processing side which is what we have been 

striving for for some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all exciting, exciting news for 

Saskatchewan people and for Saskatchewan agriculture and the 

Saskatchewan economy. But it's so unfortunate, Mr. Speaker,  



 

47 

that there are some of us in this legislature that cannot see the 

bright, positive aspects of our Partnership for Renewal and the 

strong decisions that this government has made. 

 

And I am speaking of course, Mr. Speaker, of the Leader of the 

Third Party and the Leader of the Opposition. All we see from 

them, just as the statistics on job numbers, for months and 

months now, both of these individuals have been playing fast 

and loose with figures to paint the most negative, the darkest 

picture of the Saskatchewan economy that anybody could see. 

And for what purpose? For what purpose, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Politics, that is what it's all about. It's to try to get elected. It's to 

try to get some votes out in rural Saskatchewan. But little did 

they know, little did they know that they are damaging — 

damaging — the Saskatchewan economy in lots of ways. And 

they're also damaging themselves, because now we see today 

what the actual figures are and what StatsCan is saying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to see that kind of behaviour out of 

elected officials. I expected, yes, they can give us some 

constructive critique on our policies. But to go out and 

purposely, go on and purposely mislead people and try to 

darken the picture when Saskatchewan people are feeling 

optimistic and rejuvenated. 

 

And it doesn't matter which region of the province you go to. 

You talk to small-business people. You talk to the chamber of 

commerce. These people are saying that there is economic 

activity and renewal in the economy like they haven't seen for a 

long time. 

 

So I think that these members would be best advised to say we 

are going to start to now realize and admit the benefits of what 

this government has done in the last three and a half years and 

accept that we have been leaders and we have demonstrated 

clearly that we can lead and we can make tough decisions. But 

we can make them based on compassion and understanding 

and, as I said, the principles of caring and sharing. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to, of course, we need to do more in 

economy. And more will be done certainly. As I pointed out, 

there is a lot of activity in the value added side. We're seeing on 

the manufacturing side an explosion of activity. 

 

(1545) 

 

And in my constituency — close to my constituency — a true 

success story: Bourgault Industries of St. Brieux. Mr. Bourgault 

started back in the 1970s and had a vision of building and 

producing a cultivator that was suited to the type of land, the 

soil class, that he had and farmers had in the St. Brieux region. 

He had a vision, and he had a dream, and he pursued that. And 

he built this cultivator, the first one, and I remember seeing 

models of it. And he kept working at it, kept improving it. And 

part of the success was hiring farmers in his plant in St. Brieux, 

hiring farmers. And the farmers subsequently in the 

summertime would take out the cultivator and go and try it, go 

and experiment with this cultivator to see what changes needed 

to be made. 

And that was the success because again it is a tribute to farmers 

and their ingenuity. And Mr. Bourgault would of course 

improve on that particular cultivator. And last fall, I was happy 

and delighted and honoured to be in St. Brieux with the 

Minister of Economic Development for an announcement of an 

expansion of Bourgault Industries, an expansion of more than 

100 full-time jobs. Bourgault Industries will be going from 

approximately 450 to 600 full-time jobs and a hope . . . and 

they're setting their goals for 1,000 permanent jobs in the near 

future. And their motto, I think, explains what Saskatchewan 

businesses have to do in the future. Their motto is: pursuing 

perfection. 

 

And that's what Saskatchewan businesses are doing right across 

Saskatchewan. They're improving on the technology they have 

now. They're taking new technology, applying it, and they're 

pursuing new possibilities and new types of technologies and 

that's exciting and we're seeing the benefits right across this 

province. And I tell you again, in the coming months you will 

see more and more announcements like the Bourgault's and 

again it demonstrates the manufacturing sector . . . how exciting 

and just how strong and viable that it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also comment briefly on our wellness 

model, health care reforms. And there's probably not a policy 

that I have supported more strongly than health care reforms. 

 

I firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, in the direction that we've set for 

the future of health care in Saskatchewan. We have again taken 

a look at communities, taken a look at regions of the province, 

and we've said to them, you decide, you decide for yourselves 

— again, self-determination — what constitutes a district, and 

they've done that. 

 

And we now have 30-some health districts instead of 400-and-

some health boards, that we had previously. And what these 

health districts have done is identify again in their particular 

districts what they need as far as health care, what the people of 

their district and the communities in their districts require as 

health care. 

 

And they've identified those needs and they've said, now we 

will move to implement programs that will meet the needs and 

match the needs of communities and individuals. And again, in 

April, we're going to see a transfer again of services from 

Regina to the health districts, which again will help to facilitate 

the health district boards in meeting those needs of the people 

in the communities. 

 

And the concept is very simple. The concept is simple, much 

like economic development. Who knows better than 

communities and people in the local communities what they 

need for health care, what they need for economic development 

and what will work. I don't see how Regina can know that, can 

know all of it. I suppose we know, we think we know, what 

communities need. But in this process, they are the ones who 

tell us what they need and this is a major shift away from how 

we used to approach health care in the past. And I firmly 

believe in that concept whether it's health, whether it's  



 

48 

economic development. I think it's the way to govern in the 

future. 

 

Now these health district boards . . . and certainly I've worked 

very closely with the boards in my particular constituency and I 

have a lot of respect for their undertakings and the work that 

they have done in the past number of months. It has not been an 

easy transition for some of them, but they are moving along. 

They have made . . . as I said, they've identified their needs and 

they're moving to address those needs. And I'm happy to see 

that they are again moving and they're continuing to move 

towards more community based health care which is again 

another key component of health care reforms. 

 

We look at putting in place programs that address and are 

directed by the communities and are community based. And one 

of those programs I firmly believe in is home care. We see 

elders that in the past were put in nursing homes when really 

their health did not require them to be in a nursing home. Now 

what we are saying and health boards are saying is we are going 

to re-direct some of the resources to home care so that we can 

keep individuals in their homes as long as we possibly can. And 

we're seeing that communities and individuals in communities 

are responding to that. And that is exciting and that's the way 

that we should approach this particular service. 

 

So again I just want to say that I firmly support the Minister of 

Health on the initiatives. I'm proud of health care reforms. And 

I know that they will go down in history as having been the 

saviour of medicare in Canada. And other jurisdictions, I am 

sure, will be following and adapting their particular reforms to 

more closely reflect the Saskatchewan reforms. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it has been a pleasure to 

stand here in response to the throne speech. I look for an 

exciting session, but I also look for an exciting year and an 

exciting future for Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan. Yes, there are challenges. Yes, there are some 

dark clouds on the horizon. But Saskatchewan people have 

always overcome major hurdles and I'm sure that they're going 

to do that in the future. 

 

So with that, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciated the opportunity to speak here today. Thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's a 

pleasure to be back here in the Assembly and it's also a pleasure 

to see you back in your chair presiding over this Assembly. 

 

Today I'm going to talk on a number of topics. Some of them 

will be personal and some will be related . . . things related to 

my constituency. 

 

I first want to mention to this Assembly why I entered politics. 

And of course one has to discuss things with his family and . . . 

personal things, before he enters politics. But my love for this 

life started some time ago. Back in 1967 when I was in grade 5  

our class toured this Assembly. And I remember . . . Those 

being the Thatcher years. And I remember how tough it was out 

there on the family farm. I can remember all the farmers having 

a three-bushel quota for their wheat and wheat wasn't worth 

nothing. It was very, very lean, tough times on the farm. 

 

And I took my first membership with this party in 1971 when I 

was 15 years old. And I remember that campaign at that time. It 

was called, the new deal for people. And I became an active 

worker and committed to this party and to social democracy. 

 

And I think back to the years of . . . from '82 to '91, just to 

mention some of the things that had happened that really 

interested me in entering public life. Some of the things I didn't 

like, were happening, were the disappearance of the Potash 

Corporation, or highway equipment being sold off, all our gas 

wells and Saskoil disappearing. The coalfields being given 

away. GigaText, Joytec, Supercart, there's so many more but 

those were the things plus 10 straight deficit budgets. And I sat 

back and I said, you know, enough of this is enough. I mean the 

people of this province deserve more. So I decided to run for 

public office. 

 

Once we were elected, everyone knows we said we would open 

the books. We had an independent commission called the Gass 

Commission, and after we opened those books we found the 

accumulated deficit to be close to $15 billion. Pretty tough 

thing when I look back, especially back to '82 and prior, how 

good things were here in the province. 

 

I can also think back to my first years of public life which was 

with the RM (rural municipality) of Emerald. I was there for 

seven years; the last two years I was reeve of that municipality. 

And I can remember when I first got onto council how tough it 

was there. Previous council decided to run deficit budgets and 

the RM was in pretty rough shape. 

 

And I can remember advisers, municipal advisers from Regina, 

coming out to our council meeting and telling us we had to get 

our house in order or they were going to run us out of . . . run 

the municipality out of Regina. Rural Development was going 

to take over. 

 

And I remember one of my councillors telling an adviser, you 

mean to tell us you have the nerve when your government in 

Regina can't get its house in order and you can come and tell us 

what to do. I really remember that. I remember all those deficit 

budgets. 

 

None the less, after that adviser left we tackled our financial 

problem and we brought the debt under control. I know how 

important it was to do that. I didn't do it alone but I was part of 

it and quite proud of it. 

 

Once again, although in a different public life here in the 

legislature instead of RM council, once again I'm going to be 

part of balancing the budget. It's going to be the first time in 15 

years this province is going to see a balanced budget. And I can 

tell you, the first years of office here were equally as tough or  



 

49 

more tougher than back in my municipal days. When this 

budget comes down on the 16th, I can tell you it's going to be 

the brightest day Saskatchewan has seen for 15 long years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Kluz: — We have a very positive future ahead of us 

 

I have a newspaper article here from the Star-Phoenix yesterday 

. . . or today rather. It says, "Balanced budget knife leaves 

scars." Well there's no doubt about it. All kinds of things had to 

be done to obtain a balanced budget. There's no politician that 

wants to cut services and raise taxes. I mean that just blows 

away your popularity, but it's something that have to be done. 

But nonetheless we had the political will to do that, and today 

we are going to see a balanced budget. 

 

Although Alberta, you know, gets all the press, I can tell you 

that there's a lot of scars in Alberta. And I can say to the press, 

how would you have done it? Instead of spreading this gloom 

and doom, why don't you say some of the good things about 

this balanced budget that's coming up in Saskatchewan? 

 

And I mentioned Alberta a little bit before. I'm going to get into 

it just a little bit more. Just last summer, my brother and his 

wife moved back from Calgary. And I can tell you, all people in 

Alberta aren't pleased with what's going on there. 

 

After they were here for six months . . . and that's an example of 

some of the young people coming back to this province, and 

there are more than just my brother and his family. But after 

they lived here for six months, I told them they could apply for 

their health services card. They asked me how to go about it, so 

I gave them the phone number, and before she had phoned, 

before my sister-in-law had phoned, she asked me how much 

does this cost. And I said, how much does what cost? And she 

says, well your health services in this province. And I said, well 

it costs nothing. It's derived through our tax system, and there is 

no charge for health care premiums here in Saskatchewan. She 

couldn't believe it. She told me in Alberta they were paying 

between 13 and 1400 dollars a year for their family for health 

care premiums. And they charge nothing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Then she got into a little personal story about how she had lived 

in the United States and moved to Alberta when she was quite 

young. But when they were in the United States, her father's 

best friend had a heart attack and had major heart surgery. And 

this year — or pardon me — this past summer the family went 

back to renew acquaintances in the United States, and the 

person that had that heart surgery 25 years ago was throwing a 

party. And I asked her what was that party for. And she had told 

me that after 25 years he'd finally paid the mortgage off on his 

heart surgery. Twenty-five years of paying — something we 

don't have here in Canada, thanks to Saskatchewan. 

 

A while back, probably two months ago, the federal 

government made a ruling that doctors couldn't double-bill and  

you couldn't have private clinics. And I remember Ralph Klein 

on TV that very night saying that he was going to challenge the 

federal government in a court of law. And I wonder why 

Alberta would want to do that, you know; it sounds like they 

wanted to do some double-billing. 

 

And now you're hearing the federal government say that they're 

going to reduce transfer payments and expand what the 

provinces have to do in health care and education. They're 

going to expand the responsibilities. Probably just up Alberta's 

sleeve, Ralph Klein's sleeve, just something that he wants to do. 

 

And if the Canada Health Act ever changes and there's more 

responsibility for the provinces, I'm sure you're going to see 

Ralph Klein privatize some of those hospitals. And that's right 

next door to us. That's something we've been, as a party, 

fighting for 50 years — to maintain the principles of medicare. 

And as long as you have this government here in Saskatchewan, 

we're going to maintain those principles of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: — And speaking to the media again, when you 

compare Saskatchewan to Alberta, just take some things into 

consideration. A few that come to mind rather quickly, just 

think about health care premiums and tuition for kindergarten 

students. Those are only two, but there's a lot more. 

 

There's a lot of good things happening in the province, although 

I admitted before the first couple of years of our mandate were 

very tough on us as legislators and as well as the people. But 

Saskatchewan people, being resilient, bounced back and things 

certainly are looking up. 

 

If you look at our specialty crop acres here in Saskatchewan, if 

you look at the graph, it goes up dramatically; Alberta and 

Manitoba somewhat stabilized. My colleague, the member from 

Kinistino, related to that just recently in his speech about why 

that was so. But none the less, Saskatchewan farmers 

diversified and the specialty crops, canola and flax acres, went 

up dramatically. There's other things they are doing as well, and 

some of the people in my constituency are growing coriander, 

quinoa, canaryseed, lentils, peas — all kinds of other crops that 

five short years ago they never dreamed of growing. 

 

Just consider some of the things that's happening in the market-

place. Malt barley for example. By summertime the world is 

virtually going to be sold out of malt barley. It means one thing. 

Good prices for that time of year. Flax — Canada is going to be 

the only net exporter of flax this year. It means good upcoming 

prices for flax. Canola has increasing needs. Canola prices is 

going to stay strong. Recently I've heard that peas . . . farmers 

are going to be to grow all the . . . pardon me, to be able to sell 

all they can grow and for a good price as well. 

 

And with all these crops, and farmers diversifying, it's going to 

take the pressure off wheat which mean there's going to be a 

good price for wheat as well. This is definitely good news  



 

50 

because we have reasonable or exceptional prices. And even the 

better part about it, it is not the government that created this; it 

was the Saskatchewan farmers that had diversified and took 

advantage of the situation that was out there and now they're 

going to realize some good prices. So once again it's something 

that Saskatchewan farmers are quite capable of doing and prove 

themselves once again. 

 

There's also other things, Mr. Speaker, that they're diversifying 

into. There's three new buffalo farms in my constituency and 

right now they are selling all the buffalo meat they can produce. 

Their demand has exceeded their product. 

 

Two new emu farms have just started up. They have joined the 

emu association and they are considering doing some extra 

development for value added for all the products that relate to 

emus which is oil and the fine leather, the meat of course, and 

the feathers. So if we get a few more of these emu farms going, 

we're certainly going to see more activity from these farmers. 

 

There's a couple new farms that have wild boar. A lot of 

horticulture, not to mention some of the more traditional farm 

animals. We're seeing increased number of sheep and pork and 

cattle. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is the most optimistic I've seen 

the farmers in Saskatchewan for years. And it is definitely good 

news for agriculture; it is definitely good news for all of 

Saskatchewan. And with all of this diversification it means jobs 

for Saskatchewan people. And for the last couple of days in the 

Assembly and last couple months on the air waves and the 

print, I've seen the Tory and the Liberal opposition wailing 

away about our jobless economy. I can honestly tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, we're going to have the same determination in creating 

jobs as we had in getting this deficit under control. 

 

And we want to talk about jobs. News release just this morning, 

StatsCan restructured and what they're saying is, revised job 

figures released by StatsCan show that employment in 

Saskatchewan has risen by 7,000 since 1992. Considerably 

more than previously estimated. Some more good news for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to get into some specific things in my 

constituency that happened in the last year. There was the 

private enterprise — it wasn't government-driven although 

government sets the tone and private enterprise creates these 

jobs — and there are a lot of them in my constituency. So really 

when the opposition was going around and saying there was no 

jobs out there, people in my riding were saying, I don't know 

what they're talking about because we sure see a lot of activity 

out here. 

 

I'm just going to mention a few, but there are certainly more in 

the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena  Kelvington Super 

Swine, which is still in developmental stages. But what they're 

going to do is a community-based hog barn. They're going to 

have 1,200 sows. It's going to create 12 new jobs for 

Kelvington and area — community-based. 

Valley Packing Systems, they've created a packing system for 

direct seeding from Fosston, created a number of jobs. One of 

the defeated cabinet ministers from the last election, Sherwin 

Petersen, who was the minister of Highways, even recognized 

the need for value added and diversification. He has taken upon 

himself to develop the Buffalo Seeding Systems. Last time I 

talked to him, he invested something like $140,000 into the 

seeding system. Even the previous Conservatives realize the 

need to diversify in this province. 

 

Even North East Terminal in Wadena, which was built before 

'91, had installed a grain dryer and expanded in other ways, 

created another couple of jobs. There's a new cooperative 

insurance outlet in Wadena, two more jobs. NortHome Comfort 

Windows in Foam Lake doing a terrific job of PVC (polyvinyl 

chloride) windows — they're manufacturing them just north of 

Foam Lake. They're so busy now, they created another couple 

of jobs. 

 

Mozart's Family Restaurant recently opened up in Foam Lake. 

There's going to be a number of people working there. There's a 

new auto-body shop just north of Kelliher on the farm, another 

couple of jobs. My neighbour set up another seeding system for 

direct seeding, manufactured on their farm -- a couple more 

jobs created. There's all kinds of examples out there. 

 

Another one is Rockytop Seed Cleaning — just started up — 

running with older equipment but set it up quite nicely. He's 

cleaning things like quinoa and peas. He's taking wild oats out 

of oats, making it milling quality. And just for an example to 

show how busy he is there — he's got a couple of employees 

working for him — to show how busy he is, in 1983 Wishart, 

Bankend, West Bend lost their rail line. It was called the Foam 

Lake, Wishart subdivision. There was five elevators in Wishart 

that used to handle a million bushels of grain a year. You take 

that an average of five elevators, that's something like 200,000 

bushels a year, which in 1983 figures was a lot of grain 

handled. 

 

This Rockytop Seed Cleaning — using old equipment but fixed 

it up — last year from January 24 to December 31 cleaned 

262,000 bushels of grain. That's a terrific accomplishment for 

on-farm diversification. Bankend Co-op — just a little town 

along Highway 35, there's a little co-op there. The population of 

that town is only something like 16 people. That co-op last year 

turned $2 million. There's two more people working in that co-

op now. There's a new auto dealer in the riding, Grassland Auto 

Sales. So there's lots of things happening in Kelvington-

Wadena. 

 

(1615) 

 

Just two miles to the west of my riding is the town of Wynyard. 

We've done most of our business there for the last number of 

years. So let me tell you what's happening in Wynyard — lots 

of good news happening in Wynyard. Just listen to this. A new 

auction barn, a new plumbing shop equipped with retail sales 

outlet integrated with a discount store, Big Quill Resources just 

expanded. There's 16 people working there. What they're doing  



 

51 

is they're taking potassium sulphate out of Big Quill Lake and 

turning it into things like wallboard and dentures — all kinds of 

thing. They found some niche markets. They say they're going 

to be there for ever; there's enough product to keep them going. 

They're going to be starting a new plant, and they've just landed 

some new contracts in China. So they're going to be creating 

some new jobs as well. 

 

There's a brand-new credit union under construction in 

Wynyard. The cost is something like $1.2 million. The co-op 

grocery store recently expanded. Major construction in that 

town. There's also a new bakery. New condominium -- seven-

plex condominiums went up this year. There's a new Kentucky 

Fried Chicken outlet on Highway 16 going up. And the biggest 

one of all is the Plains Poultry expansion. And after that 

expansion takes place — it's under construction right now — 

there's going to be an additional 60 new jobs for that town. 

 

So last year, in Wynyard alone, there was something like 100 

new jobs created. It's not bad for a town with a population 

under 2,400. Some really positive things happening here 

throughout the province. And like I said before, the opposition 

going around and saying there's no new jobs created, well the 

people in my constituency and surrounding area certainly 

haven't seen that because there's a lot of activity happening. 

 

And is this good enough? Definitely not. We have to do more. 

We have to create new jobs. And as I said before, it wasn't the 

government that created these jobs. We set the atmosphere, and 

it was the private sector. But that's the way things have to 

happen here in the 1990s. 

 

Like I mentioned before, it was a tough, tough time for us and 

the people of Saskatchewan, especially these first couple of 

years of our mandate. But you know, through the people's hard 

work, Saskatchewan has definitely bounced back. Just think of 

the positive outlook. We're going to have a balanced budget for 

the first time in 15 years. All kinds of new jobs out there. 

There's a positive agriculture atmosphere with good grain 

prices, and looks like good weather prediction for the upcoming 

growing season. Lots of good things happening. 

 

And before I close, I just want to touch a little bit on the 

personal side. As many of you know, or all of you know, 

through cost-cutting measures by and large helped achieve 

some of this balanced budget. But all of the little things that 

helped, and one of the little things that is helping is reducing 

the number of MLAs from 66 to 58. And as I say before, many 

of you may know this, that I find myself in a different 

constituency. I'm a candidate for nomination in the constituency 

of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

But the reason I'm saying this, as well as working for the people 

of Kelvington-Wadena and driving through that riding and 

canvassing the people in the new riding, I've been a lot busier 

than normal — busier then I was for the last three years. But 

one thing I found out there, there's one thing I found out there, 

is by and large that people are very positive and they want to 

see their politicians being positive. They don't want to see no  

more gloom and doom. They want to see the positive things, 

like I said — the balanced budget, along with balanced budget 

legislation, and new jobs, and a good ag atmosphere, and things 

turning around. People want to feel good about themselves, and 

so they should. It's been a long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: — Saskatchewan has definitely turned around. And I 

can think back to our first couple of years of our mandate when 

Tommy Douglas's wife Irma had wrote the Premier a letter and 

was basically telling him, you know, hang in there; we know it's 

tough sledding. But I have faith that things will turn around and 

that once again the sun is going to shine brightly on 

Saskatchewan, the greatest province in this dominion. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can definitely tell you, that sun is starting to shine. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and good 

afternoon to you. I'm pleased to be able to rise in this House 

today to comment on this year's Speech from the Throne. I want 

to begin by saying how proud I am to be representing the 

constituency of Meadow Lake. It's located, as you will know, 

along the Alberta border and extends eastward through the 

Meadow Lake Provincial Park. This area is quickly becoming 

one of the destination spots for people of Saskatchewan; nay, I 

say, Canada; nay, I say, the world. I stand proudly here today as 

I enter the debate on the Speech from the Throne delivered on 

February 6 by His Honour Lieutenant Governor Jack Wiebe. 

 

I want to compliment, Mr. Speaker, the mover of the throne 

speech, the member from Bengough-Milestone, on the fine job 

that she did. I had the honour of moving the Speech from the 

Throne several years ago, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure you will 

remember it well. It was the first time I ever saw you, Mr. 

Speaker, sitting on the edge of your chair. And to the seconder 

of the Speech from the Throne, the member from Saltcoats, 

what a fine job you did, delivered in fine, fine form from the 

coach's corner. 

 

And I certainly want to compliment you too, Mr. Speaker. You 

often face great adversity, and I admire and respect the manner 

with which you control this Assembly. I have heard that you are 

a modest man and do not like too much praise. I did not hear 

this from your office, mind you, but none the less I will wish 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker, the best of luck 

in the coming session. I have every confidence that you will 

provide both fairness and leadership as we pass new and 

progressive legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the two 

new cabinet ministers — the member from Athabasca, the new 

Associate Minister of Economic Development; and the member 

from Regina Lake Centre, the new minister responsible for 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

 

I would as well like to take this opportunity to welcome the  



 

52 

new Clerk Assistant, Meta Woods, to the Assembly. Fortunately 

— or unfortunately for her — she got to know several of us 

quite well through a CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association) conference and on the three-week all-party 

Driving Safety Committee tours that took place prior to this 

session. 

 

Lastly, I would like to welcome the pages to this session. I 

know you'll find it a very interesting experience. 

 

I want to speak again, Mr. Speaker, about the constituency of 

Meadow Lake. I'm sure that there is not a more beautiful place 

in the world. I've had the good fortune of travelling some in this 

world and each time I return I believe it is truly more beautiful 

than when I left. 

 

This speech and the government's priorities for 1995-96 I think 

mark a turning point in Saskatchewan history. In the last three 

years, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people and this government 

have worked very hard and made many sacrifices to deal with 

what seemed at times to be an almost overwhelming debt 

problem left by the previous administration. 

 

But the comeback has been incredible. And much of the credit, 

Mr. Speaker, must go however to the people of Saskatchewan 

— ordinary people like those of the communities of Meadow 

Lake, St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, Pierceland, Loon Lake, and 

Goodsoil. These are the people that deserve the real credit. 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, seem to have the ability to 

dig in and do what needs to be done regardless of how large the 

barrier is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Working with the government, Saskatchewan 

people now have successfully wrestled that debt monster to the 

ground. It has been some time since I've heard the good 

members in opposition ask, where is the plan? We put our plan 

in place, and you know what, Mr. Speaker? We're ahead of 

schedule. 

 

It sure would be nice if the federal and provincial Liberals 

would start working together on their plan. It seems they have 

separate plans, none of which apparently include the well-being 

of this province or this country. They could take some guidance 

from this government who will bring in a balanced budget on 

February 16. This will be the first time the budget has been 

balanced in Saskatchewan since the New Democrats left office 

in 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — And not only that, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

introducing the balanced budget Act which will promote long-

term financial stability and integrity into the administration of 

our finances. 

 

I ran for basically two reasons, Mr. Speaker. The first was 

because I believed that it was important that there was more  

openness and accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. 

The second was because I believed that the public was 

demanding a government that would assume some sense of 

fiscal responsibility. 

 

Perhaps part of what makes my job so enjoyable is that I believe 

our government has to a large degree fulfilled those two 

objectives. My whole background in the credit union required 

that I be open and accountable to our membership, and of 

course we had to be fiscally responsible. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, this new job has been a relatively easy 

transition. I know it has been referred to many times before, but 

I think it's worth repeating. In chapter 2 of the Report of the 

Provincial Auditor for the year ended March 31, 1992, the 

Provincial Auditor says, and I quote: 

 

 The government moved from providing what the 

financial review commission viewed as the weakest and 

least useful financial statements in Canada to providing 

one of the most useful financial statements issued by a 

senior government anywhere in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are powerful words. The people of 

Saskatchewan can be comforted in knowing that they are 

getting full disclosure of the province's finances. 

 

We have always promised that once we got the finances back in 

order, we would be able to focus again on other priorities. Now, 

as the throne speech suggests, we're beginning to be able to do 

that again. Mr. Speaker, as a result of this government's sound 

fiscal management policies and its focus on economic 

development at the community level, we're seeing the birth of 

an economic recovery in Saskatchewan. 

 

Last year more than $1 billion was invested in Saskatchewan's 

oil and gas sector. Saskatchewan is now the second largest oil 

producing province and the third largest gas producing province 

in Canada. In Saskatchewan there were over 6,000 person-years 

of direct employment created in 1994. In addition to that, 

another nearly 7,000 indirect person-years of employment were 

created in 1994 with respect to the oil and gas industry. Due to 

oil and gas activity, RMs and land owners are enjoying, through 

taxes and compensation, $90 million paid to them in the year 

1994. 

 

I want to speak briefly, Mr. Speaker, about some of the activity 

taking place in my constituency with respect to the oil and gas 

industry. Primarily this activity has taken place in the Goodsoil, 

Pierceland, and Joseph Bighead areas. There were 196 oil wells 

and 222 gas wells drilled in our area last year. The land sale 

revenues are estimated to be over $55 million for north-west 

Saskatchewan alone. There were 1,860 person-years of direct 

employment created, and indirectly another 2,045 person-years 

of work created. That means many, many jobs — new jobs, Mr. 

Speaker — for the people in my constituency. 

 

Retail sales jumped by 10 per cent. Thousands of new jobs 

were created, and in my home town of Meadow Lake, we again  



 

53 

had the highest number of housing starts on a per capita basis of 

any town in Saskatchewan. We have been fortunate enough to 

hold that distinction for the last three years consecutive. 

 

(1630) 

 

The spirit of pride and optimism that characterized this 

province prior to the 1980s is returning, Mr. Speaker. But this 

doesn't mean that this government is going to sit back and say 

our work is over. In fact I'm pleased to say that our work is 

really just beginning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend this government for the focus in this 

year's speech on job creation. For residents of northern 

Saskatchewan, the expansion of the Cluff Lake and Rabbit Lake 

mines and the construction of the McLean and Contact lakes are 

very good news. These projects, Mr. Speaker, mean 250 

construction jobs this year and 400 new, full-time jobs after 

that. We are setting a target that 60 per cent of all mining jobs 

created by new and expanded operations be held by 

Northerners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — I am pleased that this government is now able 

to put that money into job creation. The $10 million being put 

into the Future Skills program, which assists with job training, 

will do a lot to help bridge the gap between the unemployed and 

jobs. The new JobStart program, which will help youth move 

into the workplace, is also very, very important, Mr. Speaker. 

We need to assist youth in finding the training and the support 

that they need in order that they can move into the workforce 

and make positive contributions to our society. 

 

Over the next year the government will continue to devote itself 

to the health and well-being of Saskatchewan residents. One 

unique initiative in this area is the proposal for safe driving 

changes. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser is listening because, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to say that for sure I have been a part of the Select 

Committee on Driving Safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Over the past four months, Mr. Speaker, we 

have held hearings all across the province and have examined a 

wide variety of issues related to driving safety. It has been 

extremely rewarding for me to be a part of this committee, 

which I am confident will make important contributions to the 

safety of Saskatchewan drivers. Our recommendations will be 

tabled in the legislature here later this session. 

 

Environmental protection, Mr. Speaker, is also something that 

has been emphasized in this year's Speech from the Throne. 

This is again of particular interest to me. The area of the 

province I represent, I think, is some of the most beautiful 

country in the province, as I have alluded to earlier. It has an 

abundance of natural resources: water, animals, minerals, and 

trees. It offers a lot to many, many different groups of  

individuals. Because of its beauty, this area is a tourist 

destination. Hunters come for the game. Mining companies 

come for the minerals. Forestry companies come for the trees. 

Tourists come to enjoy the sights. And many residents in the 

area make their living off of some of the harvesting of the land. 

 

The needs and the desires, Mr. Speaker, of these many groups 

sometimes conflict. Because of this the government is 

proposing the development of a forest management . . . Forest 

Resource Management Act. This will ensure that a balance is 

achieved between developing the economic potential of this 

area while protecting the environment and the natural lifestyles 

of Northerners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — This will not in any way restrict or impair 

harvesting practices, but rather will guarantee that the 

harvesting practices, whether that be fish, wild animals, or 

trees, can continue in perpetuity. This Act is all about good 

common sense, long-term planning, and has nothing to do with 

the imposition of heavy-handed restrictions as some have 

suggested. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, I live in some of the most beautiful 

forest area in the province, and I'd say in the country, and the 

Canadian Forestry Association seems to agree with me. I am 

therefore very, very pleased that this year Meadow Lake has 

been recognized by the association and given the designation as 

the 1995 Forestry Capital of Canada. 

 

There are many events taking place this year including a 

celebrity auction on August 1 to which many of you, both in 

government and in opposition, have contributed items. I am 

sure the forestry committee would want me to thank all of you 

for them. You wouldn't by any chance have any spare hats 

would you, Mr. Speaker? 

 

On May 13 everything will culminate in a gala event. I want to 

personally invite each and every one of you to Meadow Lake on 

that day. If you're not there you'll be one of the only ones in 

Canada who aren't; so show up. It'll be a lot of fun. 

 

I want to again pay special tribute to the work the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council has done this past year. The council, along 

with all the first nations that it includes, have done as much as 

anything for the economy in our area. They now employ over 

200 people directly and many, many more indirectly. They 

continue to lead virtually all first nations people in Canada in 

their aggressive, progressive, community-based approach to 

doing things. I am honoured to be involved with them and 

congratulate Chief Richard Gladue in his new role as chief of 

the council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say in closing that this year's Speech 

from the Throne sets a new tone of optimism and opportunity 

for this province. I am very proud to have been a part of a 

government that has brought this province back from the brink 

of financial disaster, while preserving our programs  



 

54 

and services and protecting the most vulnerable residents of this 

province. 

 

I now look forward to continue working with the Saskatchewan 

people to further enhance and develop the many talents, 

resources, and opportunities we have available to us in this 

beautiful province. 

 

I will of course be voting in favour of the throne speech and 

urge all members to do the same. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to rise in the Assembly today and to 

speak on behalf of the throne speech here. 

 

First of all, I want to congratulate the member from Bengough-

Milestone for a very excellent job in moving the Speech from 

the Throne, and also to my colleague, the member from 

Saltcoats, who did a tremendous job on seconding it. And it's 

going to be a tough job for me to follow the acts that have gone 

on before me, particularly from my colleagues. 

 

I also at this time, Mr. Speaker, want to congratulate Ms. 

Woods on joining the Assembly. I'm sure that her contribution 

here will be muchly appreciated. I also want to congratulate and 

welcome the pages to this institution, and their services are 

muchly appreciated by the members. 

 

And to you, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a special congratulations 

on the job well done in maintaining the decorum of this House 

over the past sessions. And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that 

you will enjoy once again the full cooperation from the member 

from Pelly in maintaining that decorum as the member from 

Pelly has exhibited in the past, and I'm sure you will appreciate 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am truly proud to be a part of this government 

and to be a part of this throne speech — proud because this is 

the first time in nearly 15 years that we are going to see a 

balanced budget here in Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, has 

to give all of us as members of the government . . . and I think it 

gives a great deal of relief to all of the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as my colleagues before me have mentioned, the optimism 

that is out there in Saskatchewan, whether it be in rural 

Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, is very, very noticeable. 

And I think that optimism comes about, Mr. Speaker . . . it is 

because finally the people of Saskatchewan feel a degree of 

comfort and security in the knowledge that there is somebody at 

the helm of the ship of state in Saskatchewan that knows where 

we're going. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from 

Kelvington-Wadena mentioned a few minutes ago about the  

desperate situation that we inherited in Saskatchewan when we 

became government, we took over a province that was riddled 

with a $15 billion debt. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker — 

and I suppose more sadly — we took over a province that was 

in a deficit each year by over $1 billion. 

 

Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, and my colleagues here in the 

House know very well, I'm a farmer, a farmer from Pelly 

constituency. And as a farmer, Mr. Speaker, I am used to doing 

financing but not in the magnitude of millions and billions of 

dollars. So I'll be the first to admit, Mr. Speaker, that being 

elected for the first time to this legislature in 1991 and looking 

at a $15 billion debt as an accounting figure, a $1.2 billion 

deficit, I had absolutely no comprehension of what that really 

meant. I'll be the first to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I have no idea 

how big a pile 1 million loonies would make. I have no idea if 

that pile is 2 feet high, 3 feet high, or 4 feet high. 

 

So it happened, Mr. Speaker, by chance that over the Christmas 

holidays one year when my daughter was home from university 

we started to talk about this. And I admitted to her that I 

couldn't visualize what a $15 billion debt was, or a billion-

dollar deficit, or even a pile of a million loonies. So she 

suggested that perhaps we should acquaint it to something that 

we can understand or comprehend and that is time. Mr. 

Speaker, that's one thing I can judge a little bit as how long a 

second is or how long a minute is or how long an hour is. So 

she took out her calculator and she figured out for me that one 

million seconds — one million seconds — is equal to twelve 

and one-half days. Well I found that quite interesting until she 

punched out what one billion seconds was. One billion seconds 

is equal to 32 years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a greater degree of understanding 

of what $15 billion debt is and what we have to deal with here 

in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, when I can stand in this 

legislature some three years later and have the opportunity to 

suggest that we're going to bring in a balanced budget, it gives 

me a great deal of pride that we have had the fortitude, the 

wisdom, and the direction to take Saskatchewan from a $15 

billion debt and a $1 billion-a-year deficit to a balanced budget 

position in three years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — And there's no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker 

— and it's just not my opinion; it's the opinion of international 

bankers and of financial experts across this country — that 

Saskatchewan has been a trend-setter in addressing its deficit 

and debt problem and it is an example for the rest of the country 

to follow. Mr. Speaker, I can't help but be proud of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, jobs and economic recovery is the underlying 

message and direction of this government; the theme of this 

throne speech — a new day of hope and opportunity. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I don't think that anyone can argue with, as I've already 

indicated, the mess that we found Saskatchewan in in 1991. 

And now in 1995, for the first time Saskatchewan and the 

people of this great province have some hope and can see the  



 

55 

opportunity. They can see that we are rebuilding Saskatchewan 

and they are joining with us on a day-by-day basis to rebuild 

this province and make Saskatchewan the province that we all 

know it can be, and that's a province of opportunity and a 

province of prosperity. 

 

And as our Premier has already indicated, that the efforts and 

the energy of this government and the efforts and the energy 

that this government has shown in addressing the deficit and the 

debt problem we faced three years ago, that same energy, same 

effort, and same determination will be put into job creation and 

renewing the economy. 

 

That has been an ongoing process for us in government for the 

last three years. We've seen those things happen in such 

examples as Norquay Alfalfa Processors Ltd. which has just 

now completed its third year of operation, creating some 70 

jobs, all out there in the small community of Norquay. 

 

More recently we have noticed the announcement by Sask-Can 

Fibre at Canora where they have linked up partnership with 

Cargill Limited to establish a new pilot project for the 

processing of flax straw fibre. This pilot project will create four 

to five jobs directly during the life of the pilot project which is 

two years, but will lead to more modern technology available 

for the processing of flax straw fibre which will then create a 

processing opportunity right in the town of Canora. 

 

(1645) 

 

Just in the past few weeks, Mr. Speaker, a group of farmers in 

the Preeceville area have been holding meetings and discussing 

the possibility of establishing an intensive hog operation right 

in that community. These farmers are recognizing the need to 

diversify further the agricultural base that represents in my 

constituency. 

 

But they also are recognizing that agriculture is changing, has 

changed in the last 10 or 12 years, and likely that change will be 

speeded up as a result of the federal government's decision to 

change the Western Grain Transportation Act. And that change, 

Mr. Speaker, is going to have a dramatic effect upon the 

farmers in my constituency and along the parkland area. And if 

we want to survive as farmers out there, we're going to have to 

change our traditional methods of farming, look at value added 

products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as in the past, we have identified in that particular 

area of Saskatchewan, the parkland area, that we are working in 

climatic conditions that are different from many of the 

agricultural areas in Saskatchewan. 

 

According to Sask Wheat Pool figures that were provided to me 

a few months ago, on any given year 28 per cent of the feed 

grains produced in Saskatchewan is produced in the Kamsack-

Canora-Preeceville areas. Much of this is due, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the climatic conditions in which we find our farms 

in that neck of the woods in Saskatchewan. 

 

The weather station at Pelly over the last 20 years has recorded 

the highest average rainfall of anywhere in Saskatchewan. And 

at the same time through the same period of the same 20 years, 

Mr. Speaker, the same weather station at Pelly has also recorded 

the least frost-free days of anywhere in Saskatchewan. 

 

So taking those things into consideration, we find ourselves as 

farmers there in a situation where we cannot on a consistent 

basis produce quality grain. But what we can do in that area, 

Mr. Speaker, is produce quantities — not qualities but 

quantities. Very conducive to the production of feed grains that 

would work hand in hand with an intensive livestock operation 

such as a hog operation or a backgrounding operation in the 

beef cattle business. 

 

And to that end farmers there are recognizing the need to 

diversify their operations and more and more are moving into 

livestock and particularly into cattle. As a result of that, Mr. 

Speaker, a group of farmers, with the assistance of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the Department of Agriculture, 

in Norquay this fall formed a livestock or cattle breeder and 

feeder co-op; it's called the Buffalo Hump Feeder Co-op. And 

as a result of the formation of that particular cooperative  it 

has some 43 members to it right now and more joining as time 

goes on here  there has been the purchase of an additional 

300 cows, bred cows, into that area — in some cases, farmers 

expanding their cattle operation; in other cases, farmers starting 

a new cattle operation. And some of the younger farmers that 

are starting out in the livestock operation have also gone into 

the feeder side of the program, resulting in some place between 

100 and 150 feeders being purchased for the purpose of 

backgrounding and then being sold into the fat market system. 

 

Those are just some of the initiatives that farmers in our area 

are taking on on their own because they recognize, Mr. Speaker, 

that the world is changing and we live in a changing world, 

agriculture perhaps more so now than ever before. The global 

impact on agriculture is at hand. And it has been, I guess you 

would say, speeded up as a result of the federal governments of 

the past negotiating free trade agreements between Canada and 

the United States, and Canada, the United States and Mexico. 

 

And I find this quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, that when the 

former federal Conservative government was negotiating the 

Free Trade Agreement between Canada, the United States and 

Mexico, the then opposition federal Liberals made such lavish 

promises to the public of Canada that if they were elected to the 

government of Canada they would tear up the Free Trade 

Agreement. 

 

And then in the normal Liberal way, Mr. Speaker, during the 

campaign they suggested that they would renegotiate it. And 

then, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, only days after being elected 

as the Government of Canada, in the typical Liberal fashion, 

they capitulated, and they signed it. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, has been one of the things that I have 

really learned, I guess you would say, over the last three years  



 

56 

here in this great institution and also as an MLA in 

Saskatchewan: that the history of this province, the political 

history of this province, has shown us that in Saskatchewan 

really there's only two political parties. In Saskatchewan, it's the 

NDP and the other guys. 

 

And for a while, Mr. Speaker, the other guys will wear the blue 

jackets of the Tories, and they'll wear them for eight or ten years 

until that jacket gets shoddy and torn and worn. Then they'll 

throw it away, and put it in the garbage where it belongs. And 

they'll put on the red jackets of the Liberals. And then they'll 

wear that, Mr. Speaker, for eight or ten years until it's shoddy 

and torn and worn, and then they'll throw it in the garbage 

where it belongs, and then they'll put on the jackets of the 

Tories. 

 

But the bottom line of this thing is, Mr. Speaker, that they're the 

same other guys: the same difference, the same people, the 

same ideas, the same intentions and — what's scary, Mr. 

Speaker — the same hidden agenda. There is no difference, Mr. 

Speaker. There is no difference between the two. We've seen 

that federally, and we've seen that provincially. There is only 

two political parties: the NDP and the other guys. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if one looks at the history of Saskatchewan and 

looks at what there was here until the 1982 election and what 

there is here today as a result of nine and a half years of 

mismanagement, nine and a half years of the other guys doing 

their thing, it's truly saddening. But in some ways, Mr. Speaker, 

it almost makes one angry. 

 

It makes one angry that we as taxpayers and the taxpayers of all 

of Saskatchewan have to rebuild this province. But that is 

exactly what we're going to do. As my colleagues before me 

have indicated, that the Saskatchewan people are tough and 

rebound and that they have done here in this province; that I'm 

proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that they are working for a new day. 

They are uniting behind the government of this province to 

build a better province, to make that opportunities, not only for 

themselves but to make opportunities for their children and for 

their grandchildren. 

 

And we are, Mr. Speaker, as government proud to be able to 

assist in that through such programs as JobStart. Through such 

programs as JobStart that will provide the opportunity for 

training for our young people, for as we know our future lays in 

our youth. And for we know that the leaders of tomorrow are 

the youth of today. 

 

And as we have already indicated, Mr. Speaker, that we are 

living in a changing world and times are changing and we have 

to educate our young children to be prepared to handle those 

changes and to meet the challenges of the future, and that is part 

of what this government is doing for the last three years and 

will continue to do in the future. 

 

It's human nature, Mr. Speaker, to resist change. I think it's 

natural for all of us to feel comfortable and secure in the 

knowledge of the present and of the past because we know  

what's happened. And we always have a tendency to fear the 

change and fear the future. But the future is at hand and the 

future is changing on a regular basis, particularly through 

technology and particularly through changes to 

communications. Change is happening very rapidly. 

 

And I can't help but think of a neighbour and good friend of 

mine, Mr. Speaker, a gentleman by the name of Nick Chupik 

from Danbury. Nick is, I believe, 68 years of age, and a while 

back had the opportunity of having . . . spending some time 

with him and having a cup of coffee with him in town. And 

during our conversation, he related to me that he was proud of 

the fact that he had spent 58 years on the same quarter of land 

north of Danbury. He had moved there with his parents. And 

when his parents passed on, he took over the family farm. And 

he has farmed there for 58 years and raised a family there and 

done a very good job of it. 

 

So in our conversation, I suggested to Nick that during that 58 

years there on that same quarter of land, he must have seen a lot 

of changes. Well, Mr. Speaker, his response was very surprising 

to me. He said yes, Ron, he said, I've seen a lot of changes, and 

I was against all of them. He said when the municipality wanted 

to build me a road, I said I was against that because they were 

going to take an acre of my land. He said that when SaskPower 

wanted to bring me power, he said I was against that because 

there was going to be poles in my field. He said then when 

SaskTel wanted to bring me a telephone, he said I was against 

that because I'd lived for 25 or 30 years without one, why did I 

need one now. But he said, today, today I couldn't get along 

without any of those changes. 

 

And that's human nature, Mr. Speaker. It's human nature to 

resist change. But change is about us and change is what we're 

about. We change to meet the challenges of the future and that 

is what Saskatchewan people are adept at, and Saskatchewan 

people will always lead the way in meeting those challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, somebody once said — and I can't remember who 

it was now — but somebody once said that with the 

breakthroughs in communications and technology, that the 

amount of change that we have seen in our lifetime, the amount 

of change that we have seen in the last 100 years, we will see 

that much change again in the next 10. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you stop to think about it just a little bit, 

that comment's liable to be absolutely correct. Because I'm sure, 

Mr. Speaker, that if 30 years ago someone would have told you 

that you would be able to sit home in the comfort of your 

living-room and in your favourite chair in front of the television 

set, and watch a sporting event or the world Olympics taking 

place halfways around the world, and be able to watch them 

happen live to the second of the event, you would have likely 

asked him, Mr. Speaker, what have you been smoking or 

perhaps indulging in? 

 

But yet, Mr. Speaker, that is a reality of the times, it's a reality 

of today. It's commonplace and we almost take it for granted 

that we can watch a hockey game taking place in Moscow or  



 

57 

the Olympics taking place in Japan or any of those sporting 

events halfways around the world; we watch the action 

instantaneously. That, Mr. Speaker, has happened in less than 

30 years. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, through the technical changes, 

technological advances that we are seeing happening in our 

society and in our world, changes about us in such a rapid 

manner that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 



 

58 

Readers of Hansard will note the changes in the production of the verbatim that coincide with the new 

session of the legislature. 

 

Hansard is now being produced in an eight and a half by eleven format, consistent with common practice 

in most offices and with most legislative jurisdictions across Canada. The new size will both save on 

paper, and make the document easier to read. 

 

In addition, the front cover bears a new picture of the Legislative Building. This new picture is intended 

both to give a better view of our beautiful building and more appropriately fit the proportions of the 

larger sized document. 

 

Production methods in Hansard have also changed. Camera ready copy is no longer produced using a 

photo typesetter, but through desk-top publishing with Microsoft Word 6.0 and a Hewlett Packard 

LaserJet 400 SI printer. This new production technology, together with the size change, will prepare 

Hansard for future developments in electronic distribution. 

 
 


