






















































May 3, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 3, 1995 

 

 
1941 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people of the 
province. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Lampman, Steelman, and 
Yorkton areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions I wish to 
present to the Assembly, and I'd like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these petitions are signed by individuals from the areas 
around Wawota, Kennedy, Nipawin, White Fox, Cumberland, a 
number of communities across the province of Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have several 
pages of petitions I would like to present today, and I will just 
read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
on the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that the petitioners 
here are from Saskatoon, and there is a feeling that it is only the  

rural people that are against it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The member 
knows he can't make a personal comment on the petition. Just 
state where they're from and read the prayer. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They're from 
Saskatoon, Wawota, Kenosee Lake, Major, Invermay, and 
several other communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions, 
and the prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights), which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petitioners are from Spiritwood, Chitek Lake, and from 
Prince Albert. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 
 Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

adequate funding dedicated toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 65 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding SaskEnergy: (1) what was the cost of sending 

Ed Voroney, Rick Garraway, and Chris Gural to the 
effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1992; (2) 
what was the cost of sending Al Elmer to the effective 
executive program at Waskesiu in 1993; (3) what are the 
names of all SaskEnergy employees who participated in 
the effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1994; 
(4) what are all costs associated with these employees 
attending this seminar; (5) what are the names of all 
employees who have enrolled in this seminar for the 
current year? 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give  



May 3, 1995 

 
1942 

notice that I shall on day 65 ask the government the following 
question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Finance: what are the 

specific yearly tax cuts referred to by the Minister of 
Finance in the Debates and Proceedings, page 1916, 
that account for $220 million per year savings to the 
people of Saskatchewan? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday I was 
privileged to meet one of the brightest, most articulate, 
intensely politically aware group of grade 7 and 8 students that 
I've run across in the last little while. And I would like to today 
introduce them to the House. 
 
Visiting from the Lakeview School are grades 7 and 8. You will 
see the first half of the visitation here right now in the Speaker's 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. The other 80-so students will be coming 
along during question period. 
 
I would like the members to welcome the students from grade 7 
and 8, Lakeview School, together with their teachers Mrs. 
Block, Ms. Rashley, Mr. Mantyka, Ms. Amos, Madame 
McCrae, Mrs. Borisenko, Ghyslaine de Tilley, and Marianne 
Amos. 
 
Please welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my great pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
legislature, on behalf of my colleague, the member from 
Elphinstone, three students who are participants in the Scott 
Collegiate mentoring program. They're accompanied by their 
mentors who are from the staffing and development division of 
the Public Service. 
 
Now if I could, I would introduce them all by name, but 
unfortunately I have the name of just one student who is a 
constituent of the member from Elphinstone and her name is 
Melanie Cote and she's a student, a grade 10 student, in Scott 
Collegiate. So I ask all of you to join me in giving them a warm 
welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Mental Health Awareness Week 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
Mental Health Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. The main 
thrust of the Canadian Mental Health Association during this 
week is to focus on their national education campaign on 
depression. 
 

Depression is a serious illness which is often misunderstood. 
Some people ignore the signs of depression and attempt to cope 
with it through substance abuse. Others see depression as a 
personal weakness and struggle through the illness while 
blaming themselves for their perceived shortcomings. 
 
Still others perceive depression as a disease of shame, which 
prevents them from seeking assistance. Depression affects men 
and women from every walk of life, both young and old. 
 
In addition to the personal and family toll the depression can 
have on its victims, there is a related financial toll on the 
economy, according to a recent study by the Canadian Mental 
Health Association. This study estimates that 670,000 
Canadians, or 5 per cent of the workforce, are experiencing 
depression that could result in insurance disability claims. The 
financial cost of employee absenteeism and lowered 
productivity do not take into account the lower quality of work 
life suffered by those with depression and their co-workers. 
 
I urge anyone seeking more information on depression to 
contact their local office of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association for assistance on where to get help for themselves 
or a loved one. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
West Wind Aviation 

 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An important part 
of the Partnership for Renewal is the labour-sponsored venture 
capital program — a program which offers tax incentives to 
encourage Saskatchewan labour and employee groups to make 
equity investments in Saskatchewan-based businesses. 
 
I want to announce a successful application of this program. 
West Wind Aviation of Saskatoon has been registered under the 
LSVCC (labour-sponsored venture capital corporation) 
program. The West Wind employee group and West Wind 
Ventures Incorporated has raised $107,000 through employee 
investments. The employees will be eligible for both a 
provincial and a federal tax credit equal to 20 per cent of their 
investment. 
 
West Wind is a charter and aviation firm which provides 
service across western Canada and the United States, Mr. 
Speaker. It has 20 aircraft and 100 employees meeting its 
clients' travel needs. 
 
Because of increasing economic activity in Saskatchewan, more 
and more opportunities are opening up for business such as this 
one. 
 
Through the labour-sponsored venture capital program, 
Saskatchewan working people can seize these opportunities and 
take control of their economic destiny, preserving and creating 
Saskatchewan jobs, and enhancing their companies' competitive 
positions. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1943 

I congratulate the workers at West Wind for their enterprising 
response to opportunity. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future Skills Program in Swift Current 
 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Future 
Skills training program is designed so that workers can be 
trained quickly for immediate job opportunities. I want to report 
two cases in my constituency where this innovative program is 
working exactly as planned. 
 
Last week, three industries in Gravelbourg, Frontier, and 
Annaheim identified a need for specialized workers in 
production welding and MIG (metal inert gas) welding. These 
industries are expanding and expect to be hiring to meet this 
new expansion. 
 
Cypress Hills Regional College and SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), through the 
Future Skills program, have responded and are training 12 
welders able to work in these agricultural implement industries. 
These 12 will receive SIAST certificates to ensure long-term 
employability, and they will receive jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also a company in Swift Current called Bio-Milker Highflow 
America Ltd. has developed a new system, with equipment for 
which no training program exists today. Through a partnership 
of SIAST and Saskatchewan Dairy Producers, four trainees are 
receiving on-site training and becoming classified as 
technicians qualified to market, install, and repair the 
equipment for dealers and producers. This company is currently 
receiving orders from all over North America, and Future Skills 
is ensuring that the product will be properly serviced. 
 
I congratulate the industries, the schools, and the program, who 
are cooperating in providing jobs for our expanding economy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Mobility Expands Cellular Coverage to Kamsack 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm proud to report 
today that SaskTel Mobility has expanded cellular coverage to 
Kamsack and the surrounding area. 
 
The inaugural announcement and ceremonies were held in the 
Orthodox Community Centre in Kamsack Monday morning, 
May 1. SaskTel Mobility's willingness to invest in 
Saskatchewan communities shows that no one is more 
committed to the cellular needs of Saskatchewan business and 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
It's hard to imagine a time when this service could be more  

desperately needed in the parkland area than now, when 
people's livelihoods, and in some cases their lives, have been 
endangered by flood conditions in the Kamsack area. Many area 
residents have been isolated from neighbours and from vital 
services during the flood. The new cellular services are an 
invaluable tool to rural residents in the parkland area in 
circumstances such as the present flood conditions. 
 
These same services will also improve links within the business 
community and make communications easier for tourists and 
the tourism industry in Duck Mountain Park. 
 
I salute SaskTel and SaskTel Mobility Cellular on the 
installation of this service to Kamsack. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Twin Rivers Health District Pilot Project 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish to 
report to the House a pilot project involving the Twin Rivers 
Health District in my constituency. Twin Rivers is one of nine 
health districts and 26 ambulance services working with M.D. 
Ambulance in Saskatoon to coordinate return transfers to rural 
communities. 
 
Under the project, ambulances which bring patients into 
Saskatoon will be called on to transfer patients to rural 
communities on their return trips. If the returning ambulance is 
only going part way, an ambulance from the final destination 
can meet it. 
 
Patients can still choose to have an ambulance come specially 
for them. However, it is expected many people will opt for this 
new service. The end result, Mr. Speaker, is that rather than 
making frequent and empty return trips, ambulances will more 
often be standing by to respond to emergencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this efficient use of ambulances will save money 
and lead to decreased hospital stays. More importantly, patients 
will have shorter waits for ambulances and can return home 
faster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this pilot project is just another example of people 
cooperating to introduce cost-efficient health reforms and 
improve services for patients. 
 
I want to thank the Twin Rivers employees for all their hard 
work and dedication. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Family of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, last Saturday night in Saskatoon 
the Saskatchewan Knights of Columbus held a banquet at 
which its service program awards for 1995 were awarded. 
 
I'm happy to report that a family from Spiritwood, in my  



May 3, 1995 

 
1944 

constituency, was named Family of the Year. Joyce and Louis 
Willick, their daughter Michele, their sons Bryan, Glen, Reg, 
Monty, Jeff, and Chris are a very deserving family for any 
award. 
 
The Willick family lives in Spiritwood, and their contribution to 
their community as well as their church is well-known. Louis is 
a member of the town council, deputy mayor, member of the 
transportation and library boards committee. 
 
Joyce has been the caretaker of the Spiritwood Centennial 
Arena for 12 years. She drives the Zamboni and takes full 
charge of those children that come to the facility. She was 
recognized as the Spiritwood Citizen of the Year in 1987, and 
all of their children were 4-H members and served as altar 
servers or readers in the church. In addition, the family is 
actively involved in community recreation, fund-raising events 
throughout the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Willicks are friends of mine, and I'm pleased 
to share their recognition with members of the Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyerhaeuser Feasibility Study 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning at a 
press conference in Prince Albert attended by my colleagues — 
the Minister of Economic Development, the Minister of Energy 
and Mines, who is also the member for Prince Albert Northcote, 
and the member from Shellbrook-Torch River  as well as by 
myself, Weyerhaeuser announced it was launching a feasibility 
study about their future in value added forest production. 
 
For people living in northern Saskatchewan, our forests and 
forest utilization is very important. Forest uses include industry, 
recreation, and tourism, and affect many Saskatchewan people 
who live near and right in the forested regions. 
 
Bill Gaynor, the Saskatchewan vice-president of Weyerhaeuser, 
says the feasibility study team will be focusing on at least five 
key criteria to access the viability of expansion: first the 
long-term predictability, security, and related costs of the forest 
resource available to Weyerhaeuser to source any expanded 
facility; second, the needs of their customers; third, the 
potential environmental and community impacts of any 
expansion project; fourth, the employee work systems; and 
fifth, cost effectiveness. 
 
The Weyerhaeuser vice-president also said that the study 
process would provide a good opportunity for the company to 
talk with other public stakeholder groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome this study and I commend 
Weyerhaeuser on this feasibility study because it is important 
that Weyerhaeuser's discussions and plans are clearly 
understood by all of those impacted in forestry and their 
forestry and manufacturing operations. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask 
leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you and thank the members 
of the House, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce through you to 
the members, a constituent who is seated in the Speaker's 
gallery, Mr. Leonard Daniels, who is visiting with us here 
today. I want to introduce him because he's a former employee 
of the Wascana Centre Authority. He worked as a park 
assistant, and not too long ago I was able to attend a function at 
his retirement. I've known Mr. Daniels for some time in the city 
of Regina and I want to welcome him to the Assembly, and ask 
members here to join me in extending a warm welcome to him 
as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With permission, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago I promised you 
that I would be introducing in total over 160 students from the 
Lakeview School in Saskatoon. And I am pleased now to 
inform you that the balance of the tour group are now seated in 
the west gallery with overflow into the Speaker's gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students, as I said before, are very articulate 
and bright and they asked me, when I talked with them on 
Monday, why question period is usually so raucous. And I 
promised them that today all members would be listening 
intently. 
 
So with a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you and all members of the Assembly, students 
from grade 7 and 8 in Lakeview School together with their 
teachers and chaperons. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Martensville Abuse Case 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, I think we 
would have to admit that your department has run amiss. 
 
Nine people charged in the Martensville case, 180 charges, and 
where do we sit today? Only one conviction still standing. And 
the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal saying that the Crown, the 
police, and even the trial judge, have bungled the case. 



May 3, 1995 

 
1945 

Mr. Minister, I believe this is a fiasco that demands answers. 
One would have to ask, how could this happen? How could we 
have so many people charged with such serious crimes and so 
few convictions? How could the Justice department spend this 
much time and money in this case, only to see the whole thing 
turn into a disaster at the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do about these serious 
questions that people all across this province are asking? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I had 
anticipated that the member might raise that question today in 
light of the Court of Appeal decision. 
 
In response, let me say this. The Martensville police, with the 
assistance of an officer from Saskatoon, came across a large 
volume of evidence from young children, which evidence has 
been given in court in the presence of a jury. 
 
And those police officers did the best investigation that they 
were able to do and concluded that charges should be laid, and 
they were. To not lay them would have meant a judgement on 
their part that they did not believe what the children were 
saying. Now they didn't disbelieve the children; they in fact 
brought the charges. 
 
The Department of Justice entered at that stage and picked up 
the files and took them to prosecution. And the cases were laid 
before a jury, which is the way we in this country deal with 
major crimes. The jury heard the evidence, heard the 
cross-examination of the children, and concluded that they were 
not able to find the accused persons guilty according to the 
standard required by Canadian law. 
 
Now I put it to the member that that does not signal any major, 
you know, any major problem with the system, or that 
something, as the member said, has gone amiss. It is one of 
those situations where the evidence is not accepted by the jury 
as sufficient upon which to convict. And that happens in the 
administration of the criminal justice system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, certainly the reports yesterday 
and the reports as we see them in the paper today, indicate that 
there is something drastically wrong within our judicial system. 
And the response basically, you've given us, sir, really isn't 
good enough to answer the many questions that continue to 
arise out there. 
 
The fact is that many people's lives have been ruined; a 
community has been torn apart; and thousands, possibly 
millions, of taxpayers' dollars have been spent researching and 
trying this case. In fact you are facing millions more in 
malicious prosecution lawsuits and we still have many 
questions that are left unanswered. Mr. Minister, if we don't 
learn from this fiasco it could happen again. 

Will you see to it that we get answers to these questions and 
will you hold an inquiry into how the process began that started 
the Martensville case? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Oh I think that that is already well-
known. The question of how this started and the type of 
investigation and the quality of the investigation were, more 
than any other question, the matter that was probed in the trial. 
And the trial went on and on, week after week, with a great deal 
of cross-examination and a lot of searching into the precise 
question that the member raises. 
 
As to what we've learned, we've learned a lot. And that is an 
important question that the member raises, because we have 
learned that the justice system is not very skilled yet at handling 
the evidence of very young children in these cases involving 
alleged sexual abuse. 
 
We in our department have taken a couple of initiatives, which I 
think we've discussed during estimates, as to how we can better 
handle that evidence so that it is not compromised, so that its 
integrity is not compromised by the time it reaches the 
courtroom. And that's a very, very important point and a very 
important lesson to draw. 
 
Strangely, we in the common law really haven't had much 
experience dealing with the evidence — this kind of evidence 
— from very young children and we've learned lessons and 
that's an important thing to do. 
 
But we don't need an inquiry about that investigation — that's 
already been investigated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can certainly appreciate 
some of the difficulties associated with the circumstances that 
arose here. The fact is, we have a system or a Justice 
department that basically has run amok, in the fact that many 
people, innocent people whose lives have been brought before 
the community, individuals whose lives have been torn apart 
because of this case . . . And as you've indicated, it serves no 
purpose to hold a public inquiry. 
 
Well I want to know what purpose was served by the Premier 
and the Minister of Finance swooping in on Martensville right 
after the charges were laid. What purpose did that serve, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Obviously the Premier and the Minister of Finance felt that 
some political purpose would be served by their flying into 
Martensville right after the charges were laid. But now that the 
whole thing has blown up, the Premier and the Minister of 
Justice don't want to go anywhere near the community of 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you won't hold an inquiry, what steps are you 
taking to ensure that this type of problem does not arise again 
within this province  or even, if you will, in this country? 



May 3, 1995 

 
1946 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well as I indicated to the member, we 
have a couple of initiatives under way with respect to the 
handling of the evidence of very young children, and we think 
that that lesson, that changed approach, will result in a situation 
where the evidence of the very young children will be 
maintained in a way in which it is not compromised, where its 
integrity is maintained whole. And that is a very, very important 
thing. 
 
So far as the Premier and the Minister of Finance, who was then 
the minister of Social Services, visiting Martensville is 
concerned, I believe they were there to discuss questions of the 
cost — the costs that the town was being faced with. 
 
Now it's some time ago and I'm speaking by memory, but I 
believe it was a question of cost. We have of course since that 
time had other discussions with the town about the question of 
costs and have, at least to some extent, provided them with 
some assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister  and Mr. Speaker  Mr. 
Minister, as we've indicated, certainly a number of people have 
been hurt. People's lives have been torn apart by what took 
place through this fiasco. And with the fact that a number of 
lawsuits have been laid, would it not be appropriate, Mr. 
Minister, to indeed launch an inquiry, and possibly through the 
use of an inquiry, offset any further lawsuits that may arise? 
 
Or, Mr. Minister, are you just prepared to wash your hands of 
what has taken place here. I think, Mr. Minister, you're in 
charge of the justice system, and we do need some answers. 
Why will you not pursue the matter of an inquiry into the whole 
fiasco that has been undertaken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I realize that people have 
been hurt. That happens in criminal cases where the person who 
is accused of the crime is acquitted, and they naturally feel 
aggrieved. And I can understand that, that they would feel that 
way. 
 
Yet it is most unfair for the member to characterize this as a 
Justice department that is running amok. That is simply an 
unfair characterization. What would the member have done if 
the parents of the little children had come to the member and 
laid on the member's desk the statements of those young 
children? Would you not act on them? Would you not credit 
them that the contents of those statement are true? Would you 
not try to determine whether or not they were true? 
 
All those things were done by the police in Martensville. All 
those things were done before the charges were laid by the 
police in Martensville. The Department of Justice then entered 
the situation when the bail applications started to be made and 
picked up the file and tried to get the case into shape to take to 
court. 

And in the end, it is a question of whether or not the jury, a jury 
of 12 people drawn from the ordinary citizens of the 
community, believed the children to the extent that they are 
prepared to find a conviction. That's how the system works. 
 
Now sometimes there is convictions, sometimes there is 
acquittals, but the system works. And the point is that we 
should learn what we can from it. 
 
The problem with the suggestion for an inquiry, Mr. Speaker, is 
that it is not at all clear what it is we're supposed to learn. The 
way in which the investigation has been conducted has already 
been examined in great detail during the Queen's Bench trial 
and I see no point in an inquiry. Although just before I take my 
seat, may I say that we must learn all the lessons we can from 
this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assignment of Public Prosecutors 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a new question for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me if there are guidelines in place 
for the assignment of prosecutors to court cases? Specifically, 
are there any conflict of interest guidelines which govern the 
assignment of case-loads to prosecutors? And if so, could you 
table them in this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — My understanding is that the assignment 
of individual prosecutors to cases is made by the director of 
prosecutions who is Richard Quinney. I am not aware, as I 
stand here, of the existence of specific written guidelines with 
respect to those assignments, including any questions of 
conflict of interest. Although my common sense tells me that 
Mr. Quinney, being really an excellent person in this position, 
would inquire into that and take it into account. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can only hope that there 
are stringent conflict of interest guidelines regarding prosecutor 
conflict of interest. I don't think it would be conducive to fair 
and equitable justice should a prosecutor have personal 
motivation. 
 
So I'm wondering then, Mr. Minister, if you have an opinion 
with respect to the fact that Chief Prosecutor Eric J. Neufeld 
tried the cases of two members of this Assembly, and is also 
prosecuting cases involving current and past members of this 
Assembly, when he was personally involved with an incident 
involving this institution which ended with the censureship of 
Mr. Neufeld. 
 
In April of 1984, Mr. Neufeld threatened to sue the member 
from Churchill Downs for comments he made in this Assembly.  



May 3, 1995 

 
1947 

After the Speaker determined that this was a clear breach of 
parliamentary privilege, MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) voted to order Mr. Neufeld to recant his lawsuit and 
forced him to write a public apology to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, this individual now determines if charges are to 
be laid against many of these same members who voted for that 
public censure. Mr. Minister, the simple question is: do you 
believe that a possible conflict of interest could be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The question takes me by complete 
surprise, Mr. Speaker. I am not aware of the incident in 1984. 
I'm told from across the House that there was no censureship, 
so I think that the facts underlying the member's question ought 
to be examined very carefully. And I do hope — I do hope — 
that the member will have the integrity to repeat these 
statements outside the House so that Eric Neufeld is able to deal 
with such an allegation as has been made. 
 
As for me, I can say that based on reports from my deputy 
minister, Eric Neufeld is considered to be one of the, if not the, 
finest prosecutor that we have on staff. Person with a proven, 
outstanding record as a prosecutor and highly valued and highly 
trusted by the members of the department. 
 
But I can't answer the member's question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, my comments are simply 
public record; they're from Hansard, April 25, 1984. The whole 
debate is in here and it is quite available to the public to read. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask these questions . . . and you should be 
fair about this because prosecutors, sir, like anyone else in 
society, like MLAs, like cabinet ministers, these are human 
people, Mr. Minister. They have personal feelings, they have 
personal motivation. Regardless of how we might try to 
suppress sometimes those feelings that we hold, we all have 
them. And that's a fact. 
 
Now we're simply asking, Mr. Minister — and you haven't 
answered — whether there are conflict of interest guidelines 
and whether, in this particular case, there was personal attention 
paid to the fact that this, as mentioned in Hansard, took place. 
In my 10 years, Minister, in this House, I've never seen this 
happen. I have never seen this House personally censure 
someone. I would think that that would be a fairly grave action 
for this House to take. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I'm only asking you — only asking you — to 
investigate and report back to this legislature at your earliest 
opportunity if there are conflict of interest guidelines in place 
for an individual in the Justice system who is now in charge of 
determining whether cases go ahead against some of those same 
individuals who are part of the Legislative Assembly. That's all, 
Minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, the member is an 
experienced and able member in this House, understanding 
completely what is the consequence of asking the kind of 
question that he's asked, and the very raising of the question is 
tantamount to making an allegation. And as I say, I do hope the 
member will do Mr. Neufeld the courtesy of repeating those 
statements outside the House so that Mr. Neufeld can deal with 
it in an appropriate way. 
 
I have said that Mr. Neufeld is an outstanding prosecutor, 
highly respected throughout the department, and indeed, the 
bar; and I am really taken aback at the nature of the question. 
 
I have said that I do not know whether there are written 
guidelines in effect or not. I say to the minister . . . or member 
again that Mr. Quinney, in assigning a prosecutor to this case, 
would take into account all of the facts of which he has 
knowledge so far as any conflict of interest is concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Productivity 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
spite of the good work done by those employed by government, 
they do not produce goods and services that can be sold on 
domestic or global markets. And this shows up in some very 
critical areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Financial analysts at Nesbitt Burns produced a comparison of 
the productivity of Canadian provinces and they show the value 
of goods and services being produced in Saskatchewan ranking 
eighth on a list of 10 provinces. 
 
My question is to the Premier or his designate. Saskatchewan 
should have as much potential as any province in the country. 
How do you explain the low GDP (gross domestic product) per 
capita in Saskatchewan relative to other provinces with fewer 
resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well that's fairly easy. I say to the 
member from Greystone, that's fairly easy. We had the 
opposition parties in office during the '80s and that's what 
happened. During the '70s this was a prosperous province. All it 
took was 10 years of the wrecking crew of members opposite to 
produce the kind of problems we have. 
 
We say with pride that this province is improving, the 
economy's improving, the management of public affairs is 
improving. And you may in the not-too-distant future . . . the 
public of Saskatchewan may in the not-too-distant future have 
an opportunity to pass judgement on our handling of the budget 
and the economy. 
 
Perhaps one indication of how the public feel is I never hear, 
Mr. Speaker, I never hear members opposite saying, call an 
election. I've never heard you say it yet. There's darn good 
reasons why you don't say it. You're going to get annihilated if 
you do. 



May 3, 1995 

 
1948 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, it was great delight on 
Monday evening with 800 people in the Saskatchewan Centre 
that indeed I did call for an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Albertans produce more  Albertans produce 
more  they earn more, their taxes are lower, their gasoline is 
cheaper, and less of their provincial product is spent on 
government. That means that Albertans take home more pay, 
which means that they spend more and they create more jobs. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the amount of money taken 
from our overall productivity just to operate government is way 
out of line regardless of per capita costs. This NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government spends 30 cents of our 
provincial products . . . 30 per cent of our provincial 
productivity on government, not including Crown corporations. 
 
My question to the Associate Finance minister: your 
government consumes 30 cents of every dollar produced in this 
province. What are you doing to lower the cost of government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well what we are not doing is 
campaigning on an unrealistic platform. I remember in 1982 
campaigning against a group who were going to eliminate the 
sales tax. The sales tax was too high. What did that bring us? 
The very problem which you complained of in your primary 
question — high taxes. 
 
What have we done? We have introduced prudent management 
of this province's affairs, we have balanced the budget, and now 
the public of Saskatchewan can look forward to a realistic 
program which will reduce taxes. That's what we've done, is 
prudently and sensibly managed this province's affairs. We have 
balanced the budget; we have introduced balanced budget 
legislation. And we think the public of Saskatchewan are going 
to put a stamp of approval on that program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in 1986 the Liberals ran against two different parties 
who were doing nothing but trying to outbid one another with 
the taxpayers' money. The money from the sale of goods and 
services drives our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our border communities are a graphic example of what is 
happening because government policies are making 
Saskatchewan uncompetitive. Now people avoid the 9 per cent 
sales tax because they don't believe that government is making 
good use of tax dollars that they're collecting. 
 
Tonight in North Battleford, Mr. Minister, tonight in North 
Battleford, a group of communities whose businesses are being 
decimated by your government's taxation policies are meeting to 
ask the NDP to deal with the sales tax. 

My question, sir: are you going to be at the meeting, and is the 
Minister of Finance going to attend the meeting in North 
Battleford tonight; and if not, why not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With respect to the sales tax, I say to 
the members opposite, what we're not going to do is what you 
have done. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there's something interesting about 
these questions, about this manner of approach. I seem to 
remember another leader of another party doing this same thing 
some 13 years ago, promising to lower the taxes, increase the 
benefits. And the public of Saskatchewan know that's where 
they're going to take you. 
 
We have introduced sound management. We've introduced a 
balanced budget, and that will lead — and the public know this 
— that will lead to a sensible, believable program of reduced 
taxes and increased prosperity. That's what people have come to 
expect of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Let's try again, Mr. Speaker. Shall we try 
one more time? Is the Minister of Finance or is the Associate 
Minister of Finance attending the meeting in North Battleford 
tonight? Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I woke this morning 
to a call from my spouse from North Battleford asking if I was 
going to be at home this evening because on the local media it 
was being announced that I would appear for the Minister of 
Finance. I was surprised at this, so I phoned the people who are  
involved in the meeting from North Battleford. 
 
And they made it very clear that they're discussing strategy as to 
how we deal in Saskatchewan with what is a very serious 
situation. They told us they preferred not to have it as a political 
meeting, that they preferred not to have politicians there. They 
wanted some officials from the Department of Finance, Mr. 
Speaker, to answer some questions, so they can make a 
reasonable approach to the government. The people there want 
to work with this government to deal with the pressing 
problems they have in that area of the province, and we're 
responding to their needs. There will be officials there from 
Department of Finance as they requested. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Discrimination 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, on April 6 of this year, I 
took notice of a question from the member from Maple Creek. 
His question was: do you believe that it would be 
discriminatory to refuse employment or to refuse to rent an 
apartment to someone because they carry a union card? 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1949 

The member is asking whether this would be a prohibited 
ground of discrimination, and the answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code has a list, a finite list, 
of prohibited grounds of discrimination: race, creed, religion, 
colour, gender, and so on. And union membership is not one of 
the grounds listed. So the fact that someone thinks that a 
distinction is unfair doesn't mean that the code deals with it. 
The code only deals with distinctions or discrimination based 
on the prohibited grounds that are set out in the code. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Expansion of Drake Meat Processors 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's particularly a 
pleasure to rise on another plant expansion announcement in 
Saskatchewan, especially after today's question period. 
 
But the company is Drake Meat Processors, which has been in 
business in the community of Drake since 1950. This morning 
the company held a ceremony to mark the completion of the 
expansion of a project. I was proud to be there to take part in 
the event on behalf of the Premier and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Drake Meat Processors has steadily been 
increasing its sales over the years and demand for its product 
has continued to grow. As a result, the company decided to 
expand its smoke house capacity and processing equipment to 
produce beef jerky and other products. Total cost of the 
expansion was nearly $300,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say that the federal and provincial 
governments provided some assistance under the partnership 
agreement, the PAWBED, or better known as the Partnership 
Agreement on Water Based Economic Development. PAWBED 
provided funding for one-quarter of the total cost of the 
expansion. And of that amount, $53,000 is repayable over a 
period of five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PAWBED is a cost-shared agreement that is 
designed to help support value added agricultural processing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to be involved in this funding for a 
number of reasons: first, Mr. Speaker, because agri-value is one 
of the six key sectors of our economy that has been targeted for 
growth under our Partnership for Renewal strategy. Drake Meat 
Processors is a prime example of the growth that can occur in 
agriculture or food processing sector. 
 
The second reason, Mr. Speaker, is that business expansions 
like this create economic activity and many, many jobs. The 
expansion has already increased the company's sales by 30 per 
cent and resulted in the creation of seven jobs in that small 
town of Drake, Saskatchewan. Drake Meat Processors now has 
50 full-time and 15 part-time workers, making it a vital 
presence in the rural community of Drake. 

The third reason for our investment in this expansion project is 
that it will increase the company's export potential. Drake Meat 
Processors is already one of the major suppliers of processed 
and prepared meats within Saskatchewan. It now wants to 
become federally inspected so it can develop markets outside of 
the province, particularly in western Canada. That would add to 
Saskatchewan's export capabilities and result in more economic 
activity and the possibility of more jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate, on behalf of the Assembly 
and the Government of Saskatchewan, Drake Meat Processors 
on the completion of its plant expansion and modernization. 
The company's continued success is good news for all people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would be pleased 
to congratulate the people at Drake, Saskatchewan and the meat 
processing plant there. It would have been nice to have had the 
minister's statement so we could look at it. But that being the 
case, it's nice to see jobs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it's nice to see PAWBED, another initiative of the former 
government, I believe started by the member from Morse 
actually when he was the minister responsible for Sask Water, 
an initiative that was put in place to do just this, to make rural 
Saskatchewan grow and function. We're happy to see that the 
Economic Development minister has taken PAWBED to heart, 
has used it, and is now creating jobs in rural Saskatchewan as 
we had originally intended when bringing in that particular 
program. 
 
So my congratulations to the minister for using another Tory 
initiative to build jobs in this province. It's too bad that the NDP 
couldn't come up with some of their own initiatives; but that 
being the case, Mr. Speaker, we still congratulate the meat 
processors at Drake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to comment on the expansion of Drake Meats in Saskatchewan. 
Actually we are delighted, not only with the expansion but for 
those of us who use this product, it's of great excitement to us 
as well. We happen to eat these meats in our home and they're 
really excellent. 
 
The minister did not indicate specifically what the federal and 
provincial contributions were on behalf of taxpayers, and we're 
most interested in finding out these specifics, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think perhaps what we will do is wait on more particulars for 
this. 
 
I find it quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, that I guess the members 
opposite are not interested in what comments we have to make 
on this ministerial statement, so I'll simply say that we're 
pleased for Drake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1950 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, and in accordance 
with the provisions of section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, 
I want to table the annual report and operations for the year 
ended March 31, 1994, and the Provincial Auditor's spring 
report. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question 76 Ruled Out of Order 
 
The Speaker: — And also before orders of the day, I would 
like to just make a very brief Speaker's ruling. Yesterday the 
member from Regina North West submitted a notice for a 
written question which appears as question 76 in the Votes and 
Proceedings for sessional day no. 59. I point out that the very 
same question was submitted on sessional day no. 54 and 
subsequently converted to a motion for return (debatable) 
pursuant to rule 42(5). Consequently question 76 is out of order 
and shall be removed from the order paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 60 — An Act to 
amend the Department of Health Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments before we 
allow this Bill to move to Committee of the Whole and just to 
reiterate some of the points that I raised the other day. 
 
My understanding is that according to the Health minister, this 
Bill does allow the province of Saskatchewan to benefit 
economically from our knowledge and achievements in the 
health field. And certainly I think there have been a number of 
initiatives taken over the past number of years as far as 
technology and knowledge in regards to health delivery and 
health delivery in this province. And we have seen through the 
process a number of groups and individuals from different 
countries . . . and I think I mentioned a number of countries. 
Health officials have come to us from Wales, South Africa, the 
Republic of Georgia, and other places in the world to visit our 
province and to review the technology available, review the 
expertise, and glean information whereby they can go back to 
their own jurisdiction and possibly apply this technology in 
providing better, more efficient, more effective health care to 
the people of their communities. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the areas I think that  

we discussed and talked about was the implementation of the 
health card; and I trust that the Department of Health is 
continuing its review as to different methods and areas whereby 
the health card can be implemented to provide a more effective 
and efficient health service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This Bill allows the Department to "develop health systems and 
health technology or expertise", yet there is no dollar figure 
placed upon these initiatives, and I believe that it's imperative 
that the minister have some responses or some answers to this 
question. 
 
As to the dollar value, the dollar costs that will be incurred, I 
would certainly imagine or determine that there will be revenue 
derived from the sale of this expertise and these health 
technologies. As well in building on the program, it's certainly 
going to have some costs associated with it. So it would be 
appropriate, and I trust the minister has taken the time, to have 
his department review that and when we get into Committee of 
the Whole, have some questions regarding some of the costs, 
some of the benefits we may achieve, and how, at the end of the 
day, we not only are helping and assisting other jurisdictions in 
designing their health systems and building on their health 
systems, but indeed we're continuing to build and elevate our 
health system to an area where people look upon it as one of the 
best in the world. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I don't see any need at this time 
to further debate and continue the debate in adjourned debates. 
But I would certainly allow this Bill now to move to Committee 
of the Whole where we can get at detailed questions, regard the 
Bill and the intent of the Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 61  An Act 
respecting the University of Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill was created by the efforts of the University of 
Saskatchewan community over the past five years to come up 
with a new constitution. The opposition caucus recognizes and 
appreciates the effort that these groups put into this new 
constitution that they are building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Bill substantially reorganizes three existing bodies of the 
university, namely the senate, the board, and the council, and 
adds a fourth group, the university assembly. On the surface, 
Mr. Speaker, this seems quite complex, and one has to take a 
moment to wonder if a quadricameral system is actually going 
to be more streamlined than a tricameral system. It strikes me 
that the university has a more complex political system than 
most countries in the world. However we recognize that there 
are some good reasons for this. 



May 3, 1995 

 
1951 

The university represents many things to many people and holds 
down many responsibilities. These responsibilities must be 
addressed cautiously and sensitively. The university is a centre 
of learning, a research centre, a body corporate with mundane 
fiscal and physical concerns and responsibilities, an institution 
of this province responsible and answerable to the taxpayers 
who support it, a community in its own right with concerns of 
keeping the peace within its boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of these facets must be addressed. The 
university must have one face that communicates with the 
outside world, with the taxpaying public. Under this Bill, the 
senate will do that by starting to elect members of the public on 
a basis of electoral districts. We look forward to seeing just 
how this will be mandated, Mr. Speaker. But on the surface, 
initially, our response is positive. 
 
The senate will also serve to regulate the university as a 
community by taking on the responsibilities of disciplining 
students for non-academic complaints. This provision of 
academic and non-academic discipline functions in the 
university will help keep each of these functions more focused. 
The fiscal and administrative matters of the university will 
remain with the board and its functions will be clarified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the university council has shown the most change. 
It will no longer fulfil the function of broadly representing all 
staff and students, but will be a more streamlined body that will 
be able to meet more often and be able to make more expedient 
decisions on matters of academic and research policy and 
academic discipline. 
 
The role of broadly representing all members of the university 
community will now fall to the new body, the university 
assembly, which will include all faculty and a broad 
cross-section of the student body. 
 
In the minister's second reading speech, she said that the reason 
for these changes was the passage of time, the fact that many 
aspects of the constitution were obsolete. With an institution 
with as broad a mandate and as many responsibilities as the 
University of Saskatchewan, I don't think you could ever 
achieve a perfect constitution. Inevitably, the centre will not 
hold and problems will arise. 
 
Where the previous constitution had three bodies that were 
perhaps too large and ponderous, the new constitution probably 
has too many bodies and too many cumbersome checks and 
balances. The minister says this new constitution will take the 
University of Saskatchewan into the 21st century. This is a fine 
cliché, but all it really means is that it will be good for about 
five years. 
 
Nevertheless, we have to recognize that the administrative 
problems of the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) under the 
old constitution were bogging it down. This new constitution 
will provide some respite, but who knows for how long, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The process of changing and rearranging complex bodies like 
this is an ongoing process. Certainly it is an intensive process, 
and once again we would like to recognize and commend the 
university community for the many years of hard work that 
went into this well-crafted Bill. 
 
(1430) 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we need the opportunity to review the 
Bill much more closely to determine exactly how the parts are 
going to fit together. And in a perusal of the Bill it seemed that 
there was each body, each of the four body, were almost being 
given, to a certain degree, some of the same responsibilities and 
we need to look the Bill over much more closely to determine 
how all these interlocking pieces are going to fit together, Mr. 
Speaker. Therefore we would like a little more time to examine 
the Bill more closely, so I would adjourn debate on this Bill at 
the present time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
Associate Minister of Finance to introduce the officials who 
have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairperson. To my immediate left is Bill Jones, the deputy 
minister of Finance, whom we have welcomed here before. On 
my right is Kirk McGregor, executive director of taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs, and also no stranger. Behind me is 
Arun Srinivas, and I'm not entirely sure he has been here before 
and I'd ask all members to welcome Arun. He is a taxation 
policy analyst, taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. And we're certainly pleased to 
welcome them. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you just give us a bit of an overview as to 
the reasons that we have this piece of legislation before us 
today? What's its purpose and what do you intend to accomplish 
through Bill No. 58? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — These are some technical 
amendments. Virtually every year, after each budget, we have 
amendments to The Income Tax Act, and they are fairly 
technical amendments. 
 
One of them, in 5.1, makes some changes to the deficit surtax 
which was discussed in my second reading speech and was 
certainly highlighted in the Minister of Finance's budget speech. 
There are new provisions established in the investment tax 
credit for manufacturing and process. I think that was a  



May 3, 1995 

 
1952 

factor in the announcement that was made earlier in the day 
with respect to Drake Meats. 
 
There are a number of technical changes. I'm not sure how 
much detail the member wants on these. They are highly 
technical and I doubt it would be the subject of any controversy. 
Those are the main amendments. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well maybe, Mr. Minister, you could give us a 
couple of technical details so we could determine whether or 
not they are areas that we should be addressing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Okay. The other amendments are 
technical improvements requested by the federal government. 
Saskatchewan is obligated under the terms of the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Tax Collection Agreement to 
periodically make technical amendments to ensure consistency 
between Saskatchewan income tax legislation and the federal 
Income Tax Act. 
 
The technical amendments represent clarifications of Revenue 
Canada's current administrative practice with respect to The 
Income Tax Act of Saskatchewan. Technical improvements are 
set out in amendments to section 4, Saskatchewan tax 
reduction; section 5, high income surtax; section 5(1), deficit 
surtax; section 7(2), temporary manufacturing and processing 
tax credit for small businesses; section 8(3), Saskatchewan tax 
incentives; and a new provision which clarifies the application 
of a small business corporation tax rate, section 6(1). 
 
Mr. Toth: — When you talk about clarifying this under the 
federal Income Tax Act, what do you specifically mean, Mr. 
Minister? Are we bringing this into compliance with the federal 
Act in regard to changes that you've announced? Or what 
specific purpose are we addressing through these technical 
amendments as you've indicated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the member's rhetorical 
question was essentially correct. The federal government 
collects the Income Tax Act and lay down some fairly firm 
rules for the provinces with respect to  some fairly firm rules 
 with respect to our own income tax. Our income tax can be 
. . . really has to be little more than a percentage of the federal 
tax collected, to grossly oversimplify it. 
 
These, as the member correctly anticipated, these amendments 
to which you refer bring our Act into compliance with the 
federal Act, and that is further to the agreement which we have 
with the federal government. And in return for them collecting 
it, we have agreed to comply with standards and regulations 
which they set. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, in bringing our Act into 
compliance with the federal Act, a question was raised the other 
day, and I'm not exactly sure if this Act addresses it. 
 
But when I was in Maidstone last Wednesday, an individual 
asked me about the way the Saskatchewan government charges 
for the, I believe the surtax charge or the income that . . . the 2  

per cent deficit reduction tax; I think that's the one. They were 
talking about the fact that on the area of capital gains, the 
federal government charges their tax after they've removed the 
capital gains component, whereas the provincial government 
charges before the capital gains component is removed; 
therefore the provincial government is charging on a larger sum 
of income. 
 
And the individual was wondering why the province doesn't 
follow the federal government on the same basis and charge 
accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member has hit upon an 
important but somewhat complex area of the income tax law. 
 
When the government of which the member opposite was a 
member, when the former government, introduced the flat tax, 
by definition it applied to everything including the capital gains 
— and that's by definition. And that continues to be the case. 
 
Now I think what has spurred the question to the member, when 
he was in the community of Maidstone, is that when you . . . is 
that in 1994 the federal government eliminated the exemption 
for capital gains, which we support — which this government 
supports  and we said so, because it's a provision which 
benefits high income earners. The exemption remains for 
farmers and selected other groups, but the important one in this 
province is farmers. The provision remains for farmers, and we 
also support that because of the very high value which is often 
ascribed to farm land, and farm machinery I guess, for that 
matter; but it's really farm land. 
 
In '94 when they eliminated it, it is possible to crystallize the 
capital gains, take that into effect, and your $100,000 
exemption will normally cover what you've crystallized, but 
you've still got to pay the flat tax on it. And that is what has 
prompted these questions this year. 
 
There's nothing untoward about this. The tax is operating as you 
intended it should, and the flat tax is operated as you intended it 
should. Capital gains has been eliminated, which is appropriate 
in the circumstances. 
 
And the flat tax is levied upon capital gains which is . . . the 
word used is crystallized; it is crystallized. You haven't sold it. 
Since you haven't actually got the capital gains in your pocket, 
because it's been crystallized, you've got to pay the flat tax on it. 
So nothing untoward here and nothing that needs to be fixed, 
but it has prompted a fair number of questions because of its 
artificial and complex nature. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, then how do you respond to 
individuals? You basically said that this is something really 
doesn't need fixing. Am I to understand then that this is a 
one-time thing that you're going to run into as basically a 
problem that arises this year; but in the future, with the changes 
in The Income Tax Act, that it will be offset and that in the 
future it will be addressed on the same level as it is at the 
federal level. Is that what I'm understanding from you? 



May 3, 1995 

 
1953 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, this is a one-time problem. The 
taxpayer has almost always, on the advice of the accountants 
who prepare their forms, the taxpayer has voluntarily advanced 
the capital gains to take advantage of their exemption, and 
therefore they've triggered the flat tax. This is not something 
that will reoccur. The whole process will go on as it always has, 
with respect to levying a flat tax. It'll go on as it always has 
hereafter. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Hopefully that kind of 
answers . . . and maybe I can give that response back, and next 
year we won't have, as you've indicated, the same question 
arising. 
 
If it arises, maybe we can have an amendment to your income 
tax next year that will address the question so it simplifies the 
process. 
 
If I understand it correctly, what the Bill is also doing is . . . I 
think you made some comments about providing tax relief to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. And I'm not exactly sure which 
Saskatchewan taxpayers would be receiving any relief, as I 
think it's a very limited portion of the Saskatchewan taxpayer 
that finds any relief under this Bill. 
 
(1445) 
 
You talk about improving the competitiveness of the corporate 
tax structure for the Saskatchewan manufacture and processing 
sector. And I would imagine you'll probably indicate today that 
we did have some announcements that a number of your 
colleagues mentioned that are a result of this change. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could explain what 
you really meant when you talked about changes that provide 
tax relief to Saskatchewan taxpayers and improve the 
competitiveness of the corporate tax structure. Because I don't 
believe the average taxpayer in this province really will feel or 
see any immediate tax relief by this piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — What I think the public . . . the 
member opposite is partially correct. The changes this year are 
only a beginning and we're not selling them as anything more 
than that. They're only a modest beginning. 
 
What we have said is that once we get our fiscal house in order 
and introduce proper management to the public affairs of 
Saskatchewan, we'll then be in a position, over a period of time, 
to reduce the tax load in Saskatchewan. And it frankly is high. 
It's higher than we wished it were. 
 
What we see this year is a beginning, and it's only a beginning. 
With prudent management of our affairs and continued success 
by my colleague in the Department of Economic Development, 
we could look forward to further increases in the future. But we 
would admit that this is a beginning, and some would say a 
modest beginning, but an important beginning. 
 
What we have done is to introduce a reduction of up to $150 in  

the debt reduction surtax beginning this year. That'll only be 
$75 because it comes into effect — assuming we pass the Bill 
— it comes into effect on July 1. 
 
We've also introduced an investment tax credit for 
manufacturing and processing. This has actually been quite 
effective in triggering some economic development projects. 
The members of the treasury branches have been busy in the 
last few weeks with a variety of announcements. This has been, 
in part, the fruitation of the Partnership for Progress. 
 
If the members opposite go back and read that document of 
now three years old, Partnership for Progress, what you see is 
a blossoming. What you see now is that document coming to 
fruitation. We talked about partnering the businesses, we talked 
about working with indigenous Saskatchewan businesses to 
create jobs, and that is now happening. 
 
So what you see is not by chance; it is not cynical. What it is is 
part of an orderly, three-year plan that's coming to fruitation. 
And this has been quickened by the two measures. The 
investment tax credit for manufacturing and process is 
significant. By way of example, it was significant in the 
expansion of Friggstad farm machinery. 
 
We have also introduced the manufacturing and processing 
profits tax reduction, and this is a tax which provides 
businesses within Saskatchewan with a reduction. 
 
I'm going to return just for a moment, Mr. Chairman, to some 
general comments that I made earlier with respect to the 
Partnership for Progress document. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we had wanted, when we were in opposition, to 
get away from the ad hoc nature of economic development. We 
seemed to have a process whereby the government of the day 
went out and bought themselves some economic development 
and brought it home. 
 
The difficulty with that was the price tag was extremely stiff. 
And some of these projects were very expensive. We wanted to 
get away from that style of development and get to something 
far more orderly. The Partnership for Progress, that document, 
set out a blueprint for working with indigenous Saskatchewan 
businesses whereby they expanded. That is largely what has 
happened. 
 
Largely the announcements which have been made recently 
have all been Saskatchewan-owned business — there are some 
exceptions — Saskatchewan-owned businesses expanding. Not 
all. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce expansion was one 
that is obviously not headquartered in Saskatchewan. But very 
much a part of our approach to business whereby we work with 
the business community to create good jobs, jobs which have 
high productivity and to which accordingly is attached a high 
wage. 
 
What we seeked to develop, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. 
Chairperson, is high wage, high productivity jobs; a high wage,  



May 3, 1995 

 
1954 

high productivity economy. Basically that's what we've done. 
 
The introduction of the investment tax credit for manufacturing 
and process, since the member asked, has been an important 
part of that, as has the introduction of the manufacturing and 
processing profits tax reduction. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, there's no doubt the fact that 
politics plays an important . . . or has an important bearing as to 
the announcements that take place. And the recent 
announcements that we've had in the past few days, certainly 
for the past week, I would suggest to you — as you might 
indicate they're not necessarily political or just happen to appear 
at this time  I would almost begin to wonder. I think even the 
public in general would question your integrity in suggesting 
that they just accidentally happen to fall into this time period 
when the Premier of this province is sitting down and 
anticipating as to whether or not he should be calling an 
election in the very near future. 
 
In view of the fact that he's only at three and a half years into a 
mandate and he's talked about fiscal responsibility, one would 
wonder why a Premier would feel that he has to do it now; and 
is that a feeling that the legislation before us and some of these 
economic announcements may fizzle out and when it would 
come to be a more appropriate time for us to have an election 
which would show more fiscal responsibility that it may not be 
there. I don't know. 
 
But I would think, Mr. Minister, while we can talk about it and 
brag about the accomplishments, I would certainly like to 
indicate that all of Saskatchewan benefits when businesses do 
expand within this province, and I'm sure the member from 
Lloydminster is appreciative of any business that is expanded in 
her area as well. And if she's got any questions, any questions 
she would like to ask or bring forward, we certainly would 
invite her, and we'd give her the opportunity to ask any 
questions in the Assembly. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, what we've seen in the past and will 
continue to see today and we probably will be seeing in the 
future . . . And I think even as we're looking at some of the 
circumstances happening in eastern Canada, the fact that 
announcements take place at certain times will probably never 
change. It's to a government's advantage to have individual 
groups look at ways . . . especially when the Minister of 
Economic Development is involved through his department and 
the way he proceeds with the announcements. 
 
But the unfortunate part, this Bill does not address the tax rate 
and the tax structure and how it affects many people. You talk 
about reducing the tax, the surtax, I believe, from 150 to $75. 
How many people in the province of Saskatchewan will benefit 
through this reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The reduction of $150 on an 
annualized basis will apply to . . . is one of general application 
and will apply to everybody. It will have the effect of . . . It's 
also a very progressive tax. It benefits those at the . . . the  

ordinary people more than the high income earners. 
 
That's one of the reasons why this particular style of tax 
reduction appealed to us. It is simple in concept, and it is a 
reduction for low income earners, and for many it eliminates 
them entirely off the tax rolls. A flat $150 reduction will 
eliminate the entire provincial income tax liability for 6,100 
lower income taxpayers. Individuals earning up $20,000 will no 
longer pay the deficit surtax. Single income families, two 
children, earning up to $28,000, will no longer pay the deficit 
surtax. Dual income families, again with two children, earning 
up to $34,000, will no longer pay the deficit surtax. So it's a 
general application, but for these large numbers of people, it 
will eliminate them entirely from any responsibility to pay 
provincial tax and the deficit surtax. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well you made a comment about the $150 and 
then the $75. When you're talking about the $150, is the $150 
you're talking about, is that a tax? Was that $150 applicable in 
the present or just the taxation year we've just passed? And then 
the $75 tax reduction comes into effect under the . . . it'll be 
now the 1995-96 fiscal year? Is that what you're basically 
saying, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It is implemented on annualized 
basis. Assuming we get the Act passed, this tax reduction will 
be available commencing July 1 when they begin to deduct the 
income tax for . . . starting with July. So it's half a payment this 
year — $75 this year, $150 hereafter. 
 
This is no substitute for the member's questions. You have 
every right to ask questions in estimates; we have every 
responsibility to answer them, and we'll do so. I would point out 
for yourself or for any members of the public who are following 
this discussion with rapt interest that in the budget address, 
which is available on request from the Minister of Finance's 
office, this rather complicated matter is explained on page 68. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So maybe I could ask you just to explain it a little 
bit for me since I don't happen to have mine right handy here. 
What you're saying is that the reduction that takes place . . . 
when you file your income tax and then this $150 surtax is 
taken off, if that brings you down under a certain level, what 
you're saying, then you don't pay tax if that reduction comes 
into effect, and that reduction affects everyone. And if I 
understand you as well correctly, that reduction is applied . . . 
are we talking . . . Is this specifically individuals, or is it applied 
across the board to individuals and corporations or companies 
or businesses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, just individuals, in the sense of 
people — not corporate tax filers. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what would this mean in tax reduction to, say, 
a single wage earner as far as having the $150 tax reduction 
come into effect — actual tax payable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well it'll mean, if they pay tax, it'll  



May 3, 1995 

 
1955 

be a $150 reduction from the amount of tax which they pay. So 
it's $150. To borrow a phrase from a former campaign, it's $150 
in your pocket. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, if you had $150 to pay 
provincial sales tax this past year, you would — with the surtax 
coming in — you would pay nil. Basically you would have zero 
to pay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that's correct, except I think the 
member misspoke himself. The member said if you paid $150 
in provincial sales tax; you meant income tax. You meant 
provincial income tax. 
 
Yes, if you paid $150 in provincial income tax, you don't pay 
anything. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in comparison to the effects that the 
E&H (education and health) tax has in this province — and 
over the past two days we've had discussion in this Assembly 
regarding the educational tax and the problems that it creates, 
and a group of individuals and businesses on the western side 
of the province are meeting in North Battleford — would it 
have been possible for your department to find another means 
that would have created more of a level playing-field? 
 
We've talked about how businesses have been helped and 
assisted under the taxation and under the intents of this 
legislation that we have before us, but I certainly can indicate to 
you that the western part of the province is even in a more 
difficult position than areas in my part, or on the eastern side, 
because a 2 per cent reduction would basically put businesses 
along the eastern side of the province of Saskatchewan on a 
level playing-field with their counterparts in Manitoba. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could have pursued a 
matter . . . or an avenue in that way that would have been more 
of a benefit and yet would have maintained a fair tax response 
within this province. Because certainly, Mr. Minister, if people 
are given the initiative to pay or purchase goods in this 
province, it would mean revenue generation as well as a less tax 
payable. And I'm wondering if your department reviewed this or 
looked at this matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As the member knows well, anyone 
who has held elected office for longer than a week is well aware 
of this phenomenon, that is that the provincial sales tax is very 
sensitive politically. People are very aware of paying the sales 
tax. 
 
It's the same hundred . . . If you were to give them a $150 
reduction, it would be the same $150, but that is a very sensitive 
tax. It would have, at one level, it would have been attractive to 
us to have reduced the provincial sales tax by 1 per cent. I think 
there's nothing attractive about reducing it by less than a full 
percentage point because I think then you drive the merchants 
who have to figure this out mad. But a 1 per cent, an  

even 1 per cent would have been attractive from a political 
point of view. 
 
The fact is it would have cost a great deal more than what this 
measure cost. The cost of reducing the sales tax was beyond our 
capacity this year. 
 
What the Minister of Finance said in her budget address and 
what she has said travelling around the province is, stay tuned. 
It is conceivable that with continued good management, with 
continued sound fiscal policy, it is conceivable in the future we 
may be able to reduce the tax — the sales tax. That however 
was not possible this time around. 
 
I would add as well, in defence of a reduction in income tax, it's 
very . . . the reduction in income tax is very progressive. By 
having $150 reduction in income tax, you ensure that people on 
the bottom rungs get most of the benefit. With sales tax, it's 
more or less evenly distributed throughout the economic 
spectrum; reduction in the sales tax, it's concentrated at the 
lower end. 
 
And so for both of those reasons we decided to provide $150 
reduction in The Income Tax Act. We are conscious of the 
problem with the sales tax, and what Ms. MacKinnon . . . what 
the Minister of Finance has said is that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thanks for everything. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Just about. What the Minister of 
Finance has said is that we are conscious of it; we would at 
some distant time like to reduce the sales tax, and all options 
are opened in future budgets provided the kind of sound 
management continues which has prevailed in this province 
over the last three and a half years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I haven't really had a chance 
to review the auditor's report today, and one still has to question 
the sound financial management that you've been espousing, or 
telling us about today. 
 
But it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that even a 1 per cent 
reduction . . . and I don't know where you get the . . . where you 
argue the fact that it would have cost you more money to 
implement just to take 1 per cent off the E&H tax and give 
people the benefits. 
 
If a person spends $10,000, that's $100 already in their pocket 
just through a 1 per cent saving in the E&H tax. If they spend 
$15,000, it's the $150 you're talking of that they would actually 
see a saving of. 
 
And as well, Mr. Minister, what it does . . . and it may not do a 
lot for communities along the western side of the province of 
Saskatchewan. But when you look at the eastern side of the 
province of Saskatchewan, it would keep more consumer 
dollars at home, which would not only benefit businesses, but 
then it benefits the province because the tax is then paid in this 
province, versus individuals. As they look at their income and  



May 3, 1995 

 
1956 

they look at their reduced income, they then also take a look at 
where they can find a saving. 
 
And if that saving is 1 or 2 per cent on the other side of the 
border, like say in Manitoba, which we find in my area of the 
province — more people spend money over there — the fact is, 
as a province we are losing revenue because of the increase in 
the E&H tax. 
 
And it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that just through a 
reduction and through an amendment to your Bill, we could 
have even gone further than what you've done today and we 
could have provided more of a tax break, more of an incentive 
for small businesses in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it would seem to me, from the surpluses that you continue 
to talk about where we are tomorrow, and the fact that Crown 
corporations will have major dividends and have major income 
available to them, that will be available to you. The fact that 
there's funds available through GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) contract overpayments that will be coming back to the 
province; and the fact that, and hopefully — and I say this with 
a lot of hope . . . I'm hoping that maybe the announcements 
you've just announced regarding small businesses, that there is 
economic activity in this province, that the agricultural 
community continues to thrive, although it's really struggling 
right now because of the input costs that have evolved through 
agriculture or the resource sector. 
 
Mr. Minister, it would appear that there was room or would 
have been room to manoeuvre, that would have really meant 
more to the consumer by working in even a reduction of 1 per 
cent. And then if, as you say, the economy continues to bolster 
itself, maybe 1 per cent down the road. 
 
And there again, I find it difficult to understand how you can 
argue that would have cost you more money to just remove 1 
per cent from the sales tax than it was to implement this $150 
surtax reduction. I guess maybe I don't understand it 
completely, but I think for the consuming public out there, they 
would have that question as well. And I'm wondering why you 
really seriously didn't look at or assess that situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It was seriously looked at, and we 
opted for the tax reduction which is in the budget. It does cost 
considerably more, and I refer . . . I won't get into the figures 
right at the moment because they do get kind of complex for 
what is an oral discussion. I refer the member to page 72 of the 
budget speech for the precise figures. But it is considerably 
more. 
 
But as well, the tax which is being introduced has a lot of merit. 
It is a tax which provides significantly more benefit for lower 
income people. 
 
I recognize they have little voice, because the media don't talk 
to people who earn more modest incomes. They don't get the 
attention of the media, and I recognize that they don't have the 
voice. But in fact they have some legitimate complaints, and  

they complain that their tax load in inordinately high, given 
their modest incomes. 
 
We tend to agree. We think this tax is progressive. Moreover, it 
benefits individuals. Only individuals benefit from this. If you 
reduce the sales tax, some rather handsomely endowed 
institutions fare very well. The largest businesses in the 
province, the most profitable in the province all benefit from 
that. 
 
Some large corporations, which we have I think developed a 
good relationship with but which are not proper subjects to 
charity — they would not claim to be proper subjects to charity 
— which are not proper subjects of charity, get the benefit of 
the sales tax reduction. They don't get the benefit of this. This, 
which is a measured design to ameliorate the tax load borne by 
individuals, all goes to benefit people, and it benefits people on 
the lower income scale the most. 
 
And as such there is a lot of merit to this tax. And we think, in 
addition to being an affordable one — and that counts for a lot 
with us; what we can afford — we think, in addition to being an 
affordable tax, this is also a tax which benefits those who need 
it most, and we need to do that. 
 
I end as I may have begun, by saying that as we can afford it, 
other things will be considered. This province had a difficult 
three to four years to put in. Thanks to the steadfast resolution 
of the Saskatchewan public, we've gone through those three or 
four years. We have balanced the budget. 
 
We can now look forward to, hopefully, good management in 
the future. And while good management doesn't sound all that 
saleable an item, it is in fact the products of good management, 
which are better services and lower taxes, are eminently 
saleable. And that's what good management spells — it spells 
lower taxes, better services, and a more efficient public 
administration. 
 
And I can say to members opposite, you may campaign upon 
what you want to campaign on; we're going to campaign on this 
government's handling of the fiscal affairs of the province 
because we think it's worthy of support, and we think the public 
will support that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I'm 
not sure if this isn't a campaign promise. Because I'm not 
exactly sure; if I understand correctly, this takes effect July 1. 
When can the people of this province expect to have received 
the full benefits of this income surtax reduction? When will 
they be able to receive the full reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — July 1 is the actual answer to your 
question. It starts coming . . . Let us take the case of wage 
earners. Now with farmers it's a little different. But let us take 
the case of wage earners here, wage earners who are on salary 
and they're paid, as almost everyone is, apart from the  



May 3, 1995 

 
1957 

provincial government, paid twice a month. It starts coming off 
the pay cheques on July 15, and the same amount is going to 
come off each month thereafter, up to and in future years. 
 
At the end of the year it'll add up to $75 in 1995, and when you 
take a full year in 1996, it'll add up to $150. But the amount that 
comes off the pay cheque, the amount that's left over, is the 
same, starting for the July 15 pay period. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I guess basically what that interprets to, Mr. 
Minister, is the taxpayers of this province and the individuals at 
the low end who are paying through the nose, through higher 
utility rates, and on top of that they're paying E&H tax on those 
utility rates, while they pay their higher utility rates, while they 
pay their E&H tax on those utility rates, they will be paying that 
for the next year and half basically, until March 31 of 1997 
before they finally reach or attain the full benefit of this income 
surtax reduction. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that's a long time to wait for a 
reduction when every time they turn around, that bit of a 
reduction, and let's say a wage earner at $75 to start off, starting 
July 1 may see a reduction of about $7. That may not cover the 
tax that he is facing on his major components as far as the 
resource sector in his power and telephone and utility rate 
rebate. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think the argument that this is 
something that really benefits the community is not and will not 
be seen until well after the fact, and in the meantime more 
increases on the utility side. And the individual finally says 
when they come to March of 1997, well, so what? I had a $150 
reduction in my surtax and in the meantime they have been 
gouging me every time I turn around to the point that that $150 
really doesn't mean anything. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it seems to me you could have found or 
looked at a means that would have really addressed a tax 
reduction that would have been more effective and that would 
have meant more to consumers, not only consumers but 
business across the province of Saskatchewan. And I still don't 
understand why you couldn't have looked at that mode. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It should be pointed out that our 
sales tax is also a more sophisticated approach to provincial 
sales tax than most provinces. While the rate is 9 per cent, we 
have many exemptions in Saskatchewan which are not available 
elsewhere. 
 
For instance, one of them is restaurant meals and that's one 
that's available in Saskatchewan, rarely available elsewhere. 
The member from Thunder Creek states that these have always 
been available. It's true that no new ones were introduced this 
year. They haven't always been available, but no new ones were 
introduced this year. But it's also true that when you talk about 
the rate of Saskatchewan sales tax, you have to keep in mind it's 
applied on a much narrower base than is the case in most other  

provinces. In that sense we think it's a much fairer system. 
 
The member from Moosomin stated that this is going to be a 
very gradual improvement in the tax load. That may be accurate 
but it was a very deep hole which the former administration 
dug; and the deeper the hole, the more time it takes you to 
climb out of it. It stands to reason. So while it's going to take a 
while before we complete the process of establishing in this 
province a more appropriate tax regime, the public of 
Saskatchewan are well aware of how deep the hole is, and I 
have to say, without being unkind, they're well aware of who 
dug the hole as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Minister, I 
think by the time we get through this discussion they will know 
very realistically who dug the hole; who started digging the 
hole; who's continued to dig the hole. And while you've been 
continuing to dig the hole, you've been slapping the individual 
taxpayers across this province with more of the responsibility 
for reducing the debt rather than accepting the responsibility 
even across the front benches, and rather than accepting that 
responsibility through reductions. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think an area that your government could 
certainly look at while you're putting responsibility, the Minister 
of Health is putting responsibility and suggesting we're going to 
have elected health boards. And every time we ask a question, 
the comment is, well the health board made that decision. Then 
maybe take a look at the Department of Health. 
 
I would suggest that if we're going to put more responsibility in 
other areas, then we take a look at some of the direct areas in 
the departments and assist the taxpayers of this province. 
 
But before we start just blaming the government from 
1982-1991, maybe we need a little history lesson. What was the 
debt in the Crown corporations in 1982? What was the 
unfunded pension liability in 1982? Where did that unfunded 
pension liability go to from 1982, of $5 million down to 2.8? 
Now it's increased again to 3.2. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor continues to point 
out the fact that while you can brag about the balance on the 
general revenue portion at the present time, there is an overall 
debt in this province that still has amounted from 14.6 to a total 
of over $20 billion. And that comes from the auditor's interim 
report back in November of this year. 
 
So Mr. Minister, it seems to me that while you would stand in 
this House and attest to sound fiscal management, at the same 
time the debt of this province has continued to grow. And while 
you continue to throw it back into the government of the 1980s, 
the fact is that your government has allowed that debt to grow 
as well. 
 
And it would seem to me if you're looking for a means with 
which to dig yourself out of this hole that's been created, if 
you're looking at avenues whereby the taxpayers of this 
province and the consumers of this province can have and assist  



May 3, 1995 

 
1958 

you in this matter, then maybe you should bring some fair tax 
policies in. 
 
Maybe it's time you created some fair, and more of a level and a 
fairer playing-field for not only specific businesses in the 
province of Saskatchewan, as we've seen by some of the 
announcements recently, but for the average consumer in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Really give them that benefit rather 
than announcing a benefit today that's supposed to begin July 1. 
And eventually over the period of a year or 18 months, the 
consumer would then begin to see the benefit by the end of 
March 31, 1997. 
 
Mr. Minister, why not give them a real tool to work with today 
to help you dig yourself out of that hole that you keep telling us 
you've dug for yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — If I was the member opposite, I'd 
avoid a discussion of debt like death itself, because in fact debt 
is going to be the death of the Conservative Party; it truly is. 
 
Let me give you some figures on debt. In 1982, the total debt of 
the Crown corporations . . . the member's going to want to copy 
these figures down because they really illustrate what went 
wrong. It was 2.8 billion, one half of which was in SaskPower 
for a couple of projects — Squaw Rapids and Coronach. 
Another 700,000 was in SaskTel for similar projects. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seven hundred million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Or 700 million. Thank you. That 
makes up the vast bulk, about 75 per cent. Those two Crown 
corporations had about 75 per cent of the debt of the Crown 
corporations. 
 
There was only another 700 million debt in the whole of 
government, everywhere. By the time you people had left 
office, the debt of the Crown corporations had doubled, but the 
debt on the operating side had increased twentyfold — 
twentyfold. 
 
What went wrong in the '80s? You did borrow too much money 
in the Crown corporations, but what really went wrong in the 
'80s was you never matched your spending with your revenue. 
You assumed these were two separate phenomena. 
 
If I were members opposite, I would not get into a discussion of 
debt, because the figures suggest you were abominable 
managers. And that in fact is the conclusion which the 
Saskatchewan public have arrived at. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm going to have to ask you 
to give me those numbers again because I didn't get a chance to 
jot them all down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm going to seek the assistance of 
the page, and we will get a copy made of this and we'll give it to 
you. And I'm quite certain that when members opposite get it, 
you'll want to get on to some other subject. I'm quite certain  

of that. Because if you people have an Achilles' heel, it is the 
debt of the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's an Achilles' heel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I thank the 
former educator, the eminent educator from Souris-Cannington, 
for correcting my pronunciation. If you people have an Achilles' 
heel, it is debt. So when we get this thing back, I'm quite sure 
members are going to want to go to some other subject. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think 
we're into . . . we've really arrived at an interesting area of 
discussion. Because your interpretation of debt seems to have 
changed from one day to the next. I'm glad that you reiterated 
the fact that the former minister of Finance, his figures about 
the deficit was three point . . . I think it was around the $3.6 
million in the Crown corporations. 
 
But the interesting part, Mr. Minister, is one area that you 
continue to neglect — and the auditor has pointed that out — is 
the unfunded pension plans. The teachers' was around $3 
billion, and the government or the general SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees Union) was in the 
neighbourhood of 2 for a total of about $5 billion. And that, 
even though it isn't money being paid out at that time, that's 
money that has to be expended at some time in the future. 
 
So if you add those two together in view of the fact that they're 
now added . . . and I believe I noticed under one of your 
statements, or last economic statements, I believe you did 
include that portion in there. That debt at that time which had to 
be accounted for was some $8 billion that the people of 
Saskatchewan were facing that had to be accounted for or 
planned for the future as far as future expenditures. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, while you're talking of criticizing the former 
government, even today I notice some of the announcements 
that you've brought forward as far as economic development in 
this province, many of those projects were begun at a time 
when we had some of the most difficult economic times in this 
province. Times when agriculture faced not a two- or a 
three-year low, but basically we faced a decade of low 
agricultural prices. We faced a decade of low resource prices, 
Mr. Minister, and you're quite well aware of that fact. 
 
And yet some of the difficult decisions made during that time 
period will be a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
the working people across this province for years to come, for 
decades to come. And even your administration is benefiting 
from some of those difficult decisions. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other thing I'd like to point out is while you 
talked about the debt that had accumulated through the eight is 
added on to what you had accumulated prior to that, well the 
former government attempted to on different occasions, to hold 
the line. And I can remember back into '87, '88, '89 where we 
had reductions or holding the line at zero as far as public sector  



May 3, 1995 

 
1959 

salaries, zero increases in health and education. 
 
Mr. Minister, what were you doing as a minister . . . as a 
member of the opposition caucus. What were you doing? Were 
you encouraging the government to hold the line? Did you ever 
acknowledge the fact that maybe there was a time to hold the 
line and to assist the government even of the day, to establish a 
way out of the debt before it grew? No you didn't. 
 
In fact I can remember you and your colleagues standing in this 
House and saying, instead of zero per cent spending in health 
and education, the teachers need 4 per cent; or the Department 
of Health needs an additional 4 per cent. How are we going to 
teach all those students across this province. Or the Department 
of Health needs an additional 4 per cent. 
 
It didn't matter what area we were bringing forward or what 
avenue of discussion or debate was in this House, Mr. Minister, 
as an opposition member, did you act responsibly? Did you take 
the time to assist and suggest alternatives? No, it was always 
criticize, criticize, criticize. You never gave us one option, 
never even took the time to provide one option as to where you 
could have some tax savings. When tax savings were attempted, 
it wasn't good enough; you needed more spending. So I find it 
interesting, I guess, it was more appropriate to continue on with 
the 7-7-7 program. And because it didn't work in the election of 
1986, then you'd argue that process right through to the election 
of 1991. 
 
And I will say, Mr. Minister, while you criticized the former 
administration for the attempts they made to try and reduce, I'll 
admit this and I'll give you credit for one thing: I'm appreciative 
of the fact that while in opposition you weren't accepted, in 
government . . . and maybe it's because we've got some 
individuals in departments who had realistically sound heads 
who could finally get through to you and your colleagues on the 
front benches that it was time we had fiscal restraint. And it's 
hard to do. Not really, because it's time . . . 
 
And even the federal Liberal government, what did they do on 
the campaign trail? The campaign . . . the Liberals on one hand 
were making major promises; now all of a sudden they've 
become fiscal conservatives. So I'll give you credit for that, Mr. 
Minister, and to your colleagues, that you did finally 
acknowledge that we needed to hold the line. And I know it's 
been difficult. 
 
But I would beg to differ with you on some of the areas where 
you held the line. I think there were areas that could have been 
addressed much more easily and much more carefully and much 
more conscientiously so that the taxpayers and the consumers of 
this province wouldn't have been hit as drastically as you've 
done. 
 
And that's why I'm asking you, Mr. Minister . . . while the 
reduction in deficit surtax may be a benefit, the reality is a 
reduction even of a percentage point on the PST this year, and 
maybe another a year down the road, would do more for 
consumers and do more for your government in the fact that  

overall spending in this province would increase as people had 
that extra dollar in their pocket to address some of the economic 
situations that they're facing. 
 
So what I can only add, Mr. Minister, is that what you've done 
is you brag about how you've become fiscal managers — the 
unfortunate part for most consumers out there is that fiscal 
management has been placed totally on their shoulders, and you 
have not accepted any responsibility. 
 
Why did you not, Mr. Minister, take the time to look at your 
departments a little more constructively? Why didn't you take 
the time to address the pension plan of the members under the 
pre-1979 pension plan? Why didn't you take the time, Mr. 
Minister, to address the number of individuals working in the 
Premier's office. In conjunction, look at what we have, 87 here 
versus just under 40 in Alberta — with 2.5 million people — in 
the Department of the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Mr. Minister, there were a number of areas that you could've 
looked at reducing expenditures that would have assisted the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. Why didn't you that? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — All of those things are possible. In 
the member's comments, he acknowledged — and I think there 
was a note of congratulatory acknowledgement — that we have 
in fact exercised good management. I would be the first to 
attribute much of our success to the very dedicated and able 
people in the Department of Finance. We have been served very 
well by the public service. I want to take this occasion to thank 
the able and dedicated people throughout the length of the 
public service, but particularly in the Department of Finance. 
 
On this rather gracious note, Mr. Chairperson, I think I'm going 
to move that we report progress. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend the Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Act 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the Minister of Municipal 
Government to please introduce the official who has joined us 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with 
me on my right, Doug Morcom, manager of rural revenue 
sharing. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam 
Minister. Welcome to your officials. Madam Minister, it seems 
that this is a Bill that is brought forward every year to deal with 
funding and the revenue-sharing pools of urban and rural 
governments. 
 
Madam Minister, can you briefly go over what funding levels 
have been granted each year since 1991, and please indicate the  



May 3, 1995 

 
1960 

percentages of changes that have been made each and every 
year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you for that question. The 
1991-92 budget was the budget of the former member from 
Estevan that was passed after we got elected; we didn't change 
the budget when it was brought in after we got elected. But in 
1991-92, there was a decrease of 6.8 per cent in the urban 
revenue-sharing pool, and a decrease of 15.8 per cent in the 
rural revenue-sharing pool. 
 
Do you want me to give you the amount of money that was in 
each pool at the end of that decrease? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Okay, in 1991-92 after the 6.8 per cent 
was withdrawn from the pool, the rural revenue-sharing pool 
was $40.460 million. The urban revenue-sharing pool after the 
. . . minus 15.8 per cent . . . oh, just a minute. The first one — 
I'm sorry — the first one was the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The urban one. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. The first one was urban. Let me 
correct that again. In 1991-92 the urban revenue-sharing pool 
was $62.487 million. That was after this minus 6.8 per cent. 
The rural revenue-sharing pool was $40.460 million. That was 
after the 15.8 per cent was taken off it. 
 
In 1992-93, which was our first budget, we effected a 14.8 per 
cent decrease in the urban revenue-sharing pool which brought 
it down to $53.244 million. And a minus 7.4 per cent decrease 
in the rural revenue-sharing pool that brought it down to 37.460 
million. 
 
In 1993-94 the urban revenue-sharing pool was 50.581 million, 
which was a result of a 5 per cent decrease. The rural 
revenue-sharing pool was 36.120 million, which was a result of 
a minus 3.6 per cent decrease. 
 
In 1994-95 the urban revenue-sharing pool was 45.368 million, 
which was a result of a 10.3 per cent decrease. And the rural 
revenue-sharing pool was at 32.397 million, which was again a 
result of a 10.3 per cent decrease. 
 
This year, in 1995-96, the pool for the urban revenue-sharing is 
46.535 million, which is an increase of 2.6 per cent. The rural 
revenue-sharing pool is 33.230 million. Again, an increase in 
the pool of 2.6 per cent. 
 
So since 1991-92 there has been a decrease in the combined 
pools, both urban and revenue-sharing, of $23.2 million. That's 
the total cuts that have been made by our government since 
1992. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well these 
figures shed a little more light on how the contributions the 
municipalities have made towards balancing the budgets of the  

government . . . And you've said that yourself, that the 
municipalities have indeed provided a considerable contribution 
to the balancing of the budget. 
 
But in doing so, Madam Minister, it has hurt the municipal 
system to a certain degree. Because municipalities do not have 
the ability — and it's good that they don't have that ability — to 
run a deficit. They've had to then turn around and either cut 
programing or go to their tax base, the property taxpayers, to 
make up any shortfalls. 
 
And I believe, Madam Minister, that we're seeing a result of 
those cut-backs over the years with our road system currently 
out in place in rural Saskatchewan, where this spring, because 
of all the moisture, the roads themselves were not in as good a 
shape prior to the rain that they could have been. 
 
If you drive around rural Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, you'll 
see a significant number of grid roads, not to mention farm 
access, that had a limited supply of gravel on them. They 
certainly could have been in better condition prior to the spring. 
 
Now I know that none of us plan to have weather conditions 
such as we're having around the province today, and we hope to 
extend that period that we can get away with doing these types 
of major reconstructive scenarios. 
 
The other issue, Madam Minister, that has affected rural 
municipalities — and it affects everyone, not just the rural 
municipalities — but because they're limited in their funding 
capabilities of going to the property tax base or making 
applications to the government, it's those other effects that the 
government has put in place that directly impact on them, such 
as fuel taxes; such as the higher cost of utility rates; such as the 
new Crown tendering policy, which will have an impact, 
Madam Minister, on the municipalities at the end of the day. 
 
I see the minister is shaking her head. Indeed the Crown 
tendering policy will not have a direct impact on municipalities. 
And I agree with you, Madam Minister, that it won't. But when 
the road contractor goes to work for the government to do a 
road, say, for SaskPower down at Shand or at Boundary or at 
Coronach, and now they have to meet the Crown tendering 
policies and they have 20 employees on site and they hire their 
75 per cent union people, how long is it going to take for those 
15 union members to turn around and look at the other five 
non-union members and say: we need some more of our 
brothers in here working on this site; it's time that we certified 
this company. Madam Minister, and this will indeed have a very 
big impact on the revenue-sharing costs that this Bill is bringing 
forward, Madam Minister. 
 
When those contractors are unionized  they come back to 
work for the municipalities  they will now be dealing with 
union scale, with union people out of the union halls in Regina, 
even though they may be working down at Coronach, Madam 
Minister. 
 
So that's one of the other areas where revenue sharing is having  



May 3, 1995 

 
1961 

. . . the government's policies is having an impact on the 
revenue sharing of municipalities. 
 
So, Madam Minister, exactly how are the municipalities 
supposed to deal with these increased costs that you have 
provided for them through other government policies? Even 
though you have increased their revenue sharing this year, they 
are facing a great number of additional costs that are in place. 
 
To fix the roads out there that are now deteriorating — and not 
just, Madam Minister, in the north-east, but across the entire 
eastern side of the province they are facing these difficulties, 
Madam Minister — how are they supposed to deal with all of 
this added burden that they are going to face, along with the 
ever-growing costs of simply operating their RM (rural 
municipality) and the infrastructure for those municipalities, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I think I'll begin by 
pointing out to the member that the single biggest cut to the 
rural revenue-sharing pool occurred in the budget that was 
presented by the former premier, the member from Estevan, in 
1991-92. The cut that was delivered to the rural revenue-sharing 
pool that year alone was $8 million. The cut to the rural 
revenue-sharing pool since that date has been $8 million. 
 
So when you go back and look at budgets and where we have 
started on this road, I think it is quite hypocritical for the 
member over there to point out that during the last 4 or 5 or 6 
years the cuts to the revenue-sharing pool have only occurred 
under our tenure. That's simply not true. 
 
There was an $8 million cut — and I want that to be put on 
record so that everybody is clear — the first, the biggest, the 
single most largest cut in any year, without consultation, 
occurred in 1991-92 and was $8 million to rural revenue-
sharing. Since that time, yes, we have implemented other staged 
cuts and those cuts have amounted to just a fraction over $8 
million. So let's put that on the record. 
 
In regard to tendering, rural municipalities have a right to tender 
under their own conditions. Most of the people who do the 
work for rural municipalities are small rural contractors. And I 
think it is quite misleading of the member to talk about some 
kind of unionization of rural contractors, and therefore there's 
going to be an increase in cost. That obviously is not the case. 
 
Rural municipalities are in control of their own tendering. And 
so your assumption that you're making in regard to the Crown 
corporation agreement simply has no basis in fact. You're 
wrong on that and you're drawing a very long bow. 
 
(1545) 
 
So what are we doing to help municipalities more recently, in 
their difficulty? First of all, let me point out that most engineers 
and most experts and even the reeves themselves will say that  

in a year like this, it wouldn't have mattered how much gravel 
they had put on their roads last year or in the last three years. In 
the kind of spring that we've had in the last two or three, two 
months, the weather conditions mainly determined the poor 
state of our roads. 
 
So I think again it is quite false for you to say that the roads this 
spring had deteriorated because of the lack of sufficient 
maintenance or regravelling funds from the provincial 
government. That is not true. And again you should go out and 
talk to the people because they will tell you quite clearly that it 
was the spring conditions that brought about the damage, not 
necessarily because of lack of gravel. 
 
What have we done recently? Last week we announced a $6 
million package to help municipalities overcome the problems. 
That $6 million counterbalances those, I guess, $8 million of 
cuts that we have enforced. So I believe we have treated the 
municipalities very fairly. We have been very sensitive to their 
needs. On top of that, last year under the infrastructure 
program, there was another $10 million put into rural 
Saskatchewan for building roads. 
 
So since we came into government, we have withdrawn $8 
million out of the rural revenue-sharing pool. This year we put 
back, on an emergency basis, $6 million. And last year under 
the infrastructure program, $10 million went back to rural 
municipalities. 
 
So I think if you examine the facts around this, you will find out 
that the last three years, while they have been difficult for rural 
municipalities, we have treated them very fairly. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. As 
has been pointed out to me in this House many times by 
members such as the member for Regina Dewdney, the 
associate Finance minister or the minister of the Provincial 
Secretary, that the previous administration did not pass a budget 
in 1991, that it was your government indeed that passed that 
budget. 
 
When I look at the original budget documents that were 
presented in 1991 they called for a deficit of $250 million plus 
or minus. At the end of the day, Madam Minister, when your 
budget came down, it had a deficit of $850 million, so there 
was money that went some place. 
 
You say that you didn't change the number. Well if you didn't 
change the numbers, Madam Minister, it should have come out 
with a budget deficit of 250-plus-or-minus millions of dollars. 
There was a change there, Madam Minister, and somebody 
within your government made those changes — not someone 
who had previously been on that side of the government. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think there is some questions there as to 
whether or not the decreases, you said of 6.8 and 15.8, were 
those that were budgeted in there before. I don't know; I wasn't 
here. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1962 

But there is certainly some area there, Madam Minister, for 
some questions to be asked as to whether or not those were 
budgeted in there prior to the election of 1991. 
 
When I look over the changes, Madam Minister, you yourself 
gave me the number of $23.7 million decrease in the funding. 
And yet you seem to think it was so dramatic that the previous 
administration had a cut in there of $8-million-plus. So I think 
there is . . . your cut is three times larger, Madam Minister. 
 
And it's cumulative, it's cumulative. As you well know, these 
cuts are cumulative. As you decrease the amount of funding 
available for a municipality, initially they can say, we can cut 
back by a little bit; we can cut out mowing some of our back 
roads and we can carry on with the construction projects that 
we have. We can carry on with regravelling. 
 
And pretty soon, it's we can cut back on some winter snow 
disposal. We can cut back over here — we'll only hire the man 
now for the summer months and we won't have him employed 
in the wintertime. There are a few areas within the 
municipalities that they can cut back. 
 
And eventually what they start doing, Madam Minister, is they 
start cutting back on road construction. Instead of doing five 
miles that we need this year, we'll do three, and then we'll do 
two, and we won't do any gravelling. And that is what has been 
happening, Madam Minister. 
 
I realize that as the member from Melfort, you have paved roads 
all the way home. Well, Madam Minister, I don't have that 
luxury. I have to drive on the gravel roads. The fact is I even 
have to drive on one of the Minister of Highway's roads — I 
guess he's up there now — which is even worse than driving on 
the municipal roads, Madam Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gee, you've been a Tory long enough; 
how come that road didn't get it done? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So, Madam Minister, the reason the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloyd is saying, well since the 
previous administration was in government, she would have 
thought that we would have our roads paved. 
 
No, member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, we paved the roads in 
everyone else's constituency and not in our own. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when it comes down to looking at the 
roads . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain speaks of No. 9 Highway. It used 
to be a good road but it hasn't had any major work done on it 
for a significant number of years — much before 1982, Mr. 
Minister. I shouldn't get carried away talking about the 
Department of Highways. It's a subject near and dear to my 
heart for their lack of involvement in our transportation system. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when we come down to the $6 million 
that you have talked about now putting into the system and you 
talk of it coming from the rural revenue-sharing programs. So,  

Madam Minister, is that the monies that is being dealt with with 
this particular piece of legislation? The monies that are 
allocated under this particular piece of legislation, does that 
include the $6 million? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I'll give you an answer to that in a 
minute. But I just want to correct the record. Yes, you had 
another figure for your deficit in 1991-92, but everybody knows 
you cooked the books. So let's not get into a bunch of silliness 
around that. 
 
And I want to assure you that there was no change in the 
Department of Rural Development's budget from the one that 
you presented and ran away from in June, 1991 to the one that 
was passed after we got elected. So let's make sure that we put 
on the record what the facts really are. 
 
The third thing I want to correct — $23.2 million were the total 
cuts to the urban and rural revenue-sharing pool, not to the rural 
revenue-sharing pool. When I said the total cuts, I meant on 
both sides. 
 
The last question you asked me? No, the $6 million is not taken 
into account in the budget that we have because it was 
emergency funding and we didn't anticipate the emergency. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I'm glad you got into that because we asked the Finance 
minister last week a lot of questions about that $6 million and 
she was very categoric in where she said that money was 
coming from — it was Highways and Municipal Government. 
No if's, and's, but's or maybe's. 
 
And we talked about the percentages, whether it would be 2 or 
4, all those things, and she said, actually you shouldn't ask me 
those questions; that the ministers that you have to ask those 
questions of are yours and the Department of Highways, and 
that the Minister of Highways was the lead and it was clearly 
coming from your two departments. Okay? 
 
And not only that, the Premier said that this was simply the 
beginning, that this was the kick-start, and he was going to go 
to Ottawa but there was going to be more to come and you were 
going to be the one that would fund it. 
 
Now you can't tell my colleague here that it's not there. Because 
you go back in Hansard and she specifically said where it was 
coming from. 
 
So we need you to explain now where you're going to short 
your existing funding — which groups, which areas are going 
to shorted — in order to make up the 6 million bucks. And that 
you're the person that we should ask about that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, and again I want to point out that 
we are talking about the rural revenue-sharing pool that was 
established when we brought the budget down. And the Act 
we're dealing with now talks about when you make a change to 
the pool, you have to come in and correct the Act. You're  



May 3, 1995 

 
1963 

talking about emergency funding that we provided last week — 
$4 million is coming from the Department of Highways; $2 
million is coming out of Municipal Government. 
 
Our task and our challenge and our obligation is to find that 
money within our budget. We know that money doesn't grow on 
trees. Unfortunately you didn't know that when you were in 
government. But we know that you cannot stretch money. It's 
got to be found somewhere else. And our task over the next 
year, before the budget is finalized next March, is to find 
internally a savings of $2 million through our other operations. 
 
So I know that you don't understand this concept. If you would 
have, you would have engaged in it 10 years you were in 
government. But I assure you, yes, we have an obligation to 
find $2 million within our budget, as Highways has their $4 
million, and we will make sure that when our budget is 
finalized in March of 1996, that we have found through internal 
savings, and trying to make sure that we manage very, very 
prudently, we have managed to find that $2 million. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, it was you that 
brought up the 6 million bucks into the discussion on this 
particular Bill. It wasn't us. You opened it up. Therefore as far 
as I'm concerned, Mr. Chairman, it is on the discussion paper. 
The minister wanted to talk about it, therefore we'll talk about 
it. 
 
Madam Minister, $2 million is not going to be easy to find. I 
had a call from a reeve the other day who is outside of the 
so-called disaster area, talking about what has happened to the 
gravel program and what their needs are in the heavy land — all 
on this area around Regina and any place where they've had 
terrible gravel loss — and he's saying, what are we going to do? 
And he asked me to come into the Assembly the first 
opportunity I had to ask you questions about how in the world 
you could take this much money out of your department and not 
short everyone else. 
 
And if this revenue-sharing pool, Madam Minister, that you're 
talking about, is not going to be shorted — and you say it's not 
— that means that the slice of the pie that is elsewhere is even 
going to be thinner. You've only got so much money to work 
with; the Minister of Finance said there would be no more, no 
more. You're saying there's nothing here. That means there has 
to be more somewhere else. Okay? 
 
And we think you should explain to us. Because the very 
important point is, the Premier said this is only the kick-start, 
only the kick-start. Now what did he mean by that? 
 
And I asked the Minister of Finance to categorically say that 
there would not be a bunch of money promised during a 
forthcoming election campaign because there was a disaster 
happening to some people. And she wouldn't do that. She said, 
no I can't do that. 
 
Maybe there is more money. And if it's you and the Highways 
minister that are going to provide the more money, then I think  

it's important for us in discussing this Bill or any other item that 
you have before the Assembly. Any item that you bring before 
the Assembly is pertinent because that money may disappear 
out of that particular item to get moved over to the Premier's 
promise list. 
 
And it's important, Madam Minister, that you define for us 
where the dough is coming from. It's very important because 
this Assembly won't be in session after an election is called and 
we won't have any opportunity to question you. And your 
budget may not be passed. The House may rise, no budget 
passed. All we've got to go on are the interim supply motion 
and what you've proposed to do — nothing more, nothing more. 
Special warrants. No questions. 
 
So we need now to understand clearly what you are earmarking 
and where you're going to go, Madam Minister. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I've listened with interest to the question 
put by the member for Thunder Creek, and with all respect . . . 
order . . . with all respect, I think the member is trying to move 
off the Bill that's before us, which is municipal revenue-sharing. 
The member is — if I understand him correctly — wants to deal 
with another issue. 
 
Now it's fair to ask how this other matter might impact the Bill 
that's before us, but it doesn't necessarily follow then that we 
would deal then in total with the issue that he raises. So that if 
he wants to introduce issues, he must relate them to the Bill 
that's before us. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
again go back to the revenue-sharing pool. The budget we have 
before us defines the rural revenue-sharing pool and the urban 
revenue-sharing pool that we have as designated in our budget 
document. 
 
The issue, as the Chairman has said, on the emergency funding 
can be discussed when we discuss the estimates for the 
Department of Municipal Government and I'll be happy to talk 
about it at that time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Madam Minister, is there any fair 
comment from people in municipal government that their 
concerns, vis-a-vis things like the gravelling program or the 
lack thereof and the money that they would receive under 
shared grants from the provincial government, may be adversely 
affected because of what is transpiring? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We have already sent letters to all of the 
municipalities telling them what their grant allocation this year 
would be. We have no intention of changing those figures at 
this date. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Madam Minister, all we can do is take 
your word for it because we've had other circumstances in this 
House  the Minister of Agriculture is a good example . . .  



May 3, 1995 

 
1964 

about GRIP money and where the money went even though 
there was a commitment given. And all of a sudden, budget day 
rolls around, and where do we find the GRIP money? The 
Minister of Finance has conveniently used it to balance a 
budget. 
 
There wasn't a farmer in this province, Madam Minister, that 
ever suspected that that would occur. Not a farmer. They 
couldn't believe it: 178 million bucks just ripped out of their 
pockets — ripped out. And the Minister of Finance runs off 
with it. 
 
Now you say, I've written letters out. But you know what your 
biggest problem is, Madam Minister, is the Premier could go 
out and promise a bunch more cash in certain areas, and he's 
going to get it somewhere. And I for the life of me . . . and I'm 
only repeating the words of a reeve very close to the city of 
Regina, saying that they aren't confident that you're going to be 
able to deliver the goods over the coming budget year because 
of the needs that are out there. 
 
Madam Minister, could you, down the road, either through an 
order in council or some other way, could you affect the level of 
those transfers as you've previously indicated? Is there a way 
that you could take that money; is there any way that you could 
ratchet back on those funds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I don't know, and I'm not even going to 
contemplate that because we have no intention of doing it, so 
why should I comment on it? We're not going to ratchet back 
those funds; those are committed funds. We have a Bill here 
that we're discussing today. The pool of the rural and revenue 
sharing is in the estimates, and we have no intention of 
changing that. So I'm not going to enter into discussion about 
how we might because it's a hypothetical question and has no 
relevance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Madam Minister, in the explanation notes for the Bill, it talks 
about redirecting funds to the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency and that these funds are actually the 
increases that are given to this revenue-sharing pool. 
 
So in actual fact there is no new money or additional monies 
going into this pool. It's monies that are being funnelled through 
this revenue-sharing fund to SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency). 
 
So I wonder if you could explain what that's all about. He talks 
about two revenue-sharing pools, another $2 million which has 
been redirected to the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency in 1994-95. Of the $2 million, 1.166 is the urban 
revenue-sharing pool and 833,000 is for this rural 
revenue-sharing pool. Can you explain those, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. I know it's a complicated issue and I 
know I have explained it several times in the House but I will 
go over it one more time. 
 

Last year when we undertook to change the method of funding 
SAMA, we believed at the time that we would provide a grant 
to SAMA from the urban and rural revenue-sharing pool that 
amounted to $2 million. Since that time we brought in 
legislation that obligated the provincial government to fund the 
core services of SAMA for $4 million, and we have provided 
transitional funding of $1 million to SAMA, which meant then 
that $2 million that we had transferred to SAMA last year now 
could be replaced in the revenue-sharing pool from which we 
withdrew it last year. 
 
So we have provided $2 million more to SAMA, by virtue of 
the change in the Act, than we anticipated we would. And we 
have taken the $2 million that we took out of revenue sharing to 
fund SAMA and put it back into revenue sharing this year. 
 
So last year there was a change in the method of funding 
SAMA. We put into effect a new Act. The new Act obligated 
the government this year to fund SAMA's core services for $4 
million. That was new money. That meant that the $2 million 
went back to revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now I'll 
repeat what you said and you can let me know whether I got it 
right. 
 
Last year you pulled $2 million out of the revenue-sharing pool 
and paid it to SAMA. This year you've pulled that $2 million 
back out of SAMA, put it back into the revenue-sharing pool, 
and have made up the SAMA money some place else. The 
minister is nodding her head that I followed her on that. 
 
So, Madam Minister . . . but the municipalities also have to deal 
with SAMA through their own avenues. Those funds that have 
normally been paid to SAMA from the government have been 
significantly decreased over the period of time, and the costs of 
operating SAMA have increased conversely. 
 
So the municipalities are paying a much larger share of the 
costs of operating SAMA. I've had discussions with the RM 
secretary in my own municipality who was showing me 
accounts of about $2,500 or so for the cost of SAMA, which 
has now increased . . . last year, I believe it was 
$8,000-and-some and projected for 1995 of over $10,000, as 
their share of the SAMA costs. 
 
So while the minister may be moving monies around, the end 
result for the municipality is a dramatic increase in their costs to 
SAMA, which affects the revenue-sharing pools in the sense of 
the value given to them of those revenues out of the 
revenue-sharing pool; it means a much less volume, 
percentage-wise, of dollars that are going to the various 
municipalities. 
 
So those changes, while you may have shuffled money around, 
Madam Minister, at the end of the day, the municipalities are 
still . . . it's costing them more money now than it was last year 
and the year before, etc. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1965 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could give us a copy of the 
grants given out to each of the RMs, please, and the urban 
municipalities. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I'll give to you the revenue-sharing grant 
for the urban municipalities and the revenue-sharing grants, the 
unconditional and conditional grants, for the rural 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Within the 
municipal system, both rural and urban, there are two major 
changes taking place that are having quite a dramatic effect on 
the revenues available for use by those municipalities — one 
being the changes to the treaty land entitlements and the other 
being the Crow rate. 
 
The treaty land entitlements are lowering the tax base in both 
the rural and the urban municipalities as the lands are 
transferred to the native bands and become reserve lands. That 
takes those lands off of the tax rolls within those municipalities. 
 
How do those changes affect the formulas dealing with the 
revenue-sharing grant, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Just a couple of comments. Under the 
TLE (treaty land entitlements) they have an agreement with the 
federal government where the rural municipalities will be 
compensated for their tax loss. So there is tax loss 
compensation written into the agreement between the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and the 
federal government in regard to transfer of lands under the TLE. 
 
In regard to the question about when the land is removed as a 
taxable assessment, what impact does that have on their 
revenue-sharing grant? Because their assessment drops, their 
revenue-sharing grant increases. So in effect they get an 
increase in revenue-sharing grant as the taxable assessment or 
the land is removed as a taxable assessment under a TLE. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As I'm not 
familiar with the formula being used, how significant a change 
will a drop in assessment have on that grant? Will the amounts 
of the grants be directly offsetting, or is it some percentages of 
such? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Okay, again I want to make it clear that 
under TLEs for rural municipalities, they are compensated for 
their tax loss so there isn't a direct tax loss under the treaty land 
entitlement program for rural municipalities. There is an 
increase of approximately 40 per cent of their loss in their 
revenue-sharing grant in regard to rural municipalities and an 
increase of between 10 to 12 per cent of their loss in regard to 
urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The only 
problem with the settlement dollars that the RMs receive, it 
doesn't directly compensate them for the dollars lost. There is 
also another formula in place. 

While they may get a lump sum on a yearly basis, it may not 
recover the total costs . . . or the total tax base that they lost. So 
they need some other form of compensation to help make that 
up, and I believe that's one of the ongoing arguments on the 
treaty land entitlement settlements. Because we hear numbers 
thrown around of anywheres from 23 times the assessment loss 
to five times the assessment loss. And if it's five times, that's a 
very significantly different number than the 23 times. So it's 
difficult sometimes for these RMs to make up for their losses, 
and that's why the formula needs to be carefully considered 
when you're doing the revenue-sharing grants, as to exactly 
what's happening within that RM. 
 
The other thing that is coming forward that I've mentioned is, 
the Crow rate is going to have a dramatic impact on the, 
particularly the rural, RMs because they're going to suffer the 
major impact of the changes in the transportation system within 
the movement of grain. The highways will also suffer an 
impact, but the RMs will suffer it initially. They will be the first 
ones affected. And within the revenue-sharing grants, Madam 
Minister, are you going to be taking into account the effects that 
the changes to Crow rate are going to have to the rural tax base 
and their ability to maintain their infrastructure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I want to perhaps ask you to clarify. Are 
you talking about an anticipated reduction in the assessed value 
of farm land, or are you talking about the damage that's going to 
occur to the rural transportation network? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm talking about direct cost, damage. 
Damage. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The damage that's going to . . . well I 
think it is unfair and unlikely that the provincial government is 
going to be able to fill the gap that has been left by the actions 
of the federal government. We are all very concerned that the 
federal government unilaterally has seen to eliminate the Crow. 
And not only that, I think more importantly and probably more 
critically is the problem with the perceived changes in 
deregulation of the railroad. And I don't want to debate those 
issues because that belongs in the realm of ministers from 
Transport. 
 
But I know that the SARM and rural municipalities are very 
concerned about the increase of traffic that's going to occur 
because of these changes, both on the Crow side and on 
deregulations of railroads. 
 
But I will say very clearly that the provincial government is not 
going to have the ability . . . and I don't think taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan should in fact fill in for the deficiencies or the 
difficulties that have been created by the federal government. It 
is a concern to the SARM, and I know they had an opportunity 
at their last convention to talk to the Minister of Agriculture 
about the impact on their rural road network. And I will leave it 
up to the board of directors of the SARM to try to come to 
terms with that. 



May 3, 1995 

 
1966 

But I have told them very clearly that the provincial government 
does not intend to compensate rural municipalities for the 
difficulties that have been imposed upon them by the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, as the minister 
responsible for Municipal Affairs, you are going to be directly 
involved within the infrastructure of rural RMs and our 
transportation system, whether you want to be or not. 
 
Unfortunately at the end of the day, if the two senior levels of 
government, the federal and provincial government, are 
unwilling or unprepared to assist in this area, there is only one 
level of government that will be dealing with it, and that will be 
the municipal governments across this province. They have one 
taxpayer to go to -- the property taxpayer. And so whether 
you're prepared to be involved or not, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan will indeed be directly involved, and it will be 
from their pockets that this infrastructure is maintained. 
 
Now you, as the provincial representative for all municipalities 
across this province, have an opportunity to be a participant in 
this, or you can simply be like Pontius Pilate and wash your 
hands of it. 
 
But as the Minister of Municipal Affairs, you have a much 
larger tax base to tap into to assist in this. The rural RMs have 
their property, and that's it. You have the ability to tap into the 
income tax that is generated throughout this province, the 
income-generating factors to assist in the transportation system. 
 
And it's not just going to be the municipal. It's also going to be 
highways that are going to be impacted. And everyone across 
the Prairies is very, very disappointed in the manner in which 
the federal Liberal government has chosen to deal with the 
Crow rate. The simple decimation of that program is no 
solution that will aid anyone in rural Saskatchewan, Madam 
Minister. 
 
There are certainly those who believe that there was a need to 
change the Crow rate. But each and every one of those who 
believed there needed to be that change, also had some other 
alternate solutions to provide the transition for those changes 
which the federal Liberal government has completely ignored. 
 
They have talked about providing a small amount of money in 
the context of what the Crow rate meant to western Canada, and 
it is not going to provide the solutions that are going to be 
necessary, Madam Minister. So you as the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs can, as I said, wash your hands of it all and 
say it has nothing to do with me, while the whole infrastructure 
in rural Saskatchewan disintegrates. 
 
Or you can be a part of it. And in being a part of it, the 
revenue-sharing program grant system is where you can be a 
part of that, because as the land values drop, you will be asked 
to put in more money, Madam Minister. Because as you 
yourself have said, as the tax base drops within the 
revenue-sharing formula, the monies provided by the province  

on a percentage basis will rise. 
 
Now you have the opportunity there to say, we're not putting 
any more money in, so that's going to drop. We are not going to 
provide for that to make up for that property tax loss. But that's 
your opportunity, Madam Minister, and that's one of the things 
you need to very seriously consider. And you need to be 
considering that today because that process starts on August 1. 
 
So, Madam Minister, within that context of the Crow rate being 
gone on August 1, are you making any contingency plans within 
the revenue-sharing system to help starting to make up for the 
shortfalls that are going to be in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No, we have not given any indication 
that we are going to increase revenue-sharing pools because of 
the actions of the federal government. We are working very 
closely with the SARM and trying to find a way of making a 
presentation to the federal government, perhaps in order to get 
consent from the federal Minister of Agriculture to tap into that 
pool, that $300 million transitional pool that they have. 
 
We are exploring what other ways that we can work together to 
work through or find a solution to the problem that was created 
by the federal government. But again, I don't think it's either 
reasonable or fair to expect the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to 
fill the gap that was created by the federal government in their 
change. 
 
And we have a balanced budget plan, a four-year plan that we 
presented, and I think . . . Again, we have to be rational and we 
have to be reasonable about this. Again I can assure you that 
our department and our Premier are working very closely with 
the SARM to try to find a solution to the problem that we know 
is going to be on our doorstep in the next year and over the next 
five or six years as we adjust. 
 
But right now I can tell you we have not anticipated putting 
more money into the revenue-sharing pools to fill that gap. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm sure that's 
not welcome news across rural Saskatchewan when you talk of 
that, because it will have a very dramatic impact starting on 
August 1, when the costs start to increase as more and more 
grain is hauled, not to the local elevator and not to the local rail 
system, but to some other point because of the changes in the 
transportation costs. 
 
Yes, you have balanced your budget, Madam Minister. But I 
think back to 1982 to the budget that the premier of the day, 
Allan Blakeney, presented. And the anger that was expressed 
across rural Saskatchewan when, at 24 per cent interest rates at 
ever increasing fuel costs, there was nothing provided to assist 
anyone in Saskatchewan. And it was a very real and visceral 
anger that was expressed across rural Saskatchewan because the 
government seemed to be more preoccupied with the idea of 
protecting the balanced budget than they were of helping 
people. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1967 

And, Madam Minister, while you may argue that that was 
certainly the right thing to do, the people of Saskatchewan of 
that day did not believe it was so, and expressed themselves at 
that election that came up. So I think that is a concern, Madam 
Minister, that you should also be aware of. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I want to caution members 
that language that is not permissible during debate is also not 
permissible informally in the House. And just to bring that to 
the members' attention and ask that you avoid that kind of 
provocative language. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Madam Minister, the infrastructure program — how does it 
work in with the revenue-sharing grant system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I was interested in your comments, and I 
simply want to point out that the government, for 10 years that 
was under the minister from Estevan, didn't have the intellectual 
honesty or the intestinal fortitude to either cut somewhere else 
or to raise taxes. And what they left of course for the people of 
Saskatchewan for the 1990s is a huge tax bill that was unpaid 
because they chose to spend but not to cut and not to raise 
taxes. 
 
And I think everybody realizes that. And everybody in 
Saskatchewan today is very much aware that if you're going to 
survive into the next century, you have to be able to do it on 
prudent fiscal management, and balanced budgets are extremely 
important. 
 
In regard to the question on infrastructure, 15 per cent of rural 
municipalities project is paid for by the infrastructure program, 
and the revenue-sharing grant provides assistance for the 
balance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When we 
are talking about infrastructure programs then with rural 
municipalities, are those new dollars going into the system or 
are those shuffled dollars from one program to another? When 
we're talking about infrastructure programs in municipalities, 
are you taking money out of the revenue-sharing program, the 
allocations there, and calling that some of the infrastructure 
money? Or is the government initiating new monies to go into 
those programs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Last year after consultations with SARM, 
$10 million of the infrastructure money was allocated to the 
SARM, $10 million, and that was to be used on their rural 
transportation network. It was not shifted from anywhere else. It 
was money that was used to top up the already existing 
programs, which are rural conditional and unconditional 
revenue-sharing program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Was that $10 million, Madam Minister, 
already budgeted within the Department of Municipal Affairs, 
or was it new monies from the Minister of Finance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — It was not money that was already  

budgeted within our department for rural development. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, I wonder if you could 
give me some idea — because we've been talking about the 
effects the land treaty entitlements would have on the 
revenue-sharing program — just what kind of revenue losses to 
municipalities have been affected by the treaty land 
entitlements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We don't have those figures here but we 
certainly can find them for you. We would have to probably do 
a survey of the RMs across the province that have a TLE 
settlement. Some are in progress and some have been 
completed. So we would have to go out and do that research. 
But I'll provide you with that information when we have it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you could also give me some indication on the changes that 
would affect municipalities dealing with the Crow rate, what 
kind of studies you have done that would deal with any increase 
or decrease in the land assessments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well we haven't done anything there yet 
either, and I think it's still too early to tell whether there's going 
to be a decrease in the assessed value of land. This is something 
that SAMA will have to take into account as they do their 
re-evaluations. So we will have to wait for SAMA to do that 
analysis and provide us with those figures. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, as you go 
through your budgetary processing though, surely you must take 
into account some projections that would deal with any changes 
in the assessment within the RM structure, so that those 
changes would fit into your formula for providing the grant 
system. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Any impact on the change in assessment 
won't show up until a year after they occur. So we anticipate 
within . . . if the change in the assessed value or the value of 
agricultural land doesn't occur until next year, after the Crow 
rate has been gone for one crop year, then you won't see a 
change in our revenue sharing until the year following. So 
there's a lag time of about two years before there is an impact 
on revenue sharing. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1630) 

 
Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation Act 
 
The Chair: — I will ask the Minister of Municipal Government 
to introduce her officials to members of the committee. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1968 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to my 
right, Ron Styles, associate deputy minister of Municipal 
Government; and behind me to my right is Peter Hoffmann. 
He's the director of financial operations for housing division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. First 
of all, Madam Minister, let me welcome your officials, and also 
we apologize for not having actually acknowledged the work of 
the past official who has already left us. But thank you for your 
officials coming to address the Bill before us, An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 
 
I think you made reference to the fact that these are basically 
housekeeping amendments, and I'm wondering, Madam 
Minister, if you can explain in a little more detail what you 
mean by housekeeping amendments. For example, I note a new 
section 7 has been written which allows the minister to provide 
supplies and services to employees, to the corporation, and I'm 
wondering what the intent of that section is, and other 
amendments that you're bringing forward. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you for that question. In 
regard to the housekeeping amendments, the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation was set up as a separate corporation many 
years ago. And during the restructuring of government, the 
Housing Corporation became a part of the Department of 
Municipal Government. 
 
So we had to make some changes in the way our employees 
were dealt with. The employees who used to be part of the 
corporation now are employees of the Department of Municipal 
Government under executive government. So we made those 
changes to make sure that what we actually do is . . . in how the 
corporation . . . or how Sask Housing is functioning is 
consistent with the way it is placed within government. It has 
changed from a separate corporation, a separate entity, to now 
to be a function under the Department of Municipal 
Government. 
 
And as a consequence of that as well, we have changed the 
board structure. It is no longer necessary to have an independent 
board, so that amendment was also brought forward. 
 
We have been cited by the Provincial Auditor for the last 
number of years because several years ago when the home 
improvement program was initiated, the Sask Housing became 
the agent under which that functioned. And that was not a 
mandate of Sask Housing; it was really set up to be a social 
housing program. And with the home improvement program as 
part of its obligations, we had to change the Act in order to 
make it legal or in order to make it function so that it could take 
on the roles and responsibilities to manage the home 
improvement program, which now we don't have, but we still 
have a number of those loans still outstanding, and we do have 
obligation to manage that part of the portfolio. So we had to 
change the mandate of Sask Housing from a purely social  

housing program to something that had a broader function. 
 
And we also in this Act have amalgamated all the loans under 
the various programs so that it is much more clear or much 
more definitive as to the powers of Sask Housing and all of the 
programs and all the loans that operate under those programs. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, I note in section 5, the amended 
section 5 talks about under clause (c) and then we have 
subsection (7) and (8) where: 
 
 "(7) If the member of the board is not an employee in 

the public service of Saskatchewan, the corporation may 
pay the member remuneration for his or her services and 
reimbursement for travel and other expenses at rates 
determined by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
And then it also, in subsection (9): 
 
 "(9) If, due to a conflict of interest, the member of the 

board is unable to act with respect to a matter before the 
board, the minister may act . . . 

 
I'm wondering why you've got those two subsections in there, 
why you've changed that. Is that because you had ministers 
involving . . . were involved on the board, and then to address, 
rather than a double, if you will, a double-dipping base, or are 
you . . . at present do you have individuals that may be 
employed by government in other sections that are on the board 
and that's just to say that if you're already employed in the 
government, the public sector, that you will not be eligible for 
any reimbursement? 
 
Is that what I'm reading? Am I reading that correctly into those 
two sections? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — More or less that's correct. The Act has 
been amended so that if a future government believes it's 
important to put a member on the board or have the board made 
up of a member . . . of a person who is not in the employment 
of the government, or the service of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, then that opportunity is there. 
 
We right now have the board as wholly people within 
government. But we didn't want to bring in amendments that 
did not give a future government the ability, if they thought it 
right and thought it in their good judgement to be the right 
course, to put as a member . . . a person who was not an 
employee in the public service of Saskatchewan. So the 
opportunity is there but we don't use it and we don't anticipate 
using it right now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, why would you have chosen to 
have your board made up of individuals from the public sector 
versus individuals from the private sector? I'm just taking that 
from your comments. By that I mean individuals from outside 
of government would bring a different perspective to the board 
as you're reviewing the role of the board. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1969 

And maybe correct me if I'm wrong, but I'm just wondering why 
you wouldn't at least have, if you will, some of the board 
members who would be individuals from outside of 
departments or areas of government. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, really the reason for this 
change has to do with the change in function of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. The last year we saw the 
elimination to all intents and purposes of the capital funding 
program from CMHC and the federal government. 
 
Prior to 1994, there was a very active construction program and 
we were involved very heavily with the private market at that 
time. At this point in time, we are very much reduced to a 
maintenance program and no construction is anticipated. But in 
the event that in the future we might have an opportunity to 
initiate new construction programs, we still want the 
opportunity, if it is necessary, to involve the private sector. And 
so we want to leave the opportunity open for someone, perhaps 
from the Metis Housing Corporation or from the private sector, 
to be able to sit on this board to provide advice and to provide 
assistance to the direction of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, one of your comments earlier 
on, you mentioned that Sask Housing did end up with the 
responsibility of administrating the old home improvement 
program. And I've chatted with your office regarding a concern 
that was raised by an individual from Langenburg — a Ms. 
Isted, and the fact that she had a loan that was still outstanding 
and the Sask Housing had gone after her because her husband 
had left and declared bankruptcy. 
 
I'm wondering if your officials might have any idea of how that 
applies and whether or not there's been an understanding 
arrived at with Ms. Isted that has helped her out in the fact that 
she's a single wage earner with four children. If there's anything 
that you might be able to offer to elaborate on the fact that 
we've come to an agreement of possibly getting half of the loan 
back from her versus all of it being put on her shoulders, and a 
repayment schedule that would work within her budget. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you for the question. We are 
aware of Mrs. Isted and her problems. It is a confidential file. I 
can inform you that the situation has been resolved and she has 
agreed to the settlement. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I thank you for taking it 
back from where it was before, and she certainly faced a lot of 
hassle until your department really entered in again, and I thank 
you on her behalf and appreciate that. 
 
Madam Minister, you also made a comment about construction 
projects and whether this Act deals specifically with 
construction, or at the . . . I'm just coming back to that comment 
you made regarding capital construction, and I've been in touch 
with your office regarding Maryfield. I received a letter back  

indicating that certainly it's something that might be looked at 
in the future. 
 
But what I'm wondering is, is the department involved in any 
capital . . . or do I gather from the comments you just made 
about capital construction, that capital construction is totally 
eliminated at the present time, that there is no capital 
construction, that there is no assistance for small communities 
like the town . . . I should say, not rather than Maryfield, I 
should add the community of Fairlight. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — In regard to the construction activity at 
Sask Housing, with the elimination of the funding from CMHC 
and the federal government, we have not a program any longer 
to fund new housing projects, except a very limited one, a very 
small one, in northern Saskatchewan that will be initiated this 
year, where we'll be putting a very few units in La Loche and 
another very few number of units in Cumberland House. 
 
This is the last of the programs. It was a special initiative 
program that was brought in last fall by the federal government. 
We had hoped for a far more extensive program because 
northern Saskatchewan is desperately short of houses. But the 
federal government brought in a program that was very, very 
limited. In fact the program parameters really designated new 
housing only to those communities where there was no road 
access. 
 
And so after a great deal of discussion and a lot of negotiation 
with the federal government over the course of the last three or 
four months, they have agreed that Cumberland House will be 
one community, and we could pick another community, that we 
feel has very special circumstances, to designate small funding 
to. So La Loche was picked, and this summer we'll have a very 
limited construction activity in the North in regard to La Loche 
and Cumberland House. 
 
Other construction is limited primarily to maintenance and 
rejuvenation programs, which aren't regarded as new 
construction but really more of a maintenance program, but 
there is a capital cost and that is provided for. 
 
We are also looking at limited funds in order to relocate some 
units that may be vacant across Saskatchewan and have been 
sitting vacant for some time. And we believe we have to make 
use of these resources. So there is a small capital cost in regard 
to relocating some of these units and putting them on new 
foundations and so on. So that is the other very limited 
construction program we have. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I guess, 
Madam Minister, it's unfortunate that this federal government 
has all of a sudden reversed a lot of its direction. And now, if 
you will, while we've seen the province offload on local 
governments, we see the federal government continuing to 
offload to the point that I can appreciate the difficulty you and 
your officials have in trying to stretch the limited budget you 
may have. 
 



May 3, 1995 

 
1970 

But in your second reading speech, you made a comment about, 
this Act enlarges the objectives and powers of the corporation. 
And I'm wondering if you could just elaborate as to what you 
specifically meant by that comment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — That comment really was directed to the 
home improvement program which was operated under Sask 
Housing, but we didn't have the legislative mandate to do it. So 
it refers completely to our obligations now to manage the home 
improvement program loans. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In view of the 
changes being brought forward by the present Act, I'm 
wondering if you could . . . how the objectives of Sask Housing 
have changed over the past number of years, specifically in the 
past four years; and how Sask Housing offers low income 
housing, housing for disabled people and seniors. And basically 
what else is offered to the public by the corporation? 
 
I'm particularly interested in the fact, are loans continue . . . to 
be a part of the mandate of Sask Housing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No, we aren't involved in any further 
loan programs, but we are very active in enriched services. We 
are working very closely with the Department of Health and the 
Department of Social Services to provide a broader range of 
programing services to the tenants who live in our units. So we 
have moved away from direct involvement in regard to loans or 
new construction into the area where we are trying to improve 
the quality of life and the services to the clients who live in our 
social housing units. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, in section 15 and then 
subsections (l) and (m) you talk about your . . . or you outline 
fees and charges, and I'm wondering if you could provide more 
detail on the fees and charges collected by the corporation. 
What would you be levying fees for and charges? And how 
much revenue do you anticipate the corporation collecting each 
fiscal year under the fees and charges that you're implementing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — As you know, Sask Housing is the active 
partner in the programs that we partnership with the federal 
government. This relates to our ability to charge a fee to the 
federal government for administering those programs. Last year 
we collected about $4.5 million for administration for federal 
programs. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, does this legislation deal with 
any . . . or is there any infrastructure money that would be 
targeted towards Sask Housing program in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well it isn't contemplated right now. I 
know that I have brought up that opportunity in discussion with 
the federal minister of housing and also Mr. Eggleton, the 
federal Minister responsible for Infrastructure. We have pointed 
out that one very important infrastructure program that they 
could initiate and would create a number of jobs — and we'd be 
very useful all across Canada — would be one that would take  

and provide funds for housing. 
 
At this point in time, we do not anticipate that, but if the 
opportunity did come our way from the federal government, we 
certainly would take advantage of that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, the section 18 deals with a 
couple of things I'd like to raise before we vote this off . . . 
deals with housing authorities. How does this section differ 
from the old section dealing with housing authorities. In section 
18(7) deals with remuneration or reimbursement for travelling 
and other expenses, and what is the current level for housing 
authorities set at? Maybe you could just provide details for us 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — This section really gave us the ability to 
provide more detail to the way in which the housing authorities 
can carry out their duties. So it lays out with a little more clarity 
the relationship between the provincial government and housing 
authorities and their responsibilities. 
 
In regard to remuneration, there are no per diems allowed for 
people who sit on housing authority boards, but they are 
allowed to recover their expenses at rates that are the same as 
the rest of the public service. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to take a moment to 
thank the minister and her officials for their quick responses 
today. Actually I did have a few more questions, but maybe 
we'll address them at another date. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
officials here today, and I would like to thank the member 
opposite for the questions. And if he has more, he can certainly 
send them to our office, and we'd be very glad to provide him 
with the answers. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the Bill be 
passed a third time and passed under its title. 



May 3, 1995 

 
1971 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 


