






















































April 24, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 24, 1995 

 

 
1679 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed with a 
great deal of pleasure that I present petitions on behalf of the 
people from the southern part of Saskatchewan. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to present these on behalf of people from Shaunavon, 
Medicine Hat, Maple Creek, and Gull Lake and Tompkins area. 
And I'll table these for you today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing the 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Shell Lake, Spiritwood, Leoville, 
Prince Albert, Spruce Home, Domremy, Black Lake, and Stony 
Rapids area of the province, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to present 
these today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the  

 Assembly to allocate funding toward the double-laning 
of Highway No. 1. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 58 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Saskatchewan Power Corporation: (1) 

what was the cost of sending Barry McLellan, Neil 
Thompson, and Larry Wilson to the effective executive 
program at Waskesiu in 1992; (2) what was the cost of 
sending Guy Bruce, Lyle Doell, and Rick Patrick to the 
effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1992; (3) 
what are the names of all SaskPower employees who 
participated in the effective executive program at 
Waskesiu in 1994; (4) what are all costs associated with 
these employees attending this seminar; (5) what are the 
names of all employees who have enrolled in this 
seminar for the current year? 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Snowbirds 25th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the 25th anniversary season of 
Canada's world famous Snowbirds officially began five minutes 
ago at 15 Wing Moose Jaw. The acceptance show is being 
performed as we speak, in order to gain approval to take this 
year's version of the Snowbirds aeronautical ballet on the road. 
 
The Snowbirds are dedicating their 1995 show in memory of 
the late Colonel O.B. Philp, the founder of the Snowbirds, who 
passed away just a week ago. 
 
Led by Commanding Officer Major Steve Hill, their first of 80 
public shows will be this Thursday at Hay River, Northwest 
Territories, and their final public show will be on October 8 at 
Page at Lake Powell, Arizona. 
 
In between, the highlight of the season for many in this 
province is the Saskatchewan Air Show, Saturday and Sunday, 
July 8 and 9, at 15 Wing Moose Jaw. 
 
The 1995 Saskatchewan Air Show promises to be one of the 
biggest and best ever, Mr. Speaker, as the Snowbirds 
commemorate not only their own 25th anniversary, but also 
Saskatchewan's 90th anniversary and the 50th anniversary of 
the training school at 15 Wing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a magic moment when the crowd spots those 
nine bullets of light just above the southern horizon, the sun 
reflecting off the noses of the approaching Tutor jets to mark 
the beginning of the Snowbirds show. 
 
I ask all members to join in wishing the Snowbirds 80 safe and 
memorable performances in this, their silver anniversary 
season. We're proud they call Saskatchewan home. 



April 24, 1995 

 
1680 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Volunteers Recognized 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize a 
number of volunteers in my riding who were honoured at a 
banquet which I attended this past weekend in Prince Albert. 
 
The North Central Regional Recreation Association chose eight 
volunteers to receive this special recognition. 
 
They include Ellen Becker of Prince Albert for arts and culture; 
Margaret Hay of Christopher Lake for special services; Iris 
Morris of Christopher Lake for recreation; Jodi Pocha of 
MacDowall received a youth award; Hilda Reding of 
MacDowall for special services; Nick Trofimuk of 
Paddockwood for recreation; Mike and Pearl Zaparaniuk of 
Weirdale for culture and conservation. 
 
These volunteers have been recognized for dedication and 
commitment in their area of involvement. I would like to 
congratulate them and all of the volunteers in the Prince Albert 
region who have made a contribution to their community. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Professional Secretaries Week 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 
has been proclaimed Professional Secretaries Week. 
Wednesday is Professional Secretaries Day. 
 
This is a week for those of us who are lucky enough to have 
support staff to reflect on how much they contribute to the 
performance of our duties and to our general well-being. 
 
The proclamation issued by the Mayor of Regina states that 
professional secretaries accept vital responsibilities and perform 
important roles in commerce, industry, and government. And 
they are committed to upholding the highest ethical standards. 
 
What the proclamation does not say is that their most valuable 
contributions can in no way be measured by any objective 
standards. When things go well, they stand aside and allow us 
to take the credit that is actually half theirs. And when things go 
badly, they do not stand aside and say, I told you so. As 
Abraham Lincoln said: a secretary is someone who knows all 
about you but likes you anyway. 
 
As well, I think it might do us all some good if, once a year, we 
had someone in authority call us and demand an impossible task 
be performed in the next five minutes. I wonder how 
unflappable we would be. 
 
Our secretaries, of course, know how dependent we are on 
them. They are simply too modest and too polite to say so. 
 
On behalf of all of us, I might say that we do know, and that we  

do care, and this week gives us the opportunity to say so. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
National Volunteers Week, and I'm happy to report that 
volunteerism is well and alive in our city of Saskatoon. And I'd 
like to extend my congratulations and appreciation to all those 
who volunteer in our city. 
 
A report was just released by Saskatoon City Council that stated 
that volunteer efforts in Saskatoon are worth at least $648,000 a 
year to the city and its taxpayers. 
 
There are 42 community associations in Saskatoon representing 
48 neighbourhoods. And these associations have at least 1,300 
volunteers involved, contributing more than 76,000 hours of 
support. And that means that's thirty-six and a half years’ worth 
of volunteer work in our city. If these workers were paid $8.50 
an hour, their labour would have cost the city $6,480. 
 
These organizations cover a very wide variety of community 
activity from community outdoor rinks to supervising indoor 
recreational activities to managing sports leagues for tykes and 
teenagers. Also, Mr. Speaker, parks were developed or 
enhanced, drop-in facilities were managed, and nutritional food 
programs were supplied and staffed. 
 
In short, in Saskatoon and all across Saskatchewan, all of our 
lives are enriched in every sense of the word by the work of 
volunteers, and we appreciate their efforts. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated already, 
this week has been proclaimed National Volunteer Week in 
Canada. Today I would like to pay tribute to all of the many 
volunteers in Saskatchewan and in my riding who make our 
province a better place to live. Volunteers are a special people 
because they offer their talent and energy to the communities in 
which they live. 
 
It is estimated that some 13 million Canadians do voluntary 
work. The average volunteer devotes about 191 hours a year to 
voluntary work. If you stop and think about the number of 
people who volunteer in Saskatchewan, it is quite remarkable. 
 
Volunteers will play a big part when Regina hosts the Grey Cup 
later this year. And without them, many events in Saskatchewan 
would be difficult to organize. I congratulate all of the 
volunteers in Saskatchewan for having the desire and the 
motivation to help others and for caring for generations, which 
is the theme for Volunteer Week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 24, 1995 

 
1681 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, 
Saskatchewan people want you to do more than just talk about 
the federal gun laws. Hundreds of Saskatchewan residents who 
have sent us — this is only a small sample of the stack — have 
sent us these coupons saying they want more than talk and they 
support the right to own personal property. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you continue to oppose this option? 
Saskatchewan gun owners are telling us they want action. Why 
won't you take action instead of just talking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is essentially the 
same question that the member asked several weeks ago, and 
my answer is essentially the same. We are taking every action 
that we possibly can under the realities of the situation. We 
have been, on a national level, practically leading the fight as 
far as governments are concerned across this country, and we 
continue to do that. 
 
Later today I will share with the member a draft of a statement 
that we. . . a paper that we propose to file, a submission we 
propose to file with the standing committee. And we are 
pressing on every front; we continue to do whatever we can to 
oppose this thing. 
 
The problem with the ideas put forward by the opposition in the 
form of the Bills that have been tabled in this House is that they 
won't do any good, Mr. Speaker. They won't contribute 
anything at all to the position of Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan gun owners in this debate. It is just foolish to 
think that these provisions would add anything at all to the 
position of the province and accordingly we see no point in 
going along with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
have a legal opinion from the legislative Law Clerk that says 
this action would indeed be constitutional. Why not do 
something in Saskatchewan to make the feds challenge us, 
rather than waiting until the federal government has completed 
their piece of legislation? 
 
Mr. Minister, hundreds of Saskatchewan people have written to 
us supporting our proposals. Hundreds more have signed 
petitions supporting our legislation including, Mr. Minister, one 
of your own members, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley 
— Mr. Minister, this member, who has been heavily involved 
with the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and is an avid 
sportsman. So I think that you would be wise to defer to his 
judgement on this issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley has 
signed a petition specifically in favour, in favour of our Bill 31,  

our private members' Bill which recognizes property rights. 
Will you follow his recommendation and support this Bill, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am very fond of the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley and I have a great deal of 
respect for his opinion. However, to the extent that he has 
expressed an opinion in signing this petition, I must disagree 
with him. 
 
The question is not whether or not this legislature could pass 
that law. The question is whether that law would do any good. 
And the plain fact is that it would not. The federal government 
either have the constitutional ability to pass this law, or it does 
not. It claims to have that power by virtue of its exclusive 
power over the making of the criminal law. 
 
I have said over and over again that we challenge that and we 
want to take a look at the Bill that parliament finally passes and 
it may well be that we decide to take them on it and to suggest 
that what they've done is unconstitutional. 
 
My point is simply this, Mr. Speaker: passing the law proposed 
by the opposition would not improve our position one whit so 
far as the constitutional argument is concerned — not one whit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if we were to do 
something in this House, it would show the people in Ottawa 
that we are prepared to stand up and do something rather than 
just talk about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, we support the idea of making an all-party 
presentation in Ottawa, but quite frankly we don't think the 
federal Liberals are going to listen. If they were going to listen, 
they would have heard the message by now; they would have 
heard all the rallies and protests, the letters, the phone calls 
from Saskatchewan people, urging them to drop this useless 
piece of legislation. But they're not listening, and that's why 
Saskatchewan Liberal MPs (Member of Parliament) voted in 
favour of that legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, we need to go to Ottawa with some ammunition 
to show Saskatchewan is serious about fighting the gun registry. 
We need to do that through legislation in this Assembly. Mr. 
Minister, why won't you support our legislation, like hundreds 
of other Saskatchewan people are doing? And if you won't 
listen to it, why won't you offer some legislative alternatives of 
your own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have said over and 
over again at countless public meetings that Saskatchewan 
would not pass such a law; we oppose such a law. And I 
couldn't imagine that we in this legislature would pass a gun  



April 24, 1995 

 
1682 

registration law or a law requiring possession certificates. I 
don't think we'd get a vote here for such a law. 
 
So what are we going to do? The proposal put forward by the 
opposition simply is totally ineffective. It would add absolutely 
nothing to this. 
 
Now I'm in favour of doing everything we can, and I've invited 
the hon. member and others in the opposition, any number of 
times, to talk about what it is that we could do. One thing we 
did do in this House, in a show of cooperation all the way 
around, was support a unanimous resolution on this point. And 
we are resolved to go together to the standing committee and 
express our views on behalf of Saskatchewan people. Those are 
good things. 
 
We are prepared today to pass further resolutions in this regard. 
For example, we may want to pass a resolution asking the 
federal government to exempt Saskatchewan, to exempt 
Saskatchewan from the application of this law. We might 
propose that they impose this law upon provinces that think it 
would do some good. And the rest of us could treat it as sort of 
a pilot project and determine whether or not it was effective. 
Anything like that is worth doing. 
 
I'm afraid though, that the legislation put forward by the 
opposition is ineffective and would have no effect, and Ottawa 
would simply laugh at us if we went to them with that and said, 
there now, see how we feel about this in Saskatchewan. They'd 
just laugh at us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think you 
listen much better than the federal Liberals listen because they 
certainly haven't listened, and they haven't listened to 
Saskatchewan on the Crow rate. 
 
Mr. Minister, we support the all-party committee, but I think 
you're being naïve and a little foolish if you think you're going 
to go to Ottawa and get Allan Rock to listen and seriously do 
anything about our presentation. You have to show that you're 
willing to back up your presentation with some action, and so 
far you haven't done that. Mr. Minister, Allan Rock isn't going 
to listen to you unless you show that you're willing to do 
something, you're willing to act. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you don't support our legislation, when can we 
expect you to introduce legislation of your own to fight this 
useless gun registry? Make the federal government challenge 
us, challenge Saskatchewan legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm really at a loss to 
know what words I can use to convey to the member the reality 
of the situation. The federal government is purporting to act 
under its criminal law powers under section 91 of the 
constitution. They either have that power or they don't. If they 
have it, they can pass the law. If they don't have the power, then 
we will take them on in the courts and attempt to get a court  

order that invalidates this legislation. 
 
Now that is a legal constitutional question which has to be 
fought out in the courts. There is no piece of legislation that we 
can pass here that will pre-empt the federal power over criminal 
law. That's the long and the short of it. It's no more complicated 
than that. They either have the power or they don't. 
 
And us fiddling with the Human Rights Code or fiddling with 
some other provincial Act is not going to add one whit to the 
strength of our position on the constitutional question. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is as simple as it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minister of Highways' Travel 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Government House Leader. Mr. 
Minister, would you please supply this Assembly with the 
Minister of Highways' itinerary over the past three weeks, 
including the dates, places, and events he has been attending 
during this time frame. Would you be able to supply us with a 
summary of his schedule, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The Minister of Highways would be 
more than able to speak to himself when his estimates come up. 
And that's the kind of question which one can and should ask in 
estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
the Minister of Highways, Minister, is a minister of the Crown 
and is allowed extra salary, unlimited travel expenses, and a 
company of political staff to assist him. What he does with 
these taxpayers' funds is of significant relevance to this 
Assembly and to the people of the province. 
 
It has come to our attention that the minister has been spending 
most of his time in his constituency. And while normally this 
would be a laudable use of his time, it is not just coincidence 
that the minister is in a tightly contested nomination fight with 
the member from Nipawin for that seat. 
 
The highways in central and north-east Saskatchewan are under 
a foot of water and the Minister of Highways is in hot water. 
He's too busy protecting his job instead of protecting the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan whom he is supposed to 
be serving. 
 
Mr. Minister, very simply, will you confirm that the Minister of 
Highways has spent the majority of the last three weeks 
campaigning for the NDP (New Democratic Party) nomination 
in that riding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 24, 1995 

 
1683 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well there is a nominating 
convention in progress which the member is a candidate for, so 
certainly he has been involved in that. 
 
Again I think if the member wants detail about what the 
member's been doing over the last little while, the appropriate 
place to ask it is in estimates. The estimates will come before 
the House. The Appropriation Bill won't be passed until you 
approve them. I invite the member to get the detail of this from 
the minister during his estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, the 
fact of the matter is that the people from out in that riding are 
telling us is that that's where the Minister of Highways is these 
days. And we have received information that he is using 
taxpayers' dollars to campaign for his nomination, including 
time, travel expenses, and political staff. 
 
Now you talk as though it's only important to talk to the 
minister about estimates. We have a crisis on in this province. 
The people from all across the south of this province are 
demanding that we tell the Minister of Highways how important 
it is to build Highway No. 1 and double-lane it. He's not here 
sometimes to hear that. So that's important to the people to 
know that someone is listening. So we suggest you appoint an 
interim minister at least so that their concerns can be heard. 
 
Now if you were to provide a detailed account of the minister's 
itinerary, perhaps we could alleviate some of the concerns of 
the situation, and the people of this province would know that 
the minister is listening, and they'd know where to call him at so 
that they could express their concerns themselves, even though 
we in this Assembly can't get through to him any longer. 
 
So would you provide us with that itinerary so that we know 
where he is and can get a hold of him, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Knowing the member as we all do, I 
would be very surprised if he were using taxpayers' money in 
the process of campaigning for a nomination which is open, 
which he's got to do. 
 
It is part of every minister's life indeed, that you're also an 
elected member, you're also responsible to a constituency, and 
it's part of every minister's life that you also have to attend to 
the duties in your constituency. And this is one of those. It's part 
of the parliamentary system. We are not just ministers, we are 
also elected members. 
 
I repeat, I know none of the details, but I would be very 
surprised if the member were using taxpayers' dollars for 
campaigning. 
 

Health Services Advertising 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We've 
all been greeted in our mailboxes recently by an NDP health 
care brochure, which was raised last week in the House. It's 
quite interesting that the NDP believe that they have to spend 
precious taxpayer dollars to inform citizens of health services in 
our province. Health care is not like buying a car, Mr. Speaker; 
it is a necessity and you don't have various models and colours 
from which to choose. We have just one model, and it is in 
need of repair. 
 
My question, quite obviously, is for the Minister of Health: Mr. 
Minister, why does your government believe that it is necessary 
to waste taxpayer dollars in advertising, instead of focusing 
these funds on increasing the quality of care across the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to inform the people of 
Saskatchewan of the health services that are available to them 
through a publicly funded and publicly administered and 
universally accessible medicare plan, in my view, Mr. Speaker, 
is not a waste of money. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the debate that should be engaged in in this 
House, and will be engaged in across Canada, is a debate over 
that publicly funded, publicly administered and universal health 
care system. That's the debate that the Liberal leader wants to 
avoid. 
 
Because our concern, Mr. Speaker, and concern of Canadians 
from coast to coast, is the future of that system under a federal 
Liberal government, and when the destruction of universal 
medicare and the launch into a two-tiered system is being led by 
Conservatives and Reformers across the country, that's the 
debate of the hour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that's what the Minister of Health and the NDP 
government would like to have happen. The point is, Mr. 
Speaker, that up to today and tomorrow and to 1997, 
Saskatchewan gets more money from Ottawa than any province 
in Canada, and he already knows it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday's paper stated that it cost just under 
$36,000, or 9 cents per brochure, to produce and distribute the 
propaganda to roughly 395,000 homes across the province. And 
of course, Mr. Speaker, it was produced by none other than the 
NDP's agency of record, the Phoenix Advertising Group. 
 
My question to the minister: does this $36,000 include all of the 
costs of postage, distribution, writing and design, printing, and 
project management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to provide this information,  



April 24, 1995 

 
1684 

this valuable information, to Saskatchewan households cost 9 
cents a household, Mr. Speaker — 9 cents a household. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader again, continuing in the 
tradition of her caucus in this House, gets up and makes some 
astounding statements; now she talks about how Saskatchewan 
will receive more money than any other province in Canada. I 
mean it's totally astounding. 
 
What perhaps is more accurate to the kind of debate that 
Canadians are engaged in and should be engaged in is the 
headline in The Globe and Mail which reads: How the Liberals 
are unravelling — unravelling, Mr. Speaker — the social safety 
net. 
 
Mr. Speaker, somebody in the country, somebody in this 
country, is going to have to stand up for medicare, for 
one-tiered health care across Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, it will 
be this government and not that caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — This is very, very interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
because these people have been protecting the province of 
Saskatchewan on the topic of medicare for the last 25 years, and 
they have been in charge of the province of Saskatchewan for 
the last 25. Who are they protecting medicare from, 
themselves? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not going to go into the article from 
Maclean's magazine, but I suggest the Minister of Health read 
it. The NDP created district health boards, supposedly to 
increase the efficiency of our provincial health care system. 
Saskatchewan now spends more on health care than even before 
their ill-fated reforms were implemented. These brochures are 
just another example of very poor priorities. And there is a 
1-800 number cited in the brochure and the Minister says the 
purpose of this line is, and I quote, "to refer people to their 
respective districts." 
 
Mr. Minister, instead of creating greater efficiency, you've 
actually created a duplication of services. If providing services 
is the responsibility of the district boards, why isn't it also their 
responsibility to advertise their services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that the 
Liberal leader has not paid attention to the discussions that have 
gone on in this House about the structure of health care delivery 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are working 
with districts — province and communities working together  
to make this information available. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing in Saskatchewan — and 
let me underline this again as I have many times in this House 
— what we are doing in Saskatchewan and doing it the 
Saskatchewan way, because this is where, Mr. Speaker, is 
where medicare was pioneered, Mr. Speaker, we are moving  

and reshaping and restructuring to enhance and preserve 
medicare — publicly funded, publicly administered, and 
universally accessible for all of our people, not Americanizing 
the system as is the Liberal and the Tory and the Reform way. 
We are standing firmly on the principles of medicare in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
interesting that the minister still hasn't answered if the $36,000 
includes postage, distribution, writing and design, printing, and 
project management. I'll be interested in his response. 
 
We know that the Saskatoon District Health Board has its own 
printing services, Mr. Speaker, and that it sent out a 
district-wide pamphlet on services. Mr. Minister, how much of 
the health care budget is being spent on pieces of paper, most of 
which of course are now in everybody's garbage can? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that we 
need to engage in this kind of informational campaign is to 
dispel the information that's been put out by that caucus across 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not apologize for the need to inform 
Saskatchewan people of the services which are available to 
them. Mr. Speaker, when my own health district, the Moose 
Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District, did their needs assessment, 
number one on the list, Mr. Speaker, number one on the list was 
the request for information. 
 
Mr. Speaker — again I repeat — the Liberal leader will want to 
talk about this subject, but what she will not want to talk about 
is the future of medicare in Canada; neither will the Tories and 
neither will the Reformers because we know what they're 
promoting. They're promoting the two-tiered medicine that they 
see south of the 49th parallel, Mr. Speaker, and we have no 
interest, no interest in that kind of medicine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Millar Western Expansion 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, this morning the 
Premier announced a $32.5 million expansion to Millar 
Western Pulp mill at Meadow Lake. Can you tell us how this 
impacts on your previous financial arrangements with Millar 
Western, and particularly how does it impact on the province's 
ability to collect a previous loan to Millar Western? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — A strict answer to the member's 
question would be very detailed indeed. Let me just say that the 
project has had a number of things going for it, one of which is 
an environmentally, ecologically sound, technical system. What 
it has suffered from is low pulp prices over a period of time. 
The pulp prices have now increased, and with it the economics  



April 24, 1995 

 
1685 

of this mill have increased. And indeed this mill, as is the case 
with other pulp mills around the world, may well become, for 
the first time in many years, reasonably profitable. 
 
So what I don't have here, and indeed I think cannot be 
expected to provide in question period, a detailed comment on 
the economics of it. Suffice it to say, the increase in the pulp 
prices which took place some six months ago have improved 
the economics of this project very considerably. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, CIC 
has provided nearly $200 million in loans to Millar Western 
since its start-up. Your Premier finds it sufficiently important to 
talk about the job creation, and he's scratching for jobs any 
place he can get them these days. So he's willing to be part of a 
program, Mr. Minister, that's going to obviously delay any 
payment back to the province. Now 157 million of that is in the 
form of income debentures which means that repayments are to 
be made out of positive cash flow when the profits start to turn 
in. 
 
This hasn't happened yet, Minister, and this latest cash injection 
is going to set the repayment schedule back even further. Given 
today's announcement, when can Saskatchewan taxpayers 
expect to see the $157 million loan start to be repaid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — In a long list of troublesome 
megaprojects, this was not the worst sin committed by members 
opposite. That indeed would be a fair feat to achieve. We 
expect . . . and I think at the time members entered into it, we 
were not as critical of this arrangement as we were of some of 
the others. 
 
Let me say in answer to your question that the prospects for 
being repaid are relatively good given the very strong pulp 
prices. And we believe that the repayment of these loans may 
well be achieved within a relatively short period of time. I don't 
have the precise figures with me. Again I think it's unreasonable 
to expect to get into a detailed discussion of economics without 
some notice. 
 
Suffice it to say, we are optimistic that we are going to be able 
to collect all of the loans and do so within a relatively brief 
period of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, your political hack, Mark 
Stobbe, has stated that Millar Western will start making 
payments on the 157 million sometime after the turn of the 
century and may not start for 20 years beyond that. Now, Mr. 
Minister, you have renegotiated all of the loans surrounding 
Millar Western since coming to power. You have changed the 
original agreement. Mr. Stobbe over at CIC says, turn of the 
century or later or maybe 20 years beyond that. 

Now, Mr. Minister, pulp prices go up and down. Can you start 
telling Saskatchewan taxpayers today why your Premier is so 
hot to be part of this announcement when there may not be any 
return on this investment for another 25 years? Can you tell us 
that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think the hon. member was quite 
wise in not identifying the timing of that comment because I 
think that comment was made some time ago, some very 
considerable time ago — long before the current pulp prices 
increased. 
 
I say again to the hon. member, we expect that the formula will 
provide for repayment on a timely and indeed on a fairly prompt 
basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave of the Assembly to 
allow me to move a number of motions to change the names of 
members on committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Committees 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Rick Swenson be substituted for 

that of Mr. Harold Martens on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I also move, seconded by the 
member from Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for 

that of Mr. John Britton on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 
and with leave of the Assembly, I would like to move a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member just briefly tell us what 
the motion is about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The thrust of the motion would be to  



April 24, 1995 

 
1686 

urge the federal government to introduce amendments to Bill 
C-68 to allow provinces and territories to opt out of the 
provisions respecting registration and licensing. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Proposed Amendments to Bill C-68 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I 
will move this motion. 
 
The Assembly will know from previous debates that the federal 
government has, by Bill C-68, proposed a system of gun 
registration and possession certificates which are very onerous 
to lawful gun owners in Saskatchewan and which have roused a 
very high level of opposition among the hunters and the 
shooters in the province. 
 
This opposition has taken many forms and we're all familiar 
with it. We have had public meetings across this country called 
by various groups, which have been attended in record 
numbers. And we have all had this experience at our own 
constituency meetings and at public political meetings where 
opposition has been expressed so vehemently. 
 
I cannot recall in my own personal experience an issue such as 
this which has aroused so much heated opposition. That is not 
to say that everyone in Saskatchewan shares that view, but the 
opposition is so intense and so dedicated to fighting this thing, 
that it has become very much a matter that we have taken notice 
of and we have responded to in this Assembly. 
 
One of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, says that the polls 
indicate this kind of opposition too, and that has been our 
experience. 
 
One of the arguments that I have made is that before we have 
any further gun legislation in this country, the federal 
government ought to stop and take a look at the effectiveness of 
the laws that are now in place. There is a lot of gun law in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker; more than almost any other country on 
earth. And yet the federal government has never at any point 
paused and asked itself the simple question of whether or not 
that law produces any effective results, any results that are 
worthwhile. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, there has never been an attempt to 
find out whether in Canada we are on the right track with 
respect to our gun control legislation. There are simple 
questions that should be asked and should be answered before 
we go any further. Does this kind of law help in any way to 
prevent crime? Does this law make us any safer in our homes or 
any more secure in our communities than would be the case 
without this law? 
 
There are many countries in this world, Mr. Speaker, who have 
less gun law and yet are more law-abiding, where the incidence  

of suicides is lower, where the incidence of domestic violence 
is lower. 
 
There are countries with stricter gun laws who none the less 
continue to have a large criminal problem, and large problems 
respecting suicide and domestic violence and the use of 
weapons during the commission of crimes. 
 
So if you look internationally, it is not readily apparent that this 
kind of law does any good. My point is simply that the federal 
government has never tried to do a scientific evaluation to 
determine whether or not we're on the right track. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have seen waves of gun control legislation 
come at us in the past, and we have not always been 
comfortable with those proposals. I think, for example, in 1991 
where the Mulroney government, the minister, Kim Campbell, 
the Minister of Justice, proposed the gun law that was passed 
by parliament in 1991. 
 
That was the law that was supposed to solve all the problems in 
this area. We were told at the time that if we went along with 
this law, that would have an impact on our society. The crime 
rate would be reduced. We would be safer in our homes and in 
our communities. Our fear about the use of guns in the 
commission of crimes and on the streets of Canada would be 
significantly reduced. All we had to do was go along with those 
provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were pretty radical provisions at the time. 
They made it very . . . or let me put it this way. They increased 
significantly the difficulty to obtain a firearm acquisition 
certificate. You had to go through a lot more hoops, provide a 
lot more information, and that system was made much more 
complex. 
 
(1415) 
 
In addition to that, regulations were provided for and passed in 
due course respecting the safe storage of firearms. And we were 
told that that was important, so we went along with it. We didn't 
like it because in Saskatchewan we didn't see we were any part 
of the problem. We didn't know why the federal government 
would be looking to us to make all these improvements when 
we weren't part of the problem. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, occurs in the large crime centres in 
Canada, which are the large urban centres, and in those centres 
people are afraid; they harbour a lot of fear. They see on 
television, especially Detroit television, the Buffalo television, 
the use of firearms every day, particularly handguns. And they 
also know that in the large urban centres, handguns are being 
used every day in the commission of crimes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those handguns have been regulated under 
Canadian law for at least 60 years, at least 60 years. We've had 
a registration system in this country respecting handguns for 
decades. And yet that remains the problem that the big-city 
people see, and that's what they're afraid of. 



April 24, 1995 

 
1687 

Now here we have . . . or at least in 1991 we had a Justice 
minister who was saying, well look, agree to these changes and 
then that will make everybody safe and everybody will feel 
secure. Well of course that isn't the case, Mr. Speaker, because 
the criminals aren't safely storing their guns. The criminals are 
still using handguns and using them illegally, even though it has 
been illegal for a long, long time. 
 
And now here we have another Justice minister coming along 
saying, well look now, we just need to . . . we need to introduce 
some more gun law in this country. And if we do that then a lot 
of things are going to change — our homes are going to be 
safer, you're going to be more secure living in your 
communities; you'll be able to walk down the street without fear 
of somebody shooting at you. All you've got to do is go along 
with this, with this law that is included in Bill C-68. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the reaction that we have got, all of us in 
this House have gotten from across Saskatchewan, is that 
enough is enough. Enough is enough. Your last round of gun 
control, where we had to comply with a whole new set of 
requirements, didn't make any difference at all to the crime rate 
in this country, didn't make anybody safer in their home or more 
secure in their community. It just didn't work. 
 
And now you're coming back to us again through this Bill C-68 
proposed by the Justice minister, Allan Rock, and you're saying 
to us, just accept this additional amount of gun control and then 
that'll be all and it'll be all safe. And Canada will become a 
much better country in which to live because the crime rate will 
go down and people will feel more secure. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan says, nonsense. 
Saskatchewan says, enough already. If you're going to do 
something about crime, if you're going to do something about 
the use of illegal guns in the city, then look to the cities and 
look to the criminals and look to the illegal guns. Don't come 
once more to the homes of lawful gun owners, of hunters in 
Saskatchewan, and load an additional level of gun control 
legislation upon those people, pretending thereby to do 
something about the problems in the city. There is no 
connection between the two. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, again and again we have been asked to 
come up with some way in which Saskatchewan could be 
exempted from this law. And there have been various 
manifestations of that, and I referred to some of them during 
question period. 
 
One of the ideas that was seriously propounded by some of the 
groups in Saskatchewan who have an interest in this issue was 
that the federal government proceed in those provinces who 
think that this kind of law actually does some good. And they 
can implement it in places like Ontario and Quebec and some of 
the Maritime provinces, and in British Columbia if they're 
supporting this legislation. Try it in those provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. And if it does some good, if they can demonstrate that 
there's some point to this, then we in the other provinces can 
take another look at it. We can take another look at it. 

So in effect it would be a pilot project basis. Well I proposed 
that to Mr. Rock, and he said no. He didn't even consider it, Mr. 
Speaker; he just said no. 
 
Now Bill C-68 is before parliament. The standing committee is 
beginning consideration of the Bill today. And the resolution 
which I'm going to move and will read in a moment, Mr. 
Speaker, asks that the Bill be amended to allow provinces and 
territories to opt out of these provisions — to opt out of these 
provisions. 
 
And I think that we as the elected government, as the Assembly 
here representing all the people of Saskatchewan, ought to be 
able to make that judgement. The federal government is passing 
a law to respond to the fears of people in the large metropolitan 
areas of Saskatchewan. This law in not intended for our benefit. 
We all know that we will not benefit from it, so we ought to 
have the opportunity to opt out of that law. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, as follows: 
 
 Be it resolved that this Assembly urge the federal 

government to introduce amendments to Bill C-68, An 
Act respecting Firearms and Other Weapons, to allow 
provinces and territories to opt out of the provisions 
respecting registration and licensing. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly my 
pleasure to rise and speak in support of this motion. And as 
seconder, I would like to reaffirm the minister's position that the 
provinces should have the option to opt out of this legislation 
until we see if the legislation will do anything. And going back 
further, we need an evaluation on the current gun legislation 
that we do have. 
 
It is interesting to note that Kim Campbell's gun legislation has 
not even been fully implemented in the country yet, so we 
certainly do not know if the legislation is working. So therefore 
we need to have an evaluation and at least let the current 
legislation be enforced and put into place in the country before 
we have a new set of legislation. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan have clearly said from throughout 
the province that they are strongly opposed to the gun 
registration concept of this Bill. They support the crime control 
which deals with smuggling of guns into the country and also 
stiffer penalties for offenders, people who commit crime. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those components we can live with, but the 
registration component is vehemently opposed. Unfortunately 
our Liberal MPs do not see fit to represent the Saskatchewan 
voice in parliament. So we will be going to Ottawa to certainly 
carry the Saskatchewan message. 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1688 

One of the issues surrounding the registration is the cost. And 
the supporters of gun control say the cost would be minimal, 
perhaps 5 or $10. Well in actual fact it costs about $104 to 
register a handgun currently in the country, so roughly $100 per 
gun. With 21 million guns, we're looking at over $2 billion, 
which amounts to more than the federal pay-out on the Crow 
benefits, which is absolutely absurd. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are big problems with this, and the haste 
and speed with which Mr. Rock is moving on this is a clear 
indication that there is something to hide, some hidden agenda. 
People are saying the real issue is crime control. And Mr. Rock 
and his colleagues are putting up a smokescreen, letting people 
believe that once guns are registered, there'll be no more crime. 
This is totally ridiculous. 
 
We've had registration of handguns in this country for 60 years 
and by far the majority of handguns used in crime are not 
registered; they are illegal weapons. And to infringe on the 
rights of law-abiding citizens working and paying taxes in this 
country and abiding by the law, using weapons for hunting, 
trapping, for use on their farms, and resulting in a cost of 
perhaps as high as a hundred dollars a gun, not to mention the 
infringement on the people's lives, is totally unacceptable. 
 
And this is what the people of Saskatchewan are saying and this 
what this government will be carrying the message to Ottawa 
on. So, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly my pleasure to support this 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm 
pleased to be able to enter this debate this afternoon if nothing 
more than to be able to point out a few of the concerns that I 
have with the objective of the motion, which was obviously a 
quickly done thing in response to pressure that the opposition 
was bringing upon the Minister of Justice. 
 
I want to point out initially, Mr. Speaker, that I don't agree with 
anything that the member from Indian Head-Wolseley said. I 
agree completely. We have no problem with that. So I don't 
disagree with that. 
 
I essentially do not disagree with what the minister said. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make some things very, very adamant 
and crystal clear, that the biggest problem that we're facing in 
Saskatchewan with making our voice heard as clearly as 
possible is that the heart of most of the members opposite is not 
in this issue — their heart is not in this issue. It's a political 
response to a political problem. That's the fundamental premiss, 
Mr. Speaker, that I . . . that the conclusion to which I have 
come. That is the only reason. 
 
There is no doubt but that the legislation that we are proposing 
would be legitimate, it would lawful, and it could put an end to 
Mr. Rock's attack upon the citizens of this province. But I want 
to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that when we start talking 
about property rights in this province, it goes back many years,  

it goes back many years when the NDP's ideological bent was 
forced upon the people of this province so that it was not 
included in the Human Rights Code. 
 
What we're facing here is a basic, fundamental premiss  that 
the NDP cannot bring themselves about to accept the fact that 
citizens of this province do have fundamental property rights. 
And we can include the right of gun ownership in that 
fundamental right. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to say now that what we're 
witnessing this afternoon is just a bunch of smoke and mirrors; 
with due respect, Mr. Minister, a bunch of smoke and mirrors 
— as if an hallucination like this is going to appease the gun 
owners. 
 
I'll tell you something, Mr. Minister. I was in Osler on Friday 
evening. There was the Valley Trails Wildlife banquet was 
being held, and there were 200 people out there. And the 
petition that we have been presenting in this House, I had three 
copies of it along — I didn't expect that many people. But it 
didn't take 10 minutes, when those sheets of paper went around 
the tables, that the front and the back and the sides of them 
were signed by people who were anxious to say: right on; that 
will send a message; that will send a message to Ottawa. 
 
Now I know that you are going to take your happy little group 
and you're going to go to Ottawa, and you're going to talk to 
Mr. Rock and you're going to say: please, Mr. Rock, would you 
please. And that's what your motion does here today. It says, 
we're going to go to Ottawa and you're going to ask Ottawa, 
would you please put in some amendments that will allow 
provinces and territories to opt out of the provisions. Now what 
kind of a response are you going to get? 
 
Now the Liberal leader is going to go along. Right? The Liberal 
leader is going to go along because she supports our position. I 
think she supports our position. 
 
I have an article here from May 17 where it says, Haverstock 
backs tougher gun laws — she backs tougher gun laws. Hunting 
rights can be balanced with society's interests, Liberal leader 
says. And then underneath a picture of her, and it says, Linda 
Haverstock applauds federal efforts — applauds federal efforts. 
 
(1430) 
 
Now since then, of course, we've put a finger up like this. 
We've found out which way the political winds are blowing and 
say: whoops, well sorry about that; I guess maybe we're now 
opposed to this tougher gun legislation after all. That is 
hypocrisy and it does not fly in my area. And of those 200 
people, there were 198 of them that came up and told me that 
— that that is not flying. 
 
Now she can get up and say she's been misquoted or 
misinterpreted or whatever. But these lately come, late kind of 
conversions to the cause are not something that makes people  



April 24, 1995 

 
1689 

very happy. And what does not make me very happy, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I agree with the consensus here that gun control 
is not synonymous with crime control. I agree with all of that; 
we have no contention. And when we voted, Mr. Minister, all 
of us in the House together to support that motion, we are still 
behind that. 
 
But what we object to is the fact that we have the legislative 
Law Clerk, our Law Clerk, a lawyer of this Legislative 
Assembly, and he's telling us in a written statement saying, your 
laws makes sense; it will have impact. 
 
And what we object to is, why won't you do that, Mr. Minister? 
Allow this thing to be passed. It may wind up that it's not 
constitutional; it may wind up that you're right. But for 
goodness' sakes, let's not be on the defensive; let's go on the 
offensive. 
 
Let's make the feds come back in here and say, you're wrong 
and we're taking you to court and we're going to prove it. That's 
all you have to do, Mr. Minister. That's what the people of this 
province want you to do. They want you to pour some cement 
into your backbone; get up and fight for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we'll probably go along with you to Ottawa. We don't 
expect that there will be anything coming out of that, but it's an 
effort. And we will probably vote in support . . . I can't speak 
for my colleagues, but I probably would stand up and support 
you on this particular motion because that's the least that we're 
getting out of you. But I would strongly, strongly encourage you 
to put away those other political and ideological objections that 
you have to our Bills and admit that, well maybe there's 
something to that and that at least we'll try. 
 
And if you don't want to do ours . . . I know that we've already 
passed one private members' Bill in this House from our side, 
on the food Bill. And you don't want too many of those getting 
passed just before an election. And I can appreciate that. 
 
So I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, bring forward your 
own version of it, then. Bring forward your own version and we 
will support that and then you take that with you when you go 
to Ottawa on the 10th or whenever it is. And then you will have 
a sound impact in fighting — actually fighting to protect the 
people of Saskatchewan and our way of life. The people of the 
province of Saskatchewan expect no less, Mr. Minister, from 
you, and they want no less and they deserve no less. 
 
So will you do that, Mr. Minister? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate being able to speak to this motion this afternoon. 
And I must say that it was with some surprise that I listened to 
some of the comments of the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley — some surprise  because he indeed knows 
that not all Saskatchewan Liberal MPs are in support of the 
federal legislation; in fact not all of the federal NDP MPs are 
opposed to it. And of course it really wouldn't matter what the  

Tory MPs in Ottawa think because I think that if two of them 
got the flu at the same time there would be no members present. 
 
Having said all of that, I do know as well and I think that 
everyone in the province acknowledges that this particular 
provincial government would like nothing more than to make 
this a pivotal issue in the upcoming provincial election. 
 
I think that one of the things that we should note, Mr. Speaker, 
is that as Canadians we can differentiate more than they perhaps 
realize today between federal and provincial issues. And I might 
add that everywhere I've gone in the province, when I pointed 
out that there should be responsibility where responsibility lies, 
credit given where credit is due, that when I point out that in 
fact there are some things that have been done across the 
nation, for example with fisheries, people are excited by that. 
And I say, give credit where credit's due, and we applaud and 
we do. 
 
And when the grainhandlers were legislated back to work, it 
was in fact the federal New Democrat MPs who were opposing 
that action being taken. But we didn't stand in the House as the 
official opposition did and say that the provincial New 
Democratic Party should accept responsibility  full, 
front-row, centre  for the things that their colleagues were 
doing in Ottawa. Because we say of course, that credit or 
responsibility should be given where it is due and where it 
should lie. 
 
And we believe that in fact in that case with the grainhandlers 
situation, that we as people in Saskatchewan were quite pleased 
with the action that the federal government took. When it 
comes to this particular Bill, C-68, we happen to think that 
there are parts of this legislation that most people in 
Saskatchewan would support. 
 
However, we are fundamentally opposed with firearm 
registration for the people of this province for one reason and 
one reason only — there has been absolutely no evidence 
brought forward that can support unequivocally that that part of 
that legislation will ever achieve the objective as it has been 
presented to the people of this country. 
 
If they were able to bring forward that evidence, if in fact 
research has been done where they could prove their point that 
in fact it will reduce crime, that it will prevent crime, then few 
people in our country would object to it. 
 
And I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that indeed I've had 
numbers of people . . . my constituents call me and they are in 
favour of this legislation. And I say it's because they don't 
understand that in fact what they're being sold is the idea that 
somehow they will have greater safety in their streets, when in 
fact this is not what firearms registration will do. 
 
I also want to point out that in fact the kind of misinformation 
that's promoted about cost and so forth to individuals, I don't 
think is useful to this particular discussion. I think what is 
useful is talking about the fact that there's going to be more  



April 24, 1995 

 
1690 

bureaucracy created for the taxpayers to pay for that in fact may 
not be necessary at all. 
 
Why indeed should we have greater bureaucracy — an entire 
part of the civil service whose primary role is doing nothing but 
checking up on law-abiding citizens or keeping track of 
registration of firearms that could cost monies that at this point 
can't even be predicted. That's another reason why indeed we 
object to this. 
 
Having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, the question is, when this 
has been fast-tracked and that's why some Saskatchewan 
Reform members of Parliament and some Saskatchewan 
members of the Legislative Assembly were unable to be present 
for that vote, the fast-tracking of this I think tells us one thing 
— that we should also be talking about what our bottom line is 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What is the bottom line that we are willing to accept? And there 
are some things that are completely and totally unacceptable, 
one of which is that the citizens of this province — the 
law-abiding citizens of this province — if indeed they were 
going to not register their firearms, will they indeed be charged 
with a criminal offence? That would be completely and totally 
unacceptable to the Liberals of this province. 
 
Secondly, those who are collectors in our province of 
Saskatchewan, those who have heirlooms, should they in fact 
have the chance to ensure that, intact, all their collections would 
be able to be passed on or whatever, without any kind of 
penalty. That too is something that we should ensure that we 
fight for. 
 
Aboriginal people's rights as far as their hunting and fishing and 
so forth are concerned, and just the very nature of how their 
way of life has been different, and has been set by the way in 
which they have fended for themselves throughout time. 
 
Livestock owners — what are they going to do? Be required as 
far as safety is concerned, to keep their firearms in a vault when 
they have to go out and protect their livestock against 
predators? 
 
There are many, many things that we want to ensure are 
discussed in open debate and actually heard. And we should 
determine before we go to Ottawa what are the absolute bottom 
lines that are acceptable. 
 
Now having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, I want to just point 
out something that I think is not in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people or the people of this country. And it is 
when people try to push emotional buttons, based on 
fabrication, that do nothing except promote extremism, and that 
kind of extremism we've seen in Oklahoma City this past week. 
And in part some of the people, who — I understand — are 
being held with regards to those crimes, are people who were 
pushed to where they are today by extremism, by the way in 
which people have made them feel extremely negative about 
their government. 

And I would suggest that probably most of us here . . . and I've 
always found this debate in this House rather interesting 
because I know some people on the side opposite in 
government who probably, if it were up to them, would ban 
forks  that I find it most curious that they're involved in this 
discussion at all. 
 
Having said that, I think most of us want nothing more and 
nothing less than a safe and secure society. And surely to 
goodness we can all work together for that kind of end. That's 
what I'm hoping will happen with all members of this House, 
that we will be working in the best interests of people. 
 
I do not apologize. For four days after that comment in the 
paper, I had been able to look at everything from information in 
the Criminal Code of Canada and people being very willing to 
share information with me. I'm willing to change my position 
with added evidence. I'm hoping that with added evidence the 
federal government will understand that firearms registration 
will not bring to the people of this country what they purport it 
will do. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I of course would be supporting this 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, and members, what we have before us today again is 
another attempt at speaking to the issue without actually doing 
anything about the issue. 
 
When we talk . . . when this motion is being brought up by the 
minister and being debated in the House, what is he asking to 
actually do? He's asking the federal government to do 
something about one of their own pieces of legislation that's 
moving through the Assembly. 
 
He's not talking about doing something here. He's not talking 
about the Saskatchewan legislature actually doing something. 
He's talking about sending a memo, basically, to Ottawa, 
saying, will you please exempt us from your legislation? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be nice indeed, it would be nice 
indeed if Ottawa would exempt us. But it isn't going to happen, 
Mr. Speaker. The people in Ottawa who are putting this 
through, Mr. Allan Rock and the Liberal government, with the 
wholehearted support of the Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien, 
have absolutely no intention, Mr. Speaker, of breaking this 
piece of legislation up and saying it applies in Ontario or it 
applies in Montreal or it applies in Vancouver, but we don't 
have to worry about it in Saskatchewan or we don't have to 
worry about it in Alberta or the Northwest Territories. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, they have absolutely no intention of breaking 
this piece of legislation up into little parts. It's going to apply to 
everyone in this province; it's going to apply to everyone in this 
nation. And they will not split it up, Mr. Speaker, for all our 
good intentions in Saskatchewan in requesting that they do so. 
 
The only way, Mr. Speaker, the only way that Saskatchewan  



April 24, 1995 

 
1691 

can opt out of this particular piece of legislation is to do 
something in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are we at the point that we're at in the gun 
control debate? Well, Mr. Speaker, it all has to do with politics 
and nothing to do with crime control. It's politically 
advantageous to Mr. Rock, whose constituency is in downtown 
Toronto, to bring forward a piece of legislation that looks — 
that looks, Mr. Speaker — like he's actually trying to do 
something. 
 
The minister talked earlier about the need to do a review of the 
previous gun control legislation that we have in place, to see if 
it is effective. But Mr. Rock isn't interested in doing that, 
because if he did it, he might find out that further gun control 
would not solve the problems that he is directing this at. 
 
(1445) 
 
And if you don't ask the question, Mr. Speaker, and you don't 
hear the answer, you can say whatever you want. And that's 
what Mr. Rock is doing. He's saying his Bill C-68 is going to 
solve the problem of crime in the streets of our major cities; it's 
going to prevent abusive situations in families; it's going to stop 
suicide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because he hasn't got any evidence, because he's never done a 
study, it's very difficult for anybody else to dispute those 
statements. So he just throws them out like leaflets into the 
wind because nobody can question them, Mr. Speaker, because 
there is no statistical evidence on this new legislation to 
determine whether or not it will be effective. 
 
The previous administration . . . the previous legislation was 
studied by the Auditor General. And the Auditor General said 
that the studies which were done on the 1979 legislation were 
inconclusive because the methods of the study were wrong, 
because the results could have been achieved equally by natural 
progression rather than the implementation of the law. 
 
There's no evidence, Mr. Speaker, to say that any of the 
firearms legislation from 1979 onwards, which included 1992 
under Kim Campbell, have had any effect — any effect, Mr. 
Speaker. It's only politically motivated, politically motivated by 
the Liberals in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Politically motivated  the stance by our provincial Liberals. 
The Liberal leader, when she came back from the national 
convention, was all in favour of it, until she got home and 
found out what the political situation in Saskatchewan was. So 
now they have taken a stand based on politics of the issue. 
 
The government members — a good number of the government 
members, Mr. Speaker, believe fundamentally that the 
proposals by the Liberal government in Ottawa are wrong as 
they come to deal with firearms legislation. But I'm not 
convinced that the minister believes that the legislation is 
wrong. He believes in the politics of it, Mr. Speaker. And the 
politics of it in Saskatchewan says, you will be opposed to the  

federal government and the federal government's initiatives on 
firearm legislation. Again, Mr. Speaker, it's a political response 
to a political problem. 
 
And that's why, Mr. Speaker, that the government is unwilling 
to make any significant moves legislatively to protect the rights 
of Saskatchewan firearms owners. The government is 
ideologically bound not to allow property rights, Mr. Speaker. 
Had they not been ideologically bound against property rights, 
it could have been put into the constitution in 1982. But it was 
Allan Blakeney, the member from Riversdale when he was the 
attorney general, and Jean Chrétien as the representative of the 
federal government, that prevented property rights from being 
put into the constitution at that time. It was discussed, it was 
wanted by a number of jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, but the NDP 
governments of the day prevented it from being attained. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, would have provided the protection to the 
individuals who own firearms or any other property in this 
country had that been implemented today. 
 
Jean Chrétien talks about registering automobiles. He says, well 
we register automobiles, why not register firearms? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the registration of 
automobiles, who does it? It's not the federal government that 
registers automobiles, Mr. Speaker. It's the provinces because 
they're property and they're under provincial jurisdiction. That's 
who registers, that's who administers, and that's who charges 
fees for those registrations, Mr. Speaker. Not the federal 
government. 
 
And if I own an automobile, Mr. Speaker, and I don't want to 
register it, it's perfectly legal. I do not have to register an 
automobile simply because I own one. I register an automobile 
because I want to drive it on the public thoroughfares — not 
because I own it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with the new firearms legislation being presented by Allan 
Rock, it says, if you own a firearm in Canada, you will register 
it regardless of the fact that you want to use it for hunting or 
you're a collector or you're a target shooter. No matter the 
reason, we the federal government demand that you register it 
and that you pay our fees. 
 
Now the Liberal leader seemed to think that fees were not an 
issue. Well, Mr. Speaker, they're not an issue perhaps for her if 
she doesn't own any firearms, but every firearm owner, that is 
an issue. Because currently, it costs approximately between 40 
and $105, depending on the provincial jurisdiction you live in, 
to register a handgun today. 
 
The federal government has said that this registration system 
will be a cost-recovery one. Well, Mr. Speaker, that means 
you're going to pay between 40 and $105, and the federal 
government is looking at the Quebec system of registration, 
which is the highest cost one. 
 
So let's say a hundred dollars, which is certainly the numbers  



April 24, 1995 

 
1692 

that are being used by most of the firearms owners. The federal 
government wants to talk about $10 for a first-time registration, 
but only if you register them in the year about the Bill becomes 
law. Sort of a little incentive to get you to buy into the program 
 they'll give it to you cheap. But if you don't buy in then, Mr. 
Speaker, you're going to pay the full cost, and that could well be 
a hundred dollars or more. 
 
That is a significant amount of money, Mr. Speaker, a 
significant amount of money if you take into consideration that 
the federal government believes there are 7 million firearms in 
this country. At a hundred dollars apiece, that's $700 million. 
 
But the wildlife associations and the firearm industry believes 
that there is 20-plus million firearms in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. At that cost, at $100, you're talking $2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker — $2 billion taken out of the economy across Canada 
to feed the bureaucracy. Just to feed the bureaucracy. Because 
that's the only people that are going to benefit from this. 
 
And perhaps this is one of the Liberals' make-work projects, 
because you should be able to hire a significant number of 
bureaucrats for $2 billion. You look at the situation now where 
they have given notice that they're going to lay off 45,000 civil 
servants over the next year, year and a half. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
if you bring in this gun registry you could employ half of those 
at the cost of $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. So the factor of cost is 
going to be very, very significant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you look at registration. The government argues 
that they have to register firearms so that they can track them, 
so that it'll prevent smuggling, so that owners of firearms today 
will store them properly. Well, Mr. Speaker, the law is already 
on the books — already on the books — that says you have to 
store your firearms safely. They have a prescribed method of 
doing so. And there's a penalty, a jail sentence, if you fail to do 
so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I'm not exactly sure how registration is supposed to solve 
that problem, but that is what the Liberals believe is going to be 
the solution. By registering firearms you're also going to stop 
smuggling. So I guess the guy before he wants to go down in 
Toronto, downtown Toronto, to rob the 7 Eleven, is going to 
make sure that his firearm is registered or that his crossbow is 
registered. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at Saskatchewan as an example 
of homicides, 7 out of 31 in 1993 were committed with firearms 
— 7 out of 31. The other 24 used some other implement; and a 
knife, Mr. Speaker, is the most favoured. So when we're 
looking at the registration of firearms, Mr. Speaker, to control 
smuggling — we haven't controlled cigarettes, we haven't 
controlled alcohol, we certainly haven't controlled illegal drugs 
— the question has to be asked: how will the new firearms 
legislation, how will registration, deal with the illegal 
smuggling of firearms? 
 
If the people aren't prepared to register them, the criminals 
certainly aren't prepared to register, Mr. Speaker. How is  

registration going to control this? It isn't, Mr. Speaker, it isn't 
going to control it. 
 
So what happens at the end of the day? Registration has not 
prevented smuggling; registration has not prevented crime in 
the streets. The 7 Eleven is still being held up by whatever 
means and whatever tool is used. And domestic violence, Mr. 
Speaker, people who are involved in domestic violence, it's 
generally an emotional response at a particular point in time, 
not premeditated. They grab whatever weapon, whatever 
implement, is available. 
 
And I use the word weapon very advisedly, Mr. Speaker. If you 
look at the Criminal Code, they give you a definition of a 
weapon. And it doesn't say gun and it doesn't say firearm. It 
says any implement used with intent to harm another. That's 
what a weapon is. This piece of paper is a weapon if I intend to 
hurt someone with it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about weapons and domestic 
violence, the firearm is irrelevant. It's just whatever happens to 
be available. So registration, Mr. Speaker, is not going to 
diminish that. 
 
So at the end of the day, when the government hasn't been able 
to control smuggling, they haven't been able to control crime in 
the streets, and they haven't been able to make any impact on 
family violence, abusive situations, what is the next step 
necessary for a government who believes that this is the answer 
to their political problems? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if registering firearms has not solved the 
problem for them, then they're going to have to look some place 
else. And where is that going to be? 
 
Well if registering firearms didn't solve the problem, then we've 
got to take the firearms away. Now I know that the eastern 
media thinks that this is a bunch of rubbish, that it's 
fearmongering  that confiscation is the end result of 
registration. Well there are approximately 1.2 million handguns 
registered in Canada today — 1.2 million. Under the proposals 
of the current Bill C-68, 533,000 of those will be confiscated — 
almost half, almost half. 
 
Now in 1934 or 1979 or 1992, no one talked about confiscation 
by registering those handguns — no one. But today if Bill C-68 
passes, confiscation will be the end result for 533,000 of those 
handguns because the government has deemed them 
inappropriate for Canadians to own. So, Mr. Speaker, when 
registration fails in the goals that the Liberal government has set 
for itself, confiscation will be the only solution. 
 
So what can we do? What can we do? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
appeals to Ottawa have fallen on deaf ears. Allan Rock has no 
intention, absolutely no intention, of listening to anyone outside 
of his electorate area, which are the major cities of Ontario and 
Quebec. He has no intention. 
 
I attended a meeting with him up in Saskatoon, back last  



April 24, 1995 

 
1693 

summer. It was supposed to be a few people get together to 
consult with Allan Rock and give him our opinions on his 
firearm legislation. Well when it all shook down there was 
about 50 people there. We had an hour to discuss with Allan 
Rock. 
 
So what did the moderator of that particular meeting do, who 
was my own MP — the Liberal MP for Souris-Moose 
Mountain, Bernie Collins? He asked everyone in the room to 
identify themselves and what group they were with. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that took almost half an hour of the hour that had been 
allocated to us. 
 
They had no intentions of listening. They were simply there on 
a public relations effort, to say yes, we went out to western 
Canada and we met with certain gun proponents. With no 
intentions, Mr. Speaker, of listening. 
 
Consultation means you listen to what people have to say and 
you take into account what their opinions are and you reflect 
that in your project — in this particular case, Bill C-68. None of 
that happened, Mr. Speaker, none of that at all. 
 
So we have to do something in Saskatchewan. Now the 
minister's motion — if the federal government would exempt us 
— would be very nice. But they could exempt us today and 
stick us back under it tomorrow. Because there's nothing there 
that says we are exempted. And I firmly believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they will not listen to this. They will have 
absolutely no intention of honouring any form of agreement 
along that line. 
 
So we have to do something in Saskatchewan. Now the minister 
is arguing that if the Bill is passed, that he can challenge it 
constitutionally. Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe he can. And I 
would hope that he would. But we need to put something in 
place prior to that point, Mr. Speaker, that says we are going to 
stand up for the rights of Saskatchewan people. This is where 
we have drawn the line. This is what it's all about in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
In Saskatchewan, you have the right to retain your firearms. 
And if it comes to a registration system, then it is up to the 
provincial government to do it. It's up to the provincial 
government to levy any fees and set any standards, not the 
federal government. The provincial government, Mr. Speaker, is 
a lot closer to the people than the federal government is, and a 
lot more aware of their needs and desires. 
 
At the meeting we had in Saskatoon with Allan Rock, there 
were members of the native associations that attended this 
meeting, from La Ronge. And the gentleman said, can you 
expect Joe to come in, 60 miles off the trap line, simply to 
register his firearm or to write the test? In all likelihood he can't 
even understand English, let alone write the test, Mr. Speaker, 
so what do you do with Joe when he comes in off the trap line? 
You say, sorry Joe; you've handled a firearm for 70 years, but  

you're no longer qualified because you can't write the test. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it simply won't happen. It won't happen for 
Joe on the trap line. It won't happen for the rancher south of 
Maple Creek, and it won't happen in my own constituency. 
There are a large number of people who have absolutely no 
intention, Mr. Speaker, of abiding by this law if it does indeed 
pass as it is outlined today. 
 
So we need to allow Saskatchewan people the opportunity to 
have their own law in Saskatchewan. And the way that I see 
that we can do that, Mr. Speaker, is by providing property rights 
in Saskatchewan legislation, either through the Human Rights 
Code, which is under Saskatchewan jurisdiction, or under the 
notwithstanding clause dealing with the Canadian constitution, 
and put property rights into the Canadian constitution as it 
applies in Saskatchewan. And it's perfectly permitted because 
you put it into the clause . . . into section 7 of the Canadian 
constitution which is one of those areas that allows for the 
notwithstanding clause to be used. Section 7 to 15 allow that to 
happen, Mr. Speaker. And we can put property into the 
constitution as it affects Saskatchewan people. 
 
So when the federal government comes to say, you will register 
your firearms, the province can say, whoa boys; you're now 
dealing in Saskatchewan, and we have jurisdiction in that area. 
Our people have the right to own that property, and we have the 
right to set the rules and regulations. 
 
But why doesn't it happen? Because the minister and his 
government are ideologically opposed to the idea of property 
rights. That's why it doesn't happen in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a new issue. Gun control is not a new 
issue in Canada. In 1975, Warren Allmand and Pierre Trudeau 
started this latest round. It's been 20 years, 20 years that we've 
been involved in this, Mr. Speaker. They backed off on some of 
it. 
 
Most of these changes, most of these recommendations in this 
Bill, were in place in 1975, and the federal Liberal government 
of the day backed away from those, backed away from it 
because of the opposition of the people. But it kept coming up 
over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker. My colleague from 
Thunder Creek mentioned about Ralph Goodale, who ran in a 
by-election in 1979 and was defeated, was defeated, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan on the gun control issue. Because he 
was in favour of his government doing exactly that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Greystone spoke about the federal 
government having this on the fast track. Well they certainly 
seem to have that, Mr. Speaker, and I think it's only one track 
— one track going full speed, headlong into this piece of 
legislation. And that was why certain MPs from this province 
couldn't vote for or against it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a number of the Liberal MPs of this 
province did indeed vote. They voted in favour of this  



April 24, 1995 

 
1694 

legislation. And as the government members opposite keep 
trying to remind us, second reading passage means that the Bill 
is approved in principle, that you can change the i's and the 
crosses on the t's, but that's all, Mr. Speaker. You have 
approved it in principle. 
 
Well my own MP, Mr. Bernie Collins, for some reason found it 
more expedient to be away from Ottawa when this vote came 
down, than to be in Ottawa and express his opinion. Because 
we certainly have seen what the Liberal caucus whip is prepared 
to do to those members who do not support this particular piece 
of legislation as brought in by the federal government. They 
will be disciplined, and disciplined severely. 
 
So it would be very interesting to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
whether or not any of the MPs will indeed vote against it at 
further stages, or whether they will simply have some other 
reason why they can't be in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the federal government was indeed interested in listening to 
what is being said by the public, in particular western Canada, 
they would split off from this Bill, the parts that deal with the 
Criminal Code, with the penalties for those who use weapons, 
whatever weapon it might be, Mr. Speaker, and allow for much 
stronger sentences. And even more important, more important 
than mandatory sentencing, is mandatory charges, Mr. Speaker, 
because that is where the plea bargaining happens. 
 
It doesn't happen to say whether you get one year or two years, 
it happens when you say, are you going to get charged with 
robbery, or are you going to get charged with armed robbery 
with a firearm? That's where the plea bargaining happens, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that's where it needs to stop. 
 
There isn't a single responsible firearm owner in Saskatchewan 
who is opposed to the idea of someone who uses a firearm with 
criminal intent paying a penalty, and paying a harsh penalty. 
They all support it, Mr. Speaker, and every one of them would 
vote for that particular piece of legislation that was solely that. 
But when it comes to putting criminals . . . making criminals 
out of the honest, responsible firearms owners, that's where the 
line is drawn, Mr. Speaker, and that's where the general public 
is having a great deal of difficulty with the federal legislation. 
 
And that's where they have a great deal of difficulty with the 
government's inaction, the government's inaction on this firearm 
legislation. They have talked and talked and talked and talked, 
and I see the Justice minister shaking his head because that's all 
he's done, is talked on the issue, Mr. Speaker. It's getting down, 
Mr. Speaker, to where you either have to fish or cut bait. It's 
getting down to where this legislation is about to pass and it's 
going to become law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have to do something in Saskatchewan to prevent it and 
the minister is not prepared to do that. And we would certainly 
encourage him and we would support it if he provided some 
real legislation to this House that would do something in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

One of the things that the people across this province at all the 
gun rallies have been calling for is made-in-Saskatchewan gun 
laws. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that says it all — made-in-
Saskatchewan gun laws. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak on the 
motion that has been moved by the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview and seconded by the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley. And the motion reads: 
 
 Be it resolved that this Assembly urge the federal 

government to introduce amendments to Bill C-68, An 
Act respecting Firearms and Other Weapons to allow 
provinces and territories to opt out of the provisions 
respecting registration and licensing. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to state very clearly right from the outstart 
that I am personally in strong opposition to Bill C-68 bought 
out by the federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm also very, very surprised — but maybe not — 
by Liberal MPs in the province of Saskatchewan who go against 
their constituents, whether from northern Saskatchewan or from 
the South, in regards to this Bill and simply support, you know, 
their party in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at the opting-out clause; this 
opting-out clause provides a real alternative to the situation 
rather than that as proposed by the Tories. 
 
Before I get into that, I want to say a few words about my own 
background in getting on into this debate. Being born and raised 
in northern Saskatchewan and having been involved in 
trapping, fishing, hunting, and tourism, I know how strongly 
people feel in regards to the opposition in regards to this Bill. 
 
I know that when I look at the situation, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
speaking on behalf of my constituents, whether they're 
aboriginal or non-aboriginal  they're strongly united against 
Bill C-68. 
 
When I look at the presentations that have been made by letter 
by my constituents, to me and to Ottawa, I know that they come 
by it basically because their means of survival is in those areas 
that I have spoken about. It means that they are directly 
affected, you know, by this Bill in regards to carrying out their 
livelihood. 
 
And many of the people also have rights in regards to treaty. 
Many of the Indian people in northern Saskatchewan have 
treaty rights. This Liberal government in Ottawa talks about 
honouring and respecting treaties. But absolutely they do not 
regard absolutely anything about these rights when it comes 
down to hunting. Basically because they have not put in 
anything that is really meaningful to deal with this issue on a 
serious basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also am very aware that when you look at the 
situation, the issue that has been presented as a reason for  



April 24, 1995 

 
1695 

bringing in the registration and also the issue of storage and 
also the issue of testing, was to sort of somehow magically 
prevent crime. Well there's been a lot of evidence that has been 
talked about that shows that this is not so. I'll give you my own 
point of view in regards to how and why registration in and of 
itself will not prevent crime activity. 
 
As a former minister of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), I looked at this issue in regards to car registration. 
Car registration in and of itself will never prevent a drunken 
driver or a driver going out on dangerous driving. It still 
happens even if we have registration. And there is a tremendous 
amount, you know, of evidence that shows that on a daily basis 
for a lot of people. 
 
There are people who will, in crimes of passion, whether they're 
in a vehicle or outside a vehicle, continue to commit crime. And 
these types have to be dealt with in regards to the way that we 
did it on that Bill in SGI. But I think that there has to be, you 
know, consideration or more targeted approaches to the law in 
this case. 
 
So when I look at the idea of it preventing criminal activity and 
some people making comparisons with car registration, let me 
make it clear again: car registration in and of itself does not 
prevent crime. There's still dangerous drivers out there who 
need better education, better programing, better laws and 
tougher laws to deal with their situation. That's the way to deal 
with it effectively. 
 
I've also heard many times that for many years there has already 
been registration by guns. We've had to register these handguns 
for decades. We've already had to deal with the issue of storage. 
But again it shows very clearly from the historic evidence and 
experience of people that indeed the registration does not 
prevent the hold-ups that we see. It did not prevent this and 
that, you know, from occurring. It still occurred. 
 
(1515) 
 
Therefore there is no way that this law by the Liberals will do 
what they said it would do. And also too when you look at 
criminals, and even when I see that in the area of vehicles . . . 
but you could see it more easily in the area of guns. People who 
did commit crime with guns have done this, where they have 
filed away, they have rubbed out the serial number or the ID 
(identification) number so that they could not be traced. So a 
person with a criminal mind will utilize ways and means to 
prevent getting caught in the situation. And most of the 
situations, you know, are like this. And even when they leave 
on the registration, we know that they may have stolen it or they 
may have taken it out from a different source. 
 
So we know that it does not catch these people; they 
continually, and will continually, you know, be able to do this. 
 
I want to comment as well on the provincial Liberal position. 
Although they did indeed support the all-party resolution that 
we sent out before in opposition to this, let me be very clear  

that they have flip-flopped on this issue many times before they 
did make, you know, that consideration. 
 
We have seen them flip-flop on issues on economic matters. 
We've seen them flip-flop on gaming. We've seem them 
flip-flop all over the place. And again, they've flip-flopped on 
this. When they saw the polls rising and when they saw people 
starting in greater opposition to the gun control, then they came 
onside. And that has become very clear. 
 
The other point that I saw the Liberal leader make today, and I 
found it not so surprising  it's very typical of the Liberal Party 
basically because they think only in terms of a big-shot 
approach in many ways  she made a comment wherein she 
said that the money matter was not the issue. People have been 
talking about registration, whether it's $60 per person per gun. 
People have been talking about the fact that it would create the 
$100 million bureaucracy, and the member from across said it 
was as high as 2 billion. 
 
When I look at these figures, somebody says, well the figures 
are not the issue. Well it's not an issue if you're making a lot of 
money and bringing in enough money — as the Liberal leader 
and her 37 per cent increase in salary. Of course it's not an 
issue. 
 
But when a poor person, whether in southern Saskatchewan or 
in northern Saskatchewan, has to pay a registration fee, then it 
has a tremendous effect on them. 
 
When you look at the situation of poverty, this is what the 
Liberal leader forgot to look at in regards to her comment. She 
has absolutely no regard, you know, for the people who are 
trying hard to make a living in northern Saskatchewan, whether 
from fishing, trapping, and hunting. Mr. Speaker, I found that 
again not too surprising from the flip-flop artist from the 
province of Saskatchewan here. 
 
And I really feel that she did not do justice and pay due respect 
to the people in this province who are again, poor, who try hard 
and feel strong enough, who oppose this federal Liberal 
legislation as the Liberal member herself does. But she should 
not dismiss this idea away. I know why she's trying to dismiss 
it. When they were running last fall in the election — the 
federal Liberals — they talked about the fact that they would be 
not contributing to the federal debt and federal bureaucracy. 
And they made strong statements about it. 
 
Because one thing about the Liberals is this. They say one thing 
when they're out of office and another thing when they get into 
office. They said they would not increase the costs of the 
bureaucracy, but indeed this is an increase on the cost of the 
bureaucracy, whether it's 100 million or 2 billion, you know, as 
the other member has mentioned. This is an increase in 
bureaucratic cost and bureaucratic procedures that get in the 
way of law enforcement and many other things. And I think that 
this is a point that she should have made sure that she had 
connected it onto. 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1696 

Mr. Speaker, the other debate that has been mentioned by the 
Tories is this. They bring in this notion that although they 
support us full blast in regards to the opposition to the Bill at 
the federal level, they say we should do something on property 
rights. And I want to make it clear that during the constitutional 
talks in 1982 and during the constitutional process in 
Charlottetown, there were some groups in Canada that did 
present this argument. 
 
But it became very clear that under the consensus by Liberal 
and Tory governments across Canada, they did not finally 
accept property rights. And it was indeed excluded in the 
Charlottetown accord. And that was done by Conservative 
governments in power across Canada. 
 
So they themselves did not strongly and superbly believe in 
property rights to make sure that it had to be in the constitution. 
Because when it come down to the crunch during the 
constitutional debates, they backed off and they allowed the 
Charlottetown accord to go ahead without the property rights. 
And that has become, you know, very clear in history. And that 
is what Conservative members forgot to mention. 
 
But one of the most important points politically, is that the 
Conservatives at this time felt that it is better . . . possibly they 
figure that an election is going to be called. It's better to focus 
the debate, not on the federal Liberals any more — they're 
going to run away from the federal Liberals — now they would 
focus in the debate on the provincial government in regards to 
property rights. 
 
And of course we know that's their political tactic. They make 
great speeches about this and that, but we know that is their 
political ploy. They may completely disregard that which exists 
in regards to constitutional legal history in Canada. 
 
There's a concept called the principle of paramountcy or the law 
of paramountcy. Basically all it does is that if two laws conflict, 
the provincial law conflicts with the federal law, the federal law 
has paramountcy. That means that the law, federal law, can 
trump the provincial law. In other words, if any law in the 
province was raised which contradicted the federal gun law, the 
federal law will have paramountcy. 
 
It has been stated very clearly by the Attorney General of this 
province, and by many people, and by many constitutional 
experts all across Canada, that this law of paramountcy would 
prevail. 
 
And I think that the members, the Conservative members, are 
raising indeed a false issue. I mean they're already running away 
from dealing with the politics of having to face the Liberals and 
now trying to aim their guns over to the side of the provincial 
government. And it's again a simple political tactic in that 
regard. 
 
So when you look at this, Mr. Speaker, the opting-out clause 
does provide a new alternative. It does another thing. It does 
focus the action where it needs to be focused — on the law at  

the federal level. 
 
The root cause of the problem is the Liberal government law at 
the federal level. When you see the root cause of the problem, 
that's where you design your strategy and attack. You do not run 
away from that tactic. But what the Tories are doing is running 
away from that tactic and trying to blame a provincial law or 
trying to re-create a new provincial law through property rights 
which would be in effect trumped by the law at the federal level 
in the last regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore in this debate and in this view 
strongly, you know, supporting our position. It is the strong 
position. It is a reasonable position. It is the one that is targeted 
where the strategy should be targeted at, and that's at the federal 
law, at the federal level. 
 
But I think this motion will send another message to the federal 
level, and it will bring an impetus and a new form of debate at 
the federal level and say yes, Saskatchewan government is again 
making a strong stand in this regard and taking the leadership 
over all governments all across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also say a few words in my own 
language, with due respect to all languages of our country, and 
explain the situation in Cree and talk about it in regards to how 
this impacts a lot of the people. 
 
One of the members, a Conservative member across, said that 
an Indian person from across northern Saskatchewan was in a 
Saskatoon meeting and was discussing the idea of testing. And 
in many cases, because a lot of them are Cree and Dene 
speakers, that indeed the bureaucracy and the paperwork . . . 
although they were highly expert in dealing with guns all their 
lives, that indeed, you know this test would provide just a 
bureaucratic barrier, you know, for them over the long run. 
 
So I would like, in that type of regard, say a few words in Cree 
because, Mr. Speaker, as well there's always my constituents 
who come to the hospitals either in Saskatoon who are 
watching the TV. And a lot of the people from the North 
Battleford and Qu’Appelle areas, you know, as well as Cypress 
areas who like to listen and have it explained in our own 
language, so it becomes a lot more clear in regards to what the 
federal strategy is all about. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
(1530) 
 
In conclusion, I would like to say again that I'm strongly 
opposed to the gun Bill. All the people, both aboriginal and 
nonaboriginal people in northern Saskatchewan, strongly 
oppose this Bill. 
 
I think that it does disrespect to the way of life of northern 
Saskatchewan. Many people live by hunting, fishing, and 
trapping. It's their way of life, Mr. Speaker, and this Bill 
presents . . . when a lot of them are trying hard to make a living  



April 24, 1995 

 
1697 

and a lot of them are in poverty, that registration, $60 or $100 
million or $2 billion, is a costly thing for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of the government should be coming out with 
preventative programs; helping out hunting, fishing, and 
trapping at the federal level. But, Mr. Speaker, they don't do 
that. They say there should be . . . a lot of people say they 
should have prevention programs on crime. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill does not do that. Mr. Speaker, they say they should have 
prevention programs on abuse, etc. This Bill does not do that. 
 
All of these things have been false arguments by the federal 
Liberal government. And I was very, very strongly opposed to 
the federal Liberal MPs who supported this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know of one person who was from northern 
Saskatchewan, when in a pre-election strategy he said he would 
honour and respect the treaties. He said that he would respect 
the people from the North on their livelihood. When it come 
down to the fact of the matter, Kirkby was looking at the 
situation that he supported the Liberal budget. MP Gordon 
Kirkby from Prince Albert-Churchill is supporting the Liberal 
government position. And he should be taking back his words 
of respect and honour in northern Saskatchewan because he 
does not see the interconnection between the high costs of 
bureaucracy that this Bill will introduce, and on the other side, 
not helping the people out in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at all these angles I think that 
indeed the member from Saskatoon Fairview and the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley have introduced a strong position 
and a strong position of opting out, you know, in regards to Bill 
C-68 for the province of Saskatchewan. And that is a strong 
position that the province can take rather than taking away and 
focusing on other strategy. This is indeed our strong position, 
Mr. Speaker, and I support the option. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in support of 
the motion moved by the member from Saskatoon Fairview and 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, which 
would give individual provinces and territories the option to opt 
out of the provisions of Bill C-68. 
 
I realize that there are other speakers that want to get on to 
speak about the issue, so I'll keep my comments brief and to the 
point. I'll attempt to present the point of view of my constituents 
as their views were expressed to me in various vocations and 
over various situations. 
 
Since last summer and since Bill C-68 had been introduced in 
the House of Commons, I have had many, many personal 
contacts with firearm owners, whether they be farmers, hunters, 
trappers, collectors, target shooters, or gun owners in general, 
on the proposed gun legislation. 
 
I've received numerous letters, answered countless phone calls, 
attended rallies, and listened to members of the Saskatchewan  

Wildlife Federation who continue to express their doubt about 
the benefits of Bill C-68. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no proof that Bill C-68 will reduce or 
prevent crime — none at all. The present laws that are in place 
now are sufficient enough to reduce crime. All that has to 
happen is for these laws to be enforced more widely and that 
the penalties for the crimes committed be increased 
accordingly. 
 
If the increase in bureaucracy that this Bill would create would 
be redirected into an enhanced police force instead, then maybe, 
maybe we would get somewhere in reducing crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are enough smuggled guns in Canada now to 
keep crime going for longer than I care to mention. A gun 
registry will not reduce those weapons. Registration will not 
solve the problem. 
 
In conclusion, constituents tell me that if Bill C-68 is passed, it 
will not be readily accepted. And that is scary, Mr. Speaker, and 
that ought to be a serious consideration of Mr. Allan Rock 
before forcing his Bill through the House of Commons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituents I have been in contact with say, 
don't give up the fight against Allan Rock and Bill C-68; help 
us change the view of the federal Liberals on this issue. The 
purpose of this motion would do exactly that and it would allow 
Saskatchewan residents to maintain something that is a part of 
their heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion that reads: 
 
 Be it resolved that this Assembly urge the federal 

government to introduce amendments to Bill C-68, An 
Act respecting Firearms and Other Weapons, to allow 
provinces and territories to opt out of the provisions 
respecting registration and licensing. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
haven't had the opportunity over the course of this session when 
this particular subject's been discussed to speak at some length 
on it. And today the Minister of Justice, I think, has given us an 
ideal opportunity to discuss this question as it should be. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'm disappointed in what I see 
coming forward from the Minister of Justice because it is just 
one more in a long line of very carefully politically couched 
phrases that this government has thrown out to the people of 
this province to try and deflect from what is the real issue 
before us. And the real issue is a 20-year-old agenda by the 
federal Liberals, a 20-year-old agenda to force gun control on 
the people of this country. 
 
I remember well, Mr. Speaker, going back to the 1979 election  



April 24, 1995 

 
1698 

when Ralph Goodale was running in the old Assiniboia seat. 
He'd been the MP for five years; he was the chairman of the 
committee that was responsible to bring forward legislation. 
That legislation, Mr. Speaker, is no different than what Allan 
Rock has brought before this country in 1995 — the same kind 
of heinous work that the federal Liberals perpetuate on rural 
Saskatchewan and rural Canada time after time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we should not expect any less from Allan 
Rock as he goes through this process, because at the end of the 
day those 99 seats in Ontario and those seats in Montreal and 
those seats in urban Canada mean more to them, because they 
don't have the backbone and the gall and the gumption to do 
something about violent crime in this country. So they'll pass it 
off on the rest of us to be responsible for their inactivity. 
 
And it is no different, Mr. Speaker, than it was in the years 
under Pierre Elliott Trudeau, when he pandered to certain 
segments of this country rather than do something about what 
needed to be done. 
 
And somehow the Minister of Justice has bought into this. The 
same kind of political gamesmanship we saw in this Assembly 
back in 1982 when the now Premier, the then attorney general, 
marched off to Ottawa, on the instructions of Allan Blakeney 
and others, and went along with Jean Chrétien and McMurtry 
and allowed the constitution of this country to be brought 
home, Mr. Speaker — brought home without property rights 
being enshrined in it. 
 
And if that had happened, if property rights had been there, this 
would be a mute point today, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn't be 
standing in this Assembly having to worry about the rights of 
citizens in this province. 
 
But in order to get that constitution brought home, Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau needed certain things. And one of the things he needed 
was the compliance of the premier of Saskatchewan, the most 
pre-eminent New Democrat in the country at that time, the man 
that he had dealt with on the national energy program and a 
man that he had to have compliance from, if he were to 
enshrine that constitution without Quebec being signator. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know what that history was. We had 
seen the Government of Saskatchewan very proactive in 
business. We saw the expropriation of mines. We saw an NDP 
government that were very active in getting into areas where 
property rights would be a significant, a significant detriment, 
Mr. Speaker, to their political course of action. 
 
So it was not unreasonable that the member from Riversdale, 
the then attorney general, joined with McMurtry and Chrétien to 
make sure that Trudeau's document could be brought home and 
that property rights were not enshrined in the constitution of 
this country. 
 
And we, Mr. Speaker, have paid the price, particularly in 
western Canada, ever since that day. That was a dark, dark day, 
and the people of this province spoke very loudly in 1982 about  

their opposition to that — very, very loudly. 
 
So what do we have now, Mr. Speaker, brought before this 
Assembly again? Another political motion from the Minister of 
Justice — the law partner and friend of the member from 
Riversdale, probably an adviser back in 1982 when these issues 
were discussed — that simply allows, that simply allows this 
Assembly to use weasel words once more that'll lead the 
members of this Assembly off to Ottawa to a hearing, like 
sheep to a slaughter. 
 
Because I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that Allan Rock is as 
hard today as Ralph Goodale and others were back in 1979. 
And the good folks from Saskatchewan will line themselves up, 
and they'll appear before the federal Liberal hearing, and they'll 
smile and they'll nod and they'll send us home packing with our 
tails between our legs. And the Minister of Justice knows full 
well, full well, that that will be the case; that this is just simply 
part of the show for the folks in Toronto and Montreal and 
Halifax and Vancouver. This is part of the show that the 
Minister of Justice is going to be leading us to. 
 
So what's the answer? What's the answer, Mr. Speaker? We 
know how the Liberals are. The Liberal leader in this province, 
one day she is for gun control; one day she's against it. It all 
depends how close her Senate seat is, Mr. Speaker. That 
determines the Liberal attitude in this province, as it does from 
all of the rest of them that represent the MP slots here today. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Judges. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Some of them are going to be judges, my 
colleague says. Some of them are going to get other 
appointments when they go down in the next federal election, 
as assuredly they will, because the people of this province do 
not want them interfering in their private lives like they are 
proposing. 
 
My colleague from Souris-Cannington has outlined all of the 
provisions around current gun ownership, gun storage. The 
member from Cumberland talks about the rich and natural 
heritage of people in this province because we do hunt and fish, 
we do protect our livestock, and we have a rich heritage that 
says that firearms, responsible use of firearms, are part and 
parcel of our society and our fabric. 
 
(1545) 
 
And it isn't the responsible firearm owner in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that is the problem. Now if the Minister of Justice had 
brought in a motion saying that we are going to bring in 
legislation that deals with people that use firearms in violent 
crime, the members of this Assembly would applaud him. 
 
And I'm prepared to go to Ottawa, and I'm prepared to talk to 
Mr. Rock and say that these are the provisions that should be 
enacted so that citizens can be protected from those that prey 
upon others. But does he do that? No, he doesn't. 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1699 

If he brought a motion into this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that 
said we should do something with illegal immigrants who are 
bringing guns into this country, he'd be applauded. Does he do 
that? No. When the police chief in Toronto says that there's 
10,000 illegal immigrants in the city of Toronto walking around 
packing guns, we should all listen. Does Mr. Rock do anything 
about that? No. 
 
He says to the farmers and the ranchers and the native people of 
this province, you should register your guns, and I'll set up a big 
bureaucracy and I'll charge you hundreds and thousands of 
dollars to do it; and I'll set in place a whole bunch of 
bureaucrats who have the power to walk into your home, Mr. 
Speaker, and seize your property. Police officers don't want it. 
 
But do we hear anybody from the government side in this 
Assembly speak out on behalf of those people? I see lawyers all 
over the place over there. For goodness’ sakes, amongst the 
collective wit and wisdom of all the lawyers I see in the NDP 
benches, surely they could come up with some type of a plan 
that would protect people in this province. 
 
But do they? No, what they bring forward is another one of 
these weak-kneed motions by the Minister of Justice who says 
that I am willing to be part of Allan Rock's parade. For 
goodness’ sakes, Mr. Speaker, these are the same people that 
say no when an optometrist wants to get out of registration and 
licensing in this province. And yet here they expect to go before 
the federal government and say, because it's guns and it's our 
political problem — instead of medicare — we think that 
Saskatchewan, that the Territories, should be separate from 
federal law. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on one hand, because it's medicare and it's 
Tommy Douglas's legacy, people can't opt out of registration 
and licensing. But on this side of the equation, because they 
know how vulnerable they are on the issue of gun control 
because of the inactivity of the minister, he says that we should 
have the right to opt out of national registry and licensing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those kinds of contradictions are why people in 
this province do not believe the Minister of Justice. That's why 
thousands of them are signing petitions and letters and forms, 
and they're saying, for goodness’ sakes, do something about it. 
 
It's why the member from Indian Head-Wolseley — and I give 
him credit — has the gall and the gumption to stand up and say, 
I'll put my name on a piece of paper. I won't be subjected to Mr. 
Rock and this charade that he is perpetrating upon Canadian 
people. I'll put my name where it counts, and I'm not afraid of 
the consequences. 
 
You know what? He's right, Mr. Speaker. Because that member 
understands his constituents, and he's doing what his 
constituents sent him to do -- represent them in the Legislative 
Assembly. And he isn't afraid. He isn't afraid. 
 
So it's obvious, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly had best come 
up with the best solution possible. And that means that if we  

truly are going to take those federal Liberals on, there's only one 
way to do it. And I say that is get them in court, and we fight, 
and we drag this thing out. And we get them down to the next 
federal election, Mr. Speaker, so that a lot of them have to pay 
the price — pay the price that Ralph Goodale did in Assiniboia 
in 1979, and that is face the responsible gun owners of this 
country on the campaign trail, and then we'll see how 
courageous they are. 
 
It's very easy now, Mr. Speaker, at mid-term to do your dirty 
work, and that's what Allan Rock is doing. Allan Rock is being 
touted at the next leader of the federal Liberal Party, the next 
prime minister of Canada whenever Jean Chrétien decides to 
step down. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to be 
part of the process of feathering Allan Rock's political nest. 
And neither should any member of this political . . . of this 
Assembly be part of feathering Allan Rock's political nest. 
 
And that's what the Minister of Justice and the NDP are doing. 
And I do not for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, understand why a 
political party that had the gumption to expropriate potash 
mines, that had the gumption to expropriate uranium mines, that 
had the gumption to go into court for years and years and years 
and say, this is our course of action, right or wrong, we'll do it . 
. . we'll use this Legislative Assembly to break contracts. We'll 
do whatever we need in a legal sense — we'll go to the Supreme 
Court, because this is our course of action. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, when the ideal opportunity presents 
itself for this NDP government to show as much gumption and 
as much get-up-and-go to go to the Supreme Court of Canada, 
as they did when they broke the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) contracts or they broke the judges' contract or when 
they broke anybody else's contract or when they expropriated a 
mine, now all of a sudden the minister says, no, follow me off 
to Ottawa and we'll have our little say and we'll parade before 
the committee, and then we'll go home with our tail between 
our legs and we'll accept whatever Mr. Rock foists upon us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we may lose, we may lose in that court; but I'll tell 
you what — we'll win in the court of public opinion. And that's 
where the battle is today. It is in the court of public opinion, and 
if you lead the way and show the way, even if we ultimately 
lose that court battle, Mr. Speaker, at least we will have tried, 
we will have tried instead of being meekly led down the path. 
 
There are a lot of taxpayers in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
would see that court challenge and that court fight as a 
legitimate use of the taxpayers' money, a lot more legitimate 
than the plane trip to Ottawa that the minister's going to lead us 
on, and the absolute rejection, in my view, Mr. Speaker, of our 
point of view because it will not be backed up — it will not be 
backed up with good, solid legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore feel it's an appropriate time to move an 
amendment to the motion put forward by the Minister of 
Justice. And I move, seconded by the member for Moosomin: 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1700 

 That all the words following "Assembly" be deleted and 
the following substituted: 

 
 “pass legislation currently on the order paper of this 

province which would allow Saskatchewan to opt out of 
provisions respecting registration and licensing within 
Bill C-68, An Act respecting Firearms and Other 
Weapons.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members for their indulgence. We 
wanted to make certain that we were right on the interpretation 
of this amendment because it could have far-reaching 
interpretation on other matters on the order paper. So we have 
decided that it is within the scope of the motion and that the 
amendment is in order, and the debate will continue 
concurrently. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I believe that most people across the province will understand 
the full intent of the amendment. And the intent of the 
amendment we brought before the Assembly today is just to 
reinforce, in a stronger fashion, our support of the motion that 
has been introduced by the Minister of Justice. 
 
What we're basically saying, and what people have been asking 
us for the last year and a half or so since this debate basically 
began to unfold and since the federal government and Mr. Rock 
has revealed his intentions to impose strict gun registration on 
Canada and on the citizens of Canada, is the fact that this 
province, while we've stood up, while the Minister of Justice 
has stood up on many occasions and at many gun rallies to 
speak out against Mr. Rock's legislation on Bill C-68, we have 
yet, Mr. Speaker, and even as the Minister of Justice indicated 
today, we have yet to do anything within this province and 
within this Legislative Assembly and this body that would 
reaffirm and basically make it even, I guess, if you will, Mr. 
Speaker, make it even that much more significant for this 
Legislative Assembly to pass not just a motion, but to bring 
forward legislation that would endeavour to remind the federal 
minister that the provinces also have jurisdiction; that there are 
areas of responsibility and the provinces have jurisdiction under 
the constitution within the rights and the freedoms and 
maintaining those rights and freedoms within their jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have pointed out, and as we have 
pointed out in the opposition caucus for the past number of 
weeks, the fact that we continue to receive petitions from 
people across this province voicing their concern and voicing 
their opposition to Bill C-68 is an indication that it is not an 
issue that is just confined to a few certain areas in this province, 
whether it's down in the south-east or an area that I represent, or 
whether it's in the south-west or the North. 
 

And the member from Cumberland just spoke to us about the 
aboriginal community and the fact that the use of guns in their 
lifestyle is a way of providing for their families, not only in 
providing a means of revenue through the pelts that they would 
get from animals and sell, Mr. Speaker, but also in providing 
food for their families. And also many other hunters and avid 
sportsmen across the province of Saskatchewan certainly enjoy 
the sportsmanship of hunting, and they certainly enjoy the 
feasting on the bounties of their hunting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Basically what we have is individuals who feel very strongly 
that while it is important that we look at ways of managing and 
controlling crime in this country, not only in Saskatchewan but 
in Canada in general, it's also important that we recognize that 
the criminal activity across this country — I think if you did a 
survey — is implemented and undertaken by such a small 
minority of Canadians or even individuals within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe one RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer 
indicated to us, or indicated in a letter to the editor, that of the 
last 13 murder investigations that he had been involved in 
before he retired only three of them involved the use of a 
firearm. The other 10 involved different . . . either beatings or 
knifings or different circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess it's very important for us to really take the time to 
look at the broad perspective of what it means to implement 
Bill C-68. 
 
And let me say again, Mr. Speaker, no one on this side of the 
House is opposed to bringing forward legislation that really 
puts responsibility back into our . . . into, I guess, the . . . into 
crime and to criminality and that we place responsibility upon 
people for their actions. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice and I have 
discussed some of these changes and some of the areas where I 
feel we need to place responsibility. In the area of the young 
offenders, Mr. Speaker, we've talked about the fact that maybe 
parents need to be more responsible as well. And when you see 
young people as young as 10 and 12 years old committing 
vicious crimes, Mr. Speaker, it's important that those . . . that 
parents or individuals who are supposed to be responsible for 
young offenders also accept some of the responsibility. 
 
But what Mr. Rock is doing, he's trying to tell us that if we just 
implement this legislation . . . and as you can see and as you've 
noted over the past number of weeks the number of petitions 
we've brought forward, people do not believe that just by 
passing a piece of legislation or passing a Bill in the federal 
House that we will indeed reduce criminal activity or reduce 
vicious and hideous criminal crimes, or crimes of murder or 
assault upon the people of Canada, or indeed upon the people 
of Saskatchewan or any jurisdiction across . . . in this great 
nation of ours. 
 
And that's why we feel on this side of the Assembly, in our 
caucus, that it's imperative that we take the time in this  



April 24, 1995 

 
1701 

Assembly to do more than just pass motions, but also to address 
some of the fundamental issues like the opting-out clause or 
property rights. 
 
And where we can go back to the debate that took place prior to 
1982 and the present Premier was involved with the former 
prime minister, Pierre Trudeau, and the present Prime Minister, 
Jean Chrétien, in their implementation of bringing back a 
constitution to this country which didn't include all the 
jurisdictions or all the regions of this nation, and as a result we 
have an ongoing debate in this country that still has to be 
resolved. And because of that ongoing debate, we find one of 
the provinces in this country would dare to tell Canada that they 
really don't belong. 
 
And so I think, Mr. Speaker, there are more pressing issues that 
we should be dealing with, issues within the province. Certainly 
there are national issues that we should be dealing with that I 
believe are more important, are more significant to the people 
of Canada, rather than just bringing forward another Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think a number of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) have already indicated that even the 
purposes of the past gun laws that were brought forward by the 
past minister of Justice, the Hon. Kim Campbell, who . . . and 
for all intents and purposes we know, Mr. Speaker, we know 
what happened to Ms. Campbell with her endeavour to change 
the gun laws in this country — she is no longer the Justice 
minister, and for that fact, no longer the prime minister of this 
country, and even the leader of her party. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we do have, we do have another 
minister who has come to power and decided that it is important 
to continue on, to push forward legislation that was introduced 
some 20 years ago and to try and finally implement . . . 
 
And there's no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt 
in my mind, that Mr. Rock will be intent on pushing this 
legislation forward, even though he's using a smokescreen of 
committee hearings in Ottawa over the next month to listen to 
issues and to listen to concerns. Even today on the news, Mr. 
Rock said that registration would not change, that they would 
continue to implement a registry of guns across Canada. 
 
And one has to wonder, who will be lining up at the doors first 
to register their guns? Mr. Speaker, will the individuals . . . 
 
And there are many businesses across this nation and certainly 
in this province and in my area that are going to be drastically 
hurt if Bill C-68 is implemented. I wonder if Ken and Marshall 
McLeod of K & M Shooting Shop in Moosomin . . . how 
they're feeling today as we get closer and closer to the 
implementation of Bill C-68, and the business that they have 
built up and the clientele that they have built up over the past 
number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt, in talking with them, that they've 
seen and experienced a significant reduction in clientele or 
traffic through their shooting shop because of Bill C-68. 

What about the Kovach boys in the Kipling area, with their gun 
collection? And they have worked diligently and they've worked 
long hours and they've worked hard to basically pick up and 
find old guns. And what they have designed is a gun collection 
where they've found guns that would have been used in wars in 
the past, Mr. Speaker, and built a nice gun collection for 
themselves. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, the minister could say, well in some 
form or other we may be able to accommodate individuals like 
these businesses or gun collectors. But at the end of the day, 
Mr. Speaker, it's not just a matter of accommodating them 
today, it's the fact that they have spent hours, they have spent 
time, they've spent energy, they've spent money, to collect these 
guns, and what value do the guns have that they have collected 
if Bill C-68 goes through? What value do the guns that the 
McLeod brothers have in their shop have if Bill C-68 is 
implemented? And who is going to compensate them for the 
loss? 
 
And I think that is one of the real, significant factors — who 
compensates people across this nation who have purchased 
guns for sportsmanship, or whether it's used in hunting or 
whether it's just to have a .22 around the house to get rid of 
rodents on the farm, as most people across this province have 
and have used over the years? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it just seems to me that Mr. Rock — I'm not sure 
who he's talking to but no doubt he's probably listening to the 
people down in Toronto, listening to a number of people in 
Montreal, listening to people in Vancouver. And the reality is, 
Mr. Speaker, when Bill C-68 is implemented, basically what he 
does to a majority of Canadians is makes them criminals unless 
they take the time to walk down to their RCMP office and 
register all their guns. 
 
And here again, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate what many speakers 
have said before me: the law-abiding citizens of this province 
and of this country will probably take the time, but the reality is 
at the end of the day I'm not sure if very many people will 
continue to own guns. 
 
Because while Mr. Rock and the Prime Minister and the federal 
Liberals will continue to tell us that no, they are not out to take 
away firearms, that it's just a matter of controlling the sale and 
it's just a matter of knowing where the firearms are, the facts are 
even in this province when fees were put into regulations, 
regulations and fee increases take place on an annual basis in 
fact if not on a daily basis. 
 
And all of those fee increases are made through order in 
council; they don't come before this Legislative Assembly. And 
most people don't realize the cost of their auto insurance or 
other fees that they may be facing until they go and renew that 
driver's licence or they go and renew their licence plates, or 
they're maybe hit with a minor offence like possibly speeding 
and parking in a no-parking zone or whatever the offence may 
be, Mr. Speaker. No one realizes how much these fees have 
increased. And in this province we have seen them increase  



April 24, 1995 

 
1702 

drastically over the last three years. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt that once Bill 
C-68 passes, once the fee structure is in place, once a penalty is 
in place for an individual if they do not register their firearms, 
Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt within a year or so those fees that 
Mr. Rock talks about as being minimal today could rise 
dramatically. 
 
And what I've found in talking to gun owners across this 
province and people in my own constituency, individuals have 
basically said that at the end of the day they probably will not 
own any firearms because they are not going to take the time 
nor will they take and pour money into an object that basically 
they use a week or two weeks of the year when they're out 
hunting for big game across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so one has to ask, and that's why we suggest to the 
Minister of Justice, that we pass legislation in this Assembly 
dealing with these two issues of the opting-out clause and 
property rights. And that we also pass a motion or pass a Bill in 
this Legislative Assembly, saying to the federal minister, that 
you may go ahead and pass your Bill C-68 but in the province 
of Saskatchewan we already have a piece of legislation passed 
that says this province will opt out. If Quebec can opt out or 
choose to opt out of Canada and ask its people, then maybe it's 
time we asked the residents of Saskatchewan. Maybe it's time 
we passed legislation that said we will allow the people of 
Saskatchewan that voice. 
 
And it's not really appropriate to say, well at the next federal 
election they'll be judged, because quite frankly, they probably 
will win the next federal election. They may not have anything 
west of Winnipeg as far as MPs, but they don't need any MPs 
west of Winnipeg to form government in Canada. 
 
(1615) 
 
So it's very imperative that in Saskatchewan we stand up for the 
interests of the men and women who support us. It's very 
important that we stand up and voice the concerns of that 
community out there that view the fact of having guns or 
owning guns as a right and a responsibility. They treat their 
guns responsibly, and they use their guns in a responsible 
fashion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, no doubt even in Saskatchewan, we do have 
groups that would be opposed to changing the present Bill. No 
doubt we've got groups that would suggest that Mr. Rock is 
right on. But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, if 
Bill C-68 passes as it is presently, in its present form, it will still 
not create an environment that makes it that much more healthy 
for individuals who are afraid of being accosted by someone 
with a gun at sometime in the future because there are so many 
guns available. 
 
And in fact just for an example, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was 
just last week on the . . . it was on the news about . . . I believe 
it was a 14-year-old boy, designed a bomb from information he  

received through the Internet. And if you think that that's 
possible right now . . . and we just have to look to the south of 
us and into the city of Oklahoma and the tragedy that occurred 
there when individuals decided that they were going to get even 
with somebody. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, there isn't a law made in this 
Legislative Assembly or in this country that will basically 
protect people from individuals who may be out to just vent 
their anger or their frustration against others around them, 
without caring about who they may inflict that harm on, as 
we've seen in Oklahoma and the numbers of children that were 
affected by that bomb blast. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it's imperative, and I believe that it 
really is imperative, that we take the time to address this issue 
here in this Legislative Assembly. And by doing that, Mr. 
Speaker, what we do is we say to the Minister of Justice and to 
my colleagues and the Liberal representatives who will be going 
to Ottawa to address their concerns with the committee, we 
basically say to them: here is the support of the Legislative 
Assembly. Here is legislation that gives you the authority to go 
to Ottawa and indicate to Mr. Rock that Saskatchewan is not 
willing to just sit back, as the Minister of Justice has indicated, 
and wait until Bill C-68 is implemented, and then we'll proceed 
from there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that reeks with folly because by the time 
Bill C-68 is implemented, it will be too late to introduce any 
legislation that will be able to combat it. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, it's very important indeed that we take 
the time to bring forward legislation right now. And we do have 
a couple more pieces of legislation in this Assembly, on the 
floor of this Assembly, that will address the major concerns that 
we have raised in this House, that my colleagues and I have, 
and that people have spoken of throughout this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don't understand why the government 
wouldn't take a serious look at these pieces of legislation and 
allow them to come forward for debate, and even, Mr. Speaker, 
suggest possibly if there's an amendment or two needed that 
would make them stronger and strengthen them. Mr. Speaker, I 
don't know why the Minister of Justice will not take the time. 
And I invite him to do that before the committee heads to 
Ottawa. I invite the Minister of Justice to look at these pieces of 
legislation that we have in this Assembly and to bring them 
forward for debate; and in fact, Mr. Speaker, to allow them to 
pass through this Assembly as a means of giving him that much 
more authority. And this is the committee that would leave this 
Assembly that much more authority to go and address this 
issue. 
 
After all, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and that's 
right. My colleague said, while they may be passed in this 
Assembly, they don't necessarily have to be proclaimed at the 
time they're passed. But it would send a message to the federal 
minister that this province is serious in protecting the gun 
owners in this province  serious in protecting the tourism and  



April 24, 1995 

 
1703 

the outfitters, a number of them who have been drastically 
affected by individuals from other countries who have already 
cancelled trips to this province for hunting. 
 
It would protect the hunter who would go out hunting. It also 
would protect revenue that the Minister of Finance is looking 
for. Because, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine the type of 
reductions in revenue that the Department of Natural Resources 
or Environment or Resource Management will experience this 
year as individuals just say, well that's the last straw. I didn't get 
any support; I'm not going to buy that licence; I'm not going to 
go out and do any hunting this year. And licences are a 
substantial revenue bearer to this province, to the province of 
Saskatchewan, as well as bringing tourism into this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important, and I certainly want 
to stand with my colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, in 
his amendment to the motion where we're asking the Justice 
minister of this province to indeed do more than just stand in 
the Assembly and stand at gun rallies across this province and 
do lip-service, but indeed to take the time to show that this 
Assembly has the ability to bring forward legislation that would 
give more strength and more resolve, and would indicate that 
the committee leaving this province to go and make their 
submissions to the federal committee that the federal minister 
has put forward, that this province and this Legislative 
Assembly is willing to work for the people that have actually 
voted and elected each one of us in here, that we're willing to 
go to Ottawa and say to Mr. Rock: Mr. Rock, we believe you're 
wrong. We believe all the excuses you've given for your piece 
of legislation are unfounded. We certainly agree with you that 
we must address the seriousness of crime, but we believe the 
way you're going about it is not appropriate and will not address 
the issue. In fact all you are doing is making law-abiding 
citizens criminals. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I stand here today in support of a 
common sense approach to firearms and the respect for firearms 
owners and a common sense approach to the way we handle 
criminals in this country, and indeed that we should take the 
two issues, separate them, and make a better Canada and a 
better province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I encourage the Minister of Justice to now indeed heed the 
suggestion we brought forward and allow our amendment to be 
brought to this Assembly to be voted on, to be passed, to 
strengthen the resolve of this Assembly and the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I beg your forgiveness for the 
voice that you're going to be hearing for the next while. 
 
I stand to say that I will not be supporting the amendment but 
rather the original motion. The idea of shifting to property 
rights in this particular issue is a convoluted one that's difficult 
for the opposition members to present, but I suspect in some 
areas of the world they'll be able to do that. 

What interests me the most about this particular issue and why I 
stand to support what is there is that in looking at the statistics 
to analyse whether there is any rational reason or not for going 
into gun registration or firearm registration, if you look at 
statistics from other places in the world, you'll find that there 
isn't much rationale anywhere. 
 
One of the places is Great Britain, where in 1988 they 
implemented some very strict regulations for gun ownership, 
and so they've had approximately five, six years of statistics on 
which you base what took place. 
 
In that case, the legal gun ownership dropped by approximately 
20 per cent, 21 or 22 per cent. But if you take a look at firearm 
. . . robberies where firearms were used, there was about a 100 
per cent increase over that same period. 
 
So you have in place a law that says it is far more difficult to 
own a gun, and you have the actual use of that gun in a specific 
crime doubling. You can also look at the impact of violent 
crime in Britain, and it shows somewhat similar ideas. 
 
I want to point out a few things that are taking place in the 
province of Saskatchewan that indicate where people come 
from because I think  and on this issue  because I think to a 
large degree the rationale behind this issue is based on the 
income level that people have. That is to say, that if you are 
able to purchase some tickets for a trip to the sun in the middle 
of the winter and spend three weeks to a month or so down 
there, it is highly likely that with that level of income that you 
won't be a gun owner, and you won't be interested in seeing 
other people own firearms. 
 
But if you are someone who earns a living in the blue-collar 
area, as a blue-collar worker who will not earn sufficient funds 
in order to make these type of major, extended holidays, you'll 
find that they will have a larger ownership of firearms and will 
use that as part of their recreation. And so you see a division 
that occurs. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, a letter to the editor. Actually it's a 
letter to the Leader-Post editor on the 24th of this year. It's from 
an individual that I know fairly well since I ran against him in 
an election, Neil Currie. He says: 
 
 I was raised in rural Saskatchewan, here in Turtleford, 

hunting prairie chickens, partridges, ducks, and shooting 
gophers. I now own two guns, a single-shot .22 and a 
single-shot 12-gauge. (And) I see no problem in 
registering them. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Neil ran for the Liberals, and the thing that he 
doesn't say about himself is that he's a former civil servant 
living in Turtleford with, what I would expect to be, a fairly 
large pension. And paying a hundred or $200 to register his 
guns would not be a problem for him because he was able to 
participate in an election without any difficulty financially, as 
far as I could determine. And that indicates to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that in this particular case, it isn't a bother if you have lots of  



April 24, 1995 

 
1704 

money. 
 
There's another item that is in the Leader-Post of, oh, about the 
17th of this month. It's a column by Doug Cuthand. And I want 
to say that Doug is probably in the same category as Neil 
Currie, although I don't know him that well. But I feel that he's 
. . . He indicates in the column that he writes that he's an 
educated urbanite, so far removed from rural Saskatchewan and 
the people that he indicates that he's writing for, that he doesn't 
even understand the issues or recognize where the problems are. 
 
In fact he goes further than some other people in saying that, as 
I would like to say, that the native people in the province of 
Saskatchewan need a den mother to look after their weapons, 
and he says: 
 
 We need gun control legislation including registration, 

safe storage and safety courses. And it may come down 
to storing guns at safe collection sites, such as band 
offices or local RCMP detachments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it's an indication in my mind that individuals who 
have taken the time to look at what is the basis of this 
legislation would say that there is no basis for it. And those 
individuals that respond from a gut reaction or what they feel, 
will respond basis their economic . . . and status in the 
community, and the richer you are and the more likelihood that 
you are as a professional, the more likelihood you will be to 
oppose gun legislation. 
 
And I'd like to say that my belief for that to occur is the fact that 
most people are taking what they view the world off the TV, 
and not from the reality and the real facts that are there, and 
therefore they respond according to the TV shows and the rest 
of it. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, in saying that this legislation has a 
negative impact in rural Saskatchewan and I believe no one can 
demonstrate where it is going to be an efficient or effective . . . 
or even legislation that's workable. 
 
I'm going to be opposing the amendment, supporting the motion 
that was originally put forward, because this motion removes 
the problems and leaves in the Act those things that I think are 
necessary for Canada as a whole to implement. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me 
to rise here today, and I support the main motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've lived in north-eastern Saskatchewan all of my 
life. I'm a farmer and former hunter and a former pasture 
manager. And as a pasture manager and a farmer, I have needed 
firearms very many times. And I could relate many instances to  

you where we needed firearms and needed them very badly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember one time when I was a pasture 
manager and riding in the rain, and I rode up to one of the 
cowboys that was working with me and he told me of a young 
cow that was over the hill, further to the west, that was 
paralysed, seemed to be paralysed in the back legs. 
 
So I rode back over there. It was out of my way but I rode back 
over there and I found this cow alive and covered, literally 
covered, with coyotes eating her — eating her alive. And I 
didn't know what to do. It was a very hard thing to see. The 
coyotes just ran off far enough that I couldn't throw anything at 
them. The young cow was alive and crawling along, and here I 
was with my horse, over two miles away from my corrals and 
my office. 
 
So I scared them away as good as I could and rode hard into the 
corral. I got my 30-30 and drove back out with my truck. And 
sure enough, when I came over the hill, here they were again, 
eight or ten of them at least, eating this poor animal alive. 
Needless to say, I shot as much as I could, not very well, but I 
managed to kill a few, and I had to shoot the cow as well of 
course. 
 
My point is that many times in rural Saskatchewan over the 
course of my life we've needed the firearm, and needed it very 
bad and needed it very real. 
 
Almost every household in my area, as you drive in rural 
Saskatchewan where I live, has firearms in their house and 
know how to use them. And we have a very low crime rate, 
extremely low; probably one of the lowest in Canada, I would 
imagine. 
 
I know how my constituents feel on this issue, Mr. Speaker, 
because everywhere I go farmers speak to me about it, business 
people speak to me about it, the RCMP in the local area speak 
to me about it, men and women speak to me, women's clubs, 
men's groups. 
 
They all say, can't we do something about this insanity? Surely 
there's something we can do, Mr. Keeping, surely there's 
something we can do. They say, can't we stop this waste of 
taxpayers' money? 
 
My area of the province is a very good area to hunt in and we 
have a lot of hunters up there that come into the area, but we 
also have a lot of local hunters and trappers in that area. And let 
me repeat again: the crime rate in that area is extremely low — 
extremely low. And this is what people don't understand. With 
the cut-backs, the very real and very hurtful cut-backs that the 
federal Liberal government has been imposing in their budget, 
how can they at the same time do something that is not going to 
do any good at all and yet is going to be expensive to ordinary 
people? 
 
It's amazing to ordinary people  and they can't understand 
how this can happen, how that in this day and age we can waste  



April 24, 1995 

 
1705 

money — the Liberal government in Ottawa is planning to 
waste money in this way. Everyone, everyone without 
exception, knows that it's not going to do any good at all. 
Anybody inclined to use a firearm for any illegal act is not 
going to register it, so what good will registration do? 
 
Everyone is angry about it and everyone has been talking to 
their local Member of Parliament, and me, as MLA, to ask if 
there isn't something we can do. I have written a letter to the 
federal Minister of Justice. I wrote him several times actually; I 
wrote him asking . . . and one of the questions I asked him was: 
surely there's some way, Mr. Minister, that Saskatchewan can 
opt out of this plan because it's no good in our provinces. It may 
. . . it's no good in our province. It may be good somewhere, but 
it's no good here. 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is enforcement of the laws we 
have now. Everyone I talk to agrees that what we need is the 
laws that are now to be enforced, and what we don't need is 
more laws and more rules. Mr. Speaker, I support the main 
motion and I will be voting against the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
speak in support of the amendment brought forward by the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview and seconded by the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I've talked to many farmers, 
wildlife federation people, and they totally have told me that 
this Bill C-68 was not one that they wanted us to support. And 
they gave me a lot of reasons why. 
 
One is they have . . . Indians, they go out hunting; that's a way 
of life. They've got their guns. Their revolvers or handguns are 
registered now; so they say, we don't need more legislation. 
 
Farmers also, Mr. Speaker, in my area are also saying look, we 
have guns, we've got legislation in, and we are definitely not in 
support of Bill C-68. They've asked me to talk to the minister 
and put support behind to go to the federal minister and ask him 
to drop this Bill C-68. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, also the people in my constituency are 
very frustrated with the Liberal government. Mr. Speaker, our 
Liberal MP from Prince Albert-Churchill has not been 
supporting our wildlife federation or the farmers, so they've 
asked me to stand up for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion and I will not be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
only want to say a few words in support of the motion by the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview and the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley. I want to support this motion, Mr.  

Speaker, and I want to oppose the amendment proposed by the 
hon. member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Pretty well everything has been said today on this Bill. I just 
want to make a few remarks to put them on the record. And first 
of all, why are we dealing with Bill 68? Well Bill 68 is 
supposed to take firearms out of the hands of the criminals. And 
I want to just indicate that we can have all the registration that 
we want of firearms and if a person is so inclined to use a 
firearm in a criminal offence, registration most certainly is not 
going to stop that individual. There's many ways that they will 
get these firearms. They can get them through the black 
markets; firearms can be constructed; they will be stolen. And 
even if they steal the weapon and it's registered, that's not going 
to stop anything. 
 
Bill C-38 is going to create a large bureaucracy and many 
hardships. If one was to stop and just realize how many 
firearms there are in Canada, some homes, some households, 
would have six, seven firearms. Some of them would be owned 
by different members of the family, some of the members not 
even living in the homes, but there would be millions and 
millions of firearms that would have to be registered and 
different figures have been thrown around as to how much it's 
going to cost to register these firearms. 
 
Well, I suspect that the cost is going to run into the millions and 
millions of dollars. We now have registration for firearms. Any 
person who purchases a firearm in Canada has to have a 
firearms acquisition certificate. No one can go out and buy a 
firearm in Canada . . . and that's been in effect since the early 
1980s. You always have to get the certificate before you can 
purchase a firearm. 
 
So I just think that there are so many regulations that are in 
place. And if you go through a federal park, you go into a park, 
you register your gun, you have it sealed. That seal is not 
broken until you go out the other side of the park and the park 
warden will take the seal out. 
 
So there are lots of regulations for firearms but those 
regulations do not apply to individuals who are going to go out 
and commit a crime or commit an offence. It's going to cause 
many hardships, as was stated today, with Northerners. It's 
going to cause many hardships with rural folks who live on the 
farms, and the sportsman, and an added expense. 
 
And it's going to be tough for enforcement officers to try and 
enforce that. It's an Act that is going to be just about impossible 
to enforce and it's going to cause a lot of hard feelings between 
the officers who will have to enforce it. 
 
I just want to indicate that some of the regulations are going to 
be so severe. If you have your firearms, you have to have them 
in one room; you have to have them locked up. Your 
ammunition, you have to have it in another room and they also 
have to be under lock and key. 
 
And this just doesn't even make any sense, some of these  



April 24, 1995 

 
1706 

regulations. If somebody is coming into your yard or coming 
into your house, going to break in, you have to get into one 
room, you have to find the right key and unlock where you have 
your firearm stored, then you have to go into another place to 
get the ammunition to use it. And the same applies up North in 
the wooded area where in the springtime, when bears come 
breaking into your home, you have to make sure that you have 
that weapon and you know how to use it and that it's accessible. 
 
I can think of up in the far north country where trappers and 
commercial fishermen who have . . . they buy a firearm and it 
stays up in isolation in their trappers' cabins and their fishing 
cabins, and that weapon stays there, or that firearm. It's used in 
the springtime when they're out trapping. They're in a tent along 
the rivers, the bears are coming out of hibernation, they're 
hungry and they're dangerous, and they most certainly have to 
have that firearm with them at all times and ammunition to use 
it with. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what we need now more than ever is more 
education. We have to teach people how to handle their 
firearms. It takes skill and knowledge to use guns safely. And I 
think that this is something that we have to take a look at, more 
so than registration of firearms; but it's just education and how 
to handle firearms. 
 
As far as the violent crimes that happen in our country or any 
place around the world, the majority of them are . . . violent 
crimes are committed with knives — that's one of the biggest 
offenders — and other instruments other than weapons. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate quite clearly that I support 
this motion by the Attorney General and I just ask all members 
also to support the motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased . . . I know the time is short, but I just want to get in to 
say a few words on this resolution. I was pleased to find when I 
returned today that this resolution had been put forward because 
this is a very important issue. 
 
I want to note, Mr. Speaker, that I found it quite funny that the 
Liberal leader . . . you know, when the legislation was 
introduced initially in Ottawa, she agreed with it. And she came 
home to Saskatchewan and now, well, maybe she doesn't agree 
with it. I think it depends which way the wind's blowing. I think 
that's a very important point to note for all people in this 
province, how Liberals work together, saying what's appropriate 
at the time and  wherever they are  whatever's good for the 
moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to know where our federal Liberal 
MPs are in this. Why are they not standing up for the majority 
of people in Saskatchewan? I suppose maybe they aren't 
because they saw what happened to some of their colleagues  

when they didn't in Ottawa. They got stripped of all their duties 
in the legislature by the Prime Minister. A great way to act — if 
you don't toe the law, especially on an issue that's unpopular, 
you'll get stripped of your jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that goes a good long way to say how this Bill is 
being operated in Ottawa and the unilateral, almost what I 
would call dictatorial, acts that are coming out of our Liberal 
government, the federal government. Where is Mr. Goodale? I 
was at a SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) meeting, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Goodale said 
that $85 million was going to be the cost to administer this gun 
legislation — 85 million. Could you imagine if they put the $85 
million into policing and forget about making criminals out of 
honest people who think they shouldn't have to register the 
guns? 
 
What about the grandmother? Someone came up to me the 
other day and said, my mother is 90 years old, and I know 
there's a couple of guns somewhere in the basement. If she 
doesn't register them, she's a criminal. And why should I pay to 
register them? And they're family heirlooms, so we don't want 
to destroy them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's a number of these types of things: the 
collectors, the honest hunters. And as other speakers have said, 
that makes absolutely no sense, and I think it's important that 
we have the option, as this motion says, to opt out of any 
legislation with this regard. It would also give the provinces 
who decided to stay in . . . it would give the country and the 
federal government a chance to compare whether or not the 
legislation is actually deterring crime and criminals. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pilot project. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — It would be like a pilot project, as my 
colleague said. What a better way . . . and what basically what 
the federal Liberal government is saying, Mr. Speaker, is the 
province of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, the 
wildlife federation, the SARFO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Responsible Firearm Owners), and all the police organizations, 
they don't know what they're talking about. These people don't 
know what they're talking about when they say registration 
won't stop criminals. 
 
Dictatorship in Ottawa — I don't think that's what we need at 
this point in time, Mr. Speaker. I certainly want to support this 
motion. I don't think the amendment that has been put forward 
will serve any purpose, so we have to get to the main motion to 
send a united voice to Ottawa, saying that we in Saskatchewan 
believe in democratic system. And this democratic system . . . 
maybe there should be some checks and balances, and let's 
allow provinces to put forward that check and balance to make 
sure the legislation is doing what it's supposed to do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few words . . . and I want to say 
one or two more things. I want to compliment the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation and their Canadian partners on the stand 
they've taken on this issue, the common-sense  



April 24, 1995 

 
1707 

stand. I want to compliment the Saskatchewan Association of 
Responsible Firearm Owners to compliment them in the stance 
that they've taken. And I want to compliment the Minister of 
Justice and all my colleagues and the police associations of 
Saskatchewan for taking a firm stand, a logical stand, and 
saying to Ottawa, we don't need a dictatorship telling us what to 
do in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
rise again today to speak this time on the amendment to the 
motion by the Justice minister. I'd just like to note that while we 
were busy debating this particular issue, I received a number 
more petitions. And these petitions in particular deal with the 
legislation in question and the amendment, that being the 
legislation currently on the order paper to deal with Bill C-68. 
 
And as I'm sure every member in the House has heard the 
prayer, I would like to read the whole issue on this page dealing 
with this particular petition. And it reads: 
 
 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan in legislature assembled: 
 
 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
 
 That the federal government has tabled gun-control 

legislation for rifles, shotguns, and handguns; 
 
 That the proposed changes are overly restrictive and 

unnecessary considering legitimate firearm owners 
register their guns, follow stringent regulations, and use 
firearms for sport, recreation, and protection of 
livestock; 

 
 And that it is imperative that the province of 

Saskatchewan be allowed to enforce regulations 
regarding firearms that are fair, equitable, and 
reasonable for Saskatchewan without the interference of 
the federal government; 

 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 
31, An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code (Property Rights) which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The prayer part, I have been standing in my place, Mr. Speaker, 
every day, reading that, dealing with Bill 31. Today these 
particular petitions come from the White Fox, Nipawin, 
Cumberland House, Garrick, Sturgis areas. There's so many of 
them, Mr. Speaker. I can't find them all: Endeavour, 
Kelvington, and  that place that the Premier likes to refer to  

every so often when he wishes to refer to some place in rural 
Saskatchewan — Preeceville, Mr. Speaker. Also from the 
Neudorf community, a considerable number from Neudorf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these citizens, as well as the others that we 
have presented throughout the entire session and those that we 
have yet to present, all support some action, Mr. Speaker, by the 
provincial government, by this legislature. They're calling for 
support of Bill No. 31, which is part of the amendment as 
moved by my colleague from Thunder Creek. 
 
I'd like to talk a little bit about Bill 31, Mr. Speaker. Bill 31 was 
the first piece of legislation that I introduced dealing with the 
firearm issue, Mr. Speaker. And the title of that particular piece 
of legislation is An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code (Property Rights). And what it deals with is 
placing property rights within the Canadian constitution, to 
allow Saskatchewan's Human Rights Code to deal with property 
rights in this province, that it's a right under the Human Rights 
Code and that the Human Rights Commission would therefore 
be empowered to deal with property and property rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the avenues which would provide an 
additional framework of protection for Saskatchewan's firearms 
owners. Now the government members have indicated that we 
do not have jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, that the federal law has 
paramountcy over Saskatchewan law. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have 
a written opinion from the Legislative Law Clerk that states 
otherwise. The government, the ministers of Justice back and 
forth have not yet provided any type of legal opinion, other than 
their own verbal opinions, that this is not the case. 
 
The member from Regina Churchill Downs continues to say 
that section 92 of the constitution where it deals with exclusive 
powers of the province doesn't really mean that the provinces 
have exclusive power, that they only have jurisdiction in those 
areas if the federal government wants to allow them to have 
jurisdiction. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the drafters of the Canadian constitution 
in 1867 and again in 1982 had meant that the federal 
government had jurisdiction in those areas, they would have 
said so in the constitution. If you look at section 91 of the 
constitution, it says, yes, these are the areas in which the federal 
government has jurisdiction. But in section 92, it says, 
exclusive powers of the provinces. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in the Bills before this Assembly, Bills 31 and 
48, deal with section 92 of the Canadian constitution in 
providing protections for Canadian citizens, that they should 
have the right to hold property, to own property, Mr. Speaker. 
And in property we don't mean just real properties, but we mean 
chattels and movables, Mr. Speaker, as well as real estate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, firearms would fall into that category. And the 
amendment, as moved by my colleague from Thunder Creek, is 
talking about these particular pieces of legislation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that they are very reasonable pieces of  



April 24, 1995 

 
1708 

legislation. They have the support of the many, many . . . the 
hundreds and thousands of people that have signed the 
petitions, Mr. Speaker, in support of property rights protected 
by Saskatchewan law. 
 
The first Bill, no. 31, deals with the Human Rights Code and 
placing property rights in such. The second Bill, no. 48, Mr. 
Speaker, deals with an amendment to the Canadian constitution 
specifically, utilizing the notwithstanding clause as the vehicle 
to put property rights into section no. 7 of the Canadian 
constitution, such that it would read: life, liberty, property, and 
protection of the person. No, that's not quite it . . . anyways, that 
you can't be arrested without due process, etc. 
 
The minister is somewhat shaking his head there that . . . 
Security of person, that's what it is: so life, liberty, property, and 
security of the person, Mr. Speaker. And this would again allow 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan firearms owners, and 
indeed all movables and chattels . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I've been listening with care and 
enormous interest to what the member from Souris-Cannington 
is saying. He's spoken before, and I believe having done so, he's 
thereby limited to the strict parameters of the amendment which 
is really fairly narrow. It does not, I think, include a 
wide-ranging discussion of the merits, which are considerable, 
of the motion moved by the Attorney General. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I have listened very carefully to the 
member from Souris-Cannington, and although the member 
makes a good point of order . . . because I was going to 
interrupt but not on the same point of order. I think the 
member's point of order is not in order. But I would ask the 
member not to get into details of the two Bills, but on the 
principle as to why the passing of those two Bills is a good 
amendment. So I don't think the member's point of order is well 
taken. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed the 
reason why it would be proper for this Assembly to pass these 
two Bills, nos. 31 and 48, is that it would provide that 
protection that the firearms owning public of Saskatchewan is 
very desirous of. They wish to have some form of protection 
provided by the Saskatchewan legislature, by the Government 
of Saskatchewan, for their property. And these particular Bills, 
Mr. Speaker, that are on the order paper today would indeed 
provide that type of protection. It would reinforce, Mr. Speaker, 
those provisions of the Canadian constitution which are already 
there. 
 
When we're dealing with the Canadian constitution, Mr. 
Speaker; we're talking about a very nebulous group of laws that 
need to be interpreted, Mr. Speaker, that continuously are being 
read and reread by the Parliament of Canada and by the courts 
of Canada including the Supreme Court. 
 
The particular pieces of legislation that are on the order paper  

or that this motion deals with, Mr. Speaker, would clarify our 
jurisdiction over property and over firearms, Mr. Speaker, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, that 
passing these two particular pieces of legislation are very 
important to the firearms owners of this province. It's 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that another piece of legislation was 
unable to be carried forward, but perhaps the government 
members would be interested in dealing with that particular 
piece of legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian constitution allows in section 
92 for both property rights and for the Human Rights Code to 
be the exclusive jurisdiction of the provinces. So in passing 
these two Bills, Mr. Speaker, with the approval of the 
Assembly, it would allow us that protection. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I understand though that the government 
members are very reluctant to deal with these two pieces of 
legislation because they feel that somehow or another we are 
providing too broad of a stroke. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to 
disagree with that. If they would carefully look at these two 
particular pieces of legislation, they would see that it's narrowly 
defined to what kinds of properties are being talked about and, 
in passing, that it also clearly states that firearms are an example 
of the kinds of properties that these particular pieces of 
legislation are dealing with. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite and the members 
opposite wish to deal with the federal legislation, but they seem 
to be unable to determine how best to do so and what would be 
the best vehicles within this legislature to provide that. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 o'clock this House 
stands recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


