






















































March 21, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 21, 1995 

 

 
1013 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today. The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituents that have signed this petition are 
all from the town of Shaunavon, my home town. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan and specifically firearm owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Gull 
Lake, Regina, Langenburg, Beauval, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petitioners 
today come from the town and area of Shaunavon, Gull Lake 
and area, as well as one from Saskatoon, I see here. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
directed towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning of Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these on behalf of our constituents today. 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my petition reads and the prayer 
says: 
 
 Therefore we urge the provincial government to address 

the needs of Cabri and area and provide the funds 
necessary to ensure that a minimum of one acute care 
bed be available at Prairie Health Care Centre. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you, sir, and to all the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Mike Anderson and his wife Michelle who are seated in 
your Speaker's gallery. Mike will be known to the members of 
the House as no. 66 centre with the Saskatchewan Roughriders, 
entering, I think, his 12th season with the Riders, having joined 
the team in 1984. 
 
This is the 10th season as a starting centre. I think the linemen 
always like to say very simply that it is them who guarantee that 
people like Kent Austin get a chance to break every record in 
the play book because they guard the quarterback. Having had a 
nephew playing in college football in the United States as a 
tailback, of course he says that it's his speed and not the 
lineback — but I think it's the linemen that do the job. 
 
And certainly Mike has been doing his job because he's been a 
key member of the Rider team that won the Grey Cup in '89, 
selected to the Western Conference all-star team in 1988, 
graduated from San Diego State in '84. His dad, which I did not 
know until the preparation of the notes, was also a member of 
the Roughriders from 1953 to '58. And his wife Michelle, and 
Mike, are both graduates of San Diego State in athletic 
medicine. 
 
Time doesn't permit me to go through his other community 
efforts, but this is a person who is not only an outstanding 
athlete, but highly educated. He is a community-minded person, 
and given the fact that this is Grey Cup year coming up, 1995, 
and Mike's going to be playing in the Grey Cup for the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders, I want him to be introduced to you 
and to everybody in the House. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 21, 1995 

 
1014 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
On this day we must acknowledge the sad fact that racism is 
still prevalent in our society. Racism exists every time we look 
at a person and make a judgement on that individual based on 
our preconceived notions about them because of what they 
appear to be. 
 
Prejudice has no place in our society where more and more 
among us look to other races and cultures for the richness and 
variety their cultures bring to our own. 
 
Instead of looking at this day as an occasion to celebrate the 
advances we have made in eliminating racism, we must instead 
make it one on which we continue to try to end racial 
discrimination of all kinds wherever we might encounter it in 
our lives. 
 
Discrimination of any kind is intolerable, but that based on race 
is particularly reprehensible. I ask all people today to commit to 
try to improve our society and ourselves as individuals by 
speaking out against racism today and every day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, 35 years ago in Sharpeville, 
South Africa, peaceful demonstrators against apartheid were 
massacred by security forces. To commemorate this tragic 
event, in 1966 the United Nations declared March 21 the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
In 1986 on this day, the Canadian parliament called on all 
Canadians to join together to eliminate racism from our society. 
In 1988 representatives from the federal, provincial, and 
territorial governments declared that this day be recognized in 
all Canadian jurisdictions. 
 
It is now 35 years after Sharpeville, Mr. Speaker. It is a sad but 
true fact that on this day we can report some progress, but not 
enough. The most fitting way to honour this day would be to 
declare it no longer necessary. And soon, we hope, we will. 
 
Until that day comes, we should all, I propose, pay somewhat 
less attention to the big picture on the world scene and 
concentrate more on what we as individuals can do to totally 
eliminate racism from our own lives and from our immediate 
surroundings. As we renew our personal commitment, we 
should, on a positive note, remind ourselves that the opposite 
side of racism in Saskatchewan is our awareness and 
celebration of the cultural diversity of this province. A diversity 
reflected in our motto, "From Many Peoples, Strength." Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with both my 
colleagues in recognizing the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. It was my pleasure to 
attend a breakfast meeting in Saskatoon on Saturday which was 
organized by the Saskatoon & District Labour Council and the 
Saskatoon Multicultural Council, and it was a discussion on 
how to eliminate racism in the workplace. 
 
There were several speakers there who outlined examples of 
racism that they had faced in the workplace, and as they tried to 
achieve something that we should be able to take for granted in 
today's society, namely being accepted as an equal. But there 
was a large turnout, Mr. Speaker, which indicated to me that 
there's hope that the goal of equality in the workplace and a 
desire to accept and respect our cultural and racial diversity has 
taken hold. 
 
I'd like to congratulate the labour council and the multicultural 
council for bringing people in the community together to talk 
about ending racism and to promote tolerance and 
understanding as we approach the 21st century. 
 
Today, I think, reminds us, Mr. Speaker, of hard struggles that 
people have had in Sharpeville and elsewhere, to establish these 
simple truisms — that we're all members of one human race and 
one human family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Radio Station Raises Funds For Health Care 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it's my great 
pleasure to congratulate Z99 Radio of Regina for its recent 
radiothon, the beneficiary of which was the Regina General 
Hospital and the Regina Health District. Z99 is the station that 
Regina people will know as . . . it's the station we listen to 
because our children change the dial to Z99, or so we say. 
 
From last Thursday morning until 6 p.m. Saturday, the morning 
team of C.C. and Lorie Lindsay were on the air broadcasting 
live from the Cornwall Centre. I'm told that they didn't need any 
coffee; they were just using their youth and their enthusiasm 
and their commitment to the cause as a stimulant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the result of the 36-hour radiothon was $27,050 
raised. This money will be used to supply two hospital infant 
heart and lung monitors and four home monitoring units. 
 
The effort by the station, its staff, and the many individuals, 
businesses, and organizations who contributed is very welcome 
and is a great statement of the support for our hospitals and the 
health board. 
 
I want to mention Z99's sister station in Saskatoon, C95, has a 
similar radiothon, and in October they raised $29,000 for the 
Royal University Hospital. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is the eighth year that Z99 has raised money 
for children. I know all members will join me in thanking Z99  



March 21, 1995 

 
1015 

for their very good efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wascana Energy and Joseph Bighead Reserve 
Natural Gas Agreement 

 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While on the theme 
of racial discrimination, I want to tell you that we are in fact 
moving forward. 
 
This past Thursday I had the pleasure of attending a very 
important signing ceremony in my riding involving the Joseph 
Bighead First Nation and Wascana Energy based out of Regina. 
The signing signalled an agreement for the joint development of 
oil and natural gas reserves in and around the Joseph Bighead 
First Nation Reserve near Pierceland. 
 
Both sides will benefit from this agreement. For Wascana 
Energy, the entire Beacon Hill/Mannville gas pool will be 
treated as one engineering challenge. They no longer have to 
take into account the considerable difference in royalties 
between the provincial Crown land and reserve land. 
 
For the band, money will now flow in from all of the gas 
pumped out of the area. Band members no longer have to worry 
about the off-reserve wells draining gas from the reserve land 
with no compensation. 
 
In the process of reaching this agreement, the band made it 
clear that they wanted to acquire business knowledge. 
Therefore, Wascana Energy worked on this request and the 
result was a company called Pee-Kay Resources Developments 
Corporation. This band-owned oil and gas company will give 
band members valuable business experience and will provide 
new opportunities. 
 
I would like to congratulate Chief Ernest Sundown, his head 
men, elders, and band members, and Wascana Energy for 
building a solid economic future by using Saskatchewan's 
resource base. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of Max Braithwaite 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with sadness that I report on the passing of Max Braithwaite, a 
Saskatchewan-born author who was one of our province's most 
successful writers. 
 
Braithwaite's career spanned more than 50 years. He started as a 
freelance writer for Maclean's in 1945 and also wrote several 
books for children, as well as scripts for radio, television, stage, 
and film. 
 
Max Braithwaite was born in Nokomis and spent his childhood  

in Prince Albert and Saskatoon. After receiving his teaching 
certificate, he taught at various one-room schools across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It was these experiences, Mr. Speaker, that inspired Braithwaite 
to write Why Shoot the Teacher, the first in his trilogy of prairie 
experiences. This was followed by Never Sleep Three in a Bed 
and The Night We Stole the Mountie's Car. The latter won him 
the Steven Leacock medal for humour, a feat that he 
humorously noted not even Steven Leacock had accomplished. 
 
His books captured perfectly life on the prairie and were filled 
with wit and compassion. Braithwaite realized that it was this 
wit and compassion that gives Saskatchewan residents their 
ability to survive even in the harshest times. 
 
In his words, Mr. Speaker, Braithwaite strived to be, "one hell 
of a good storyteller." And that he was. The literary world will 
be a bleaker place without him. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

GRIP Surplus 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition 
caucus is pleased once again to present some of the many, many 
questions we have received from our very popular "Mr. 
Premier, I want to know" initiative. It seems that the people of 
the province have a lot they want to say to you, Mr. Premier. 
Here are just a few of the things that they are asking. 
 
This question comes from David Davis from Estevan. Mr. 
Premier, your Finance minister feels that the agriculture 
industry was dealt a severe blow by the federal Liberals. And if 
she feels this way, why did she take 189 million farm dollars 
from these same people? Where is the justice? Is a surplus more 
important than the people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, I certainly would like to have 
the chance to respond to David. Certainly the constituent is 
accurate in pointing out that we have been dealt a very serious 
blow by the federal Liberal government. They have taken away 
our Crow benefit. They have not replaced it with a plan, have 
not made decisions. We don't know if even the paltry 1.6 billion 
that we are getting . . . we don't know how we're getting it or 
when we're getting it. We don't know what branch lines are 
going to be abandoned. 
 
Mr. Goodale says that don't worry, it won't be that bad, but 
nobody's saying what will happen. So obviously that is a very 
dramatic hit on Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
As to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) surplus, Mr. 
Speaker, we put back $130 million of our GRIP surplus into 
agriculture. The federal government chose to put out less than  



March 21, 1995 

 
1016 

50 per cent of theirs back into agriculture. So I think on balance 
we are the government that is supporting and fighting for 
farmers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Fuel Tax 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a question for the Premier. This comes from Kazim Karp 
from Speers. Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are taxing 
the heck out of farmers, i.e. 15 cents per litre gas tax, 9 per cent 
tax on our grain trucks and parts and etc. Alberta farmers pay 
half the price we do for farm fuel. Don't you understand that 
farmers are the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 
for that question. Obviously I don't agree with the fundamental 
proposition or assumption behind the question because it 
indicates, in the wording of it, a taxing of the farmers. What the 
situation is of course, as the hon. member opposite will know 
being a part of the government of the day, was a very huge 
deficit and debt. 
 
And in approaching this very major fiscal problem that we have 
as Saskatchewan people, we try to do it in a balanced way, 
balanced and fair way where there would be reductions of 
government services, redesigning of government programs on 
the one hand to save money, and unfortunately given the size of 
the debt, taxation which is based on the principle of ability to 
pay. Nobody likes to pay taxes, that's for sure, but there is no 
singling out of any particular group in this area. 
 
Thankfully it's all beginning to pay off. The member knows that 
we have announced a balanced budget for '94-95, and in fact a 
surplus. And the surplus will be going down to the down 
payment of the debt, and for the next four years there will be 
further surpluses. And as the member also knows, in the budget 
we've announced a tax decrease on the deficit surcharge of 
$150 per taxpayer and up to $300 per two-family working 
incomes. So it is going in the right direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GRIP Surplus 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier as well. And this question comes from Eric P. Pankratz 
from Foam Lake. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why farmers are not on a level 
playing-field with farmers from Manitoba and Alberta. All their 
federal and provincial GRIP premiums were used and 
distributed to farmers. As well, Saskatchewan lost federal 
dollars when GRIP was changed. You ripped us off. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to 
respond to Eric. That information is not correct. I would submit 
that Saskatchewan farmers are indeed ahead of Alberta farmers  

at this point in time. We have negotiated a GRIP replacement 
with the federal government. Alberta has given notice to get out 
of GRIP, are trying to get their farmers out immediately, and 
they have no replacement program for their producers. 
 
In Saskatchewan our hog and cattle producers have NISA (net 
income stabilization account). In Alberta and Manitoba they 
have nothing. So, Mr. Speaker, it is quite clear that 
Saskatchewan producers at this point in time are ahead of our 
neighbouring provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question, to the 
Premier as well, comes from a constituent from the Kelvington 
area — Eugene Patenaude, I believe is how you pronounce the 
name. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are trying to kill the 
family farm. Today I received a statement from SCIC 
(Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation) stating an 
overpayment on the 1993 GRIP, a program you cancelled. Why 
don't you pay the consequences? I fail to see any positive action 
from your government to date. You take away part of our 
guaranteed income, and now you are killing us with health care 
cuts. What's next — our shirts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well thank you. I would be glad to 
respond to Eugene. And I'll probably get a chance to talk to him 
in person so I'll give a more detailed answer when I get a 
chance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we did not . . . we are not killing the family 
farm. We are doing all that we can to support and maintain the 
family farm. 
 
The payment that the question refers to is the GRIP surplus 
which would have accrued had we collected premiums from 
farmers. What that statement is that Eugene has and maybe 
doesn't understand is a statement that says that's what he would 
have paid had the program continued, and then at the end of the 
program, would have gotten that money back. What we've 
chosen to do is not collect the money so that we don't have to 
put him through the agony of borrowing the money and then 
receiving it back later. 
 
So when the program winds down, there will be $26 million left 
in the GRIP surplus which will be paid back to farmers on top 
of having their '93 and '94 payments deferred. 
 
So we again treated farmers as fairly as we could on the GRIP 
surplus. We put 130 million of our share of that surplus back 
into agriculture, into things that will help farmers to adapt and 
change to the new future and help us survive the hit that we've 
taken from the federal government on the Crow. 
 
So we're certainly working to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 



March 21, 1995 

 
1017 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
comes from Mr. M. Scott Morvik from Eastend, Saskatchewan, 
located smack in the south-west corner of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and south of the Cypress Hills, the home of Scotty the 
Tyrannosaurus rex. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know where all my GRIP money went. 
Near as I can figure you slipped about 300 million of producers' 
money which should have been returned to those who paid the 
premiums, not thrown into some new program I want no part 
of. Mr. Premier, will you answer Scott today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, speaking of 
dinosaurs, I think the two political parties opposite are the only 
ones who want to go back to '91 GRIP. I think if you test with 
farmers, they've moved on and are ready to adapt into the new 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers are getting back their share of the GRIP 
surplus the same way that we wound down tripartites for beef 
and hogs and honey; the surpluses were redistributed to the 
people who contributed them, and in addition to that we've 
taken most of our provincial share and put it back into 
agriculture. So I think on balance that that has been a very fair 
treatment of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is also to the Premier and I am pleased that he has seen 
it appropriate to selectively answer some of them. Since this 
question pertains to him in particular, perhaps he will deign us 
with an answer. 
 
And this question comes from Elroy Schneider from St. 
Walburg, and he asks: Mr. Premier, since I am quitting farming, 
having gone broke because of your GRIP changes, why can't 
my share of the total $180 million GRIP fund be paid directly to 
me so I can pay off my creditors? If not, would you consider 
returning the government contribution of your pension plan to 
the government coffers? Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again the farmers' 
share of GRIP surplus is being returned to them. In fact better 
than waiting until the program is wound down and paying it out 
at that time, we have taken the extra step of deferring payments 
so that they haven't had to make the payments in '94 that would 
then be refunded to them. So again I think the answer is the 
same as before. We have treated the farmers under GRIP as 
fairly as we could, given the financial burden that we have in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rail Strike Legislation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have  

just heard from a number of Saskatchewan farmers who believe 
this government has attacked farm families in this province. 
And now the NDP (New Democratic Party) in Ottawa has 
teamed up with the Quebec separatists to block back-to-work 
legislation to end the rail strike. In fact this morning I heard a 
former NDP MLA, John Solomon, defending the obstructive 
tactics of the NDP caucus. I know the Premier likes to say, a 
Tory is a Tory is a Tory. Well a New Democrat is a New 
Democrat is a New Democrat. And New Democrats like John 
Solomon are putting their union friends' interests ahead of the 
best interests of Saskatchewan farmers and other industries. 
 
Mr. Premier, have you spoken to your NDP colleagues in 
Ottawa? Have you explained to them how their NDP tactics are 
hurting our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that clearly we have been very consistent in 
our position that we would have appreciated and have wanted a 
negotiated settlement. 
 
And we made that clear as early as last Tuesday and introduced 
a motion in the House, worked on a motion in the House with 
the members of the opposition, that clearly stated the preference 
of this Assembly; not only the government but the members of 
the opposition, with the exception of trying to get the Liberals 
to vote on this motion because they simply weren't here for the 
vote. 
 
But to get to the point, we have had a position in this Assembly, 
opposition members and government members, that we 
supported a negotiated settlement. You've spoke to it; you voted 
for it. But at the end and as an end result when all else failed, 
the back-to-work legislation was in order. 
 
That legislation has now been introduced in the House of 
Commons and we see no reason at this point in time to hold it 
up, and that is our position, especially when you have both the 
union — the main union involved — and the railways also 
saying that back-to-work legislation is in order. And I quote: 
 
 CAW president Buzz Hargrove said in Toronto that he 

told both the Bloc and the NDP on Monday morning 
that there was absolutely no advantage or reason for 
them to delay the legislation. 

 
We agree with that. I hope that the members opposite agree. 
And later today we'll be introducing a motion under rule 17 that 
will ask for that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, maybe 
you should explain that to your federal counterparts then, 
because it is them, along with the Quebec separatists, that is  



March 21, 1995 

 
1018 

holding up this back-to-work legislation, and you're aware of 
that, and all Saskatchewan farm families are aware of that as 
well. 
 
This is very typical behaviour for the NDP and the Liberals in 
Ottawa. First the Liberals, including the Agriculture minister 
from Saskatchewan, attacked farmers in Saskatchewan by 
destroying the Crow. Then the NDP, including five NDP MPs 
from Saskatchewan, attacked farmers by blocking back-to-work 
legislation. That's your party that's doing that, Mr. Premier — 
standing for the union leaders instead of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I guess that's not surprising when you look and see how you 
people also attacked Saskatchewan farmers by gutting the GRIP 
program and taking $188 million away from farm families. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you pretend to speak for Saskatchewan 
farmers when you and your NDP colleagues in Ottawa attack 
farm families again and again and again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite, the Leader of the Conservative Party, would listen, he 
would know that what he says is absolute nonsense. 
 
The fact of the matter is that everyone wanted a negotiated 
settlement. You wanted a negotiated settlement; you voted for 
that motion last Tuesday. We wanted a negotiated settlement. 
We said at the end of the day if negotiations didn't work, 
back-to-work legislation would be in order. 
 
The railways agree with that position put by the legislature in 
Saskatchewan. The union, CAW (Canadian Auto Workers), 
agrees with that position. We're all in agreement. And for you to 
stand here and say that there's any other motive of anyone in 
this House or of the union or of the railway, is nothing short of 
playing politics with the lives and economic future of our 
farmers. And that is unfair. 
 
I say to you again that we have voted on this motion in the 
House, and I challenge you to support the motion which we are 
going to move under rule 17 later today which asks for speedy 
passage of the legislation . . . will see the grain and 
commodities moving in and out of the province by rail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Patronage Appointments 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
NDP government is becoming more and like their Tory 
predecessors of old. It has become secretive, arrogant, and 
defensive. And yesterday we tabled a memo which advised the 
dismissal of all members of the SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) board with no consideration at all for 
their qualifications as board members. 
 
The Premier would not even defend his own actions. Today I  

ask the Premier once again: was it NDP practice to dismiss 
Saskatchewan people from their board appointments just 
because they weren't New Democrats? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on August 24, 1992 the 
Liberal leader speaking in this House on a discussion we had 
with respect to how the civil service should be competent and 
impartial, said the following, on page 2963: 
 
 I don't think that it's unreasonable for people, whether 

they be a New Democratic government or otherwise to 
hire people, whether they be New Democrats or 
anybody, as long as they're competent. 

 
That was your policy in 1992. I think that's a policy in 1992 
which she probably doesn't stick to in 1995. Certainly the 
federal Liberals don't stick to it, judging by their list of 
patronages in Saskatchewan and in Canada. I think it's a 
reasonable statement of our position. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan look to this particular Premier to tell 
the whole truth, whether it's about patronage or about Phoenix 
Advertising. People look to the Premier to bring the truth to 
light. And when the Premier won't answer serious allegations, 
when he buries the Phoenix report, people lose trust in his 
leadership. 
 
Let me refresh the memory of the Premier. Today I tabled two 
more lists generated by the Milenkovic memo — one for 
SaskTel, one from SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) — further evidence that entire 
boards were dismissed, Mr. Speaker, entire boards without 
evaluation, on the basis of nothing but pure politics. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you justify today, how, with no evaluation of 
these people, you arrived at a decision to simply dismiss all — 
all of them. If not politics, then what was the deciding factor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm more 
than happy to respond to the inconsistencies of the Liberal 
leader, the member for Greystone, who seems to take one 
position in 1992 in which, as the Premier has indicated, she 
indicates that it's unreasonable for people, whether they be New 
Democratic government or otherwise, to hire people whether 
they be new Democrats or anybody as long as they're 
competent. That's her position in 1992. 
 
I don't know what has changed, Mr. Speaker, because in recent 
days we have heard the Liberal leader talk about it from a 
different point of view, saying in fact that she would make 
patronage appointments. She has said that on the radio. She is 
quoted in the newspaper and she is quoted in other places. 
 
That's different than what the policy of this government is, Mr. 
Speaker, because the policy of this government is we will, as 
we have in the past, appoint people to boards and commissions 
who will support the policies of the government, who are 
competent and can do the job, and not because they would have  



March 21, 1995 

 
1019 

any particular ties to any particular affiliation. 
 
And there is a long and substantive list of people who have 
been appointed to boards and commissions who are clearly not 
New Democrats, including our present candidates of the Liberal 
Party in constituencies where they happen to have been 
nominated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Premier will 
have the courage to answer this one today. Mr. Speaker, on the 
issue of patronage there is no bigger patron for Phoenix 
Advertising than this particular government, a company that is 
the subject of a prosecutor’s report that the Justice minister 
refuses to make public. 
 
In 1993 the government referred the Milgaard case to the 
Alberta Justice minister on the grounds that the Saskatchewan 
government was too close to the issue. And the Saskatchewan 
Justice minister at the time, and I quote: we did that because 
two members of this legislature were involved in the 
investigation. End of quote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is too close to the Phoenix case as 
well. Phoenix has benefited from millions of dollars of 
government contracts. The Minister of Economic Development, 
as it is apparent, has worked out of the office. And the 
connections go on and on. 
 
In these cases, Mr. Speaker, standard practice is to refer the 
issue out of province. 
 
My question to the Premier is: given that your Justice minister 
refused to make the prosecutor’s report public, will you now do 
the right thing, Mr. Premier, and refer the report to an ethics 
commissioner in one of our neighbouring provinces for an 
impartial review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
point out to the member from Greystone, the Liberal leader, 
who from day to day seems to change her position on almost 
every issue that there is in the front of Saskatchewan, and read 
to her a letter that has come from one of the people in the 
industry, Tap Communications Inc., in which clearly they say 
 and this is not the only one; they all support the policy of 
open tendering, where people can bid openly for advertising, 
communications work  in which Mr. Penner says, I remember 
a time not so long ago when there was no opportunity to bid on 
government work. The change that you have instituted is still 
very refreshing, and we look forward to future competitions. 
 
That's a vindication of the policy of this government, and that's 
clearly different than what exists with Liberal governments, as 
is the case in Ottawa under the federal Liberal administration 
which this Liberal leader supports, Mr. Speaker, and is a part 
of. 

And I want to quote to you and the House, Barrie McKenna, 
parliamentary bureau, who recently reported the first major 
piece of government advertising business awarded under new 
policy guidelines introduced last May by Public Works 
minister, David Dingwall, was split by two agencies with close 
Liberal ties — Vickers & Benson Advertising Ltd. of Toronto 
and BCP Stratégie Créativité of Montreal. Both companies had 
lent some of their top talent to help the Liberals get elected in 
the 1993 campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's Liberal policy. That's not the policy of this 
New Democratic . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ACS Employee Conflict of Interest 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, on Friday 
you promised to investigate what appears to be a conflict of 
interest by an ACS employee who was moonlighting as a 
private bill collector. Mr. Minister, what have you found out 
about the matter and what action are you taking? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we are still reviewing 
this matter, and we will continue to do that until we are satisfied 
whether or not there is any conflict of interest or any 
wrongdoing. And we will investigate this very carefully. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, farmers — and there are 
thousands of them in this province who deal with ACS — need 
to be certain that their confidential files are not being misused. 
Already on last Friday afternoon, you were saying that there 
was no indication that information was used improperly, that 
you had already had a quick look at it, that this individual has 
not taken the personal files of Saskatchewan farmers with him 
to his private bill-collecting job. And yet you have the audacity 
to stand in the House on Tuesday now and say that you haven't 
done anything yet. And you were quick to point out to the 
media on Friday afternoon that there was no impropriety. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's not acceptable. Bring the whole goods to 
the House as you've got them, and tell the farmers of this 
province that their records have not been misused. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know where 
again the member is coming from. On Friday he brought it to 
the House, which was the first time it had been brought to my 
attention. I of course immediately telephoned out to ACS to get 
information. 
 
The initial information I got is that we have not found any  



March 21, 1995 

 
1020 

conflict of interest. Now we are certainly continuing to 
investigate, as the member opposite is asking, to investigate this 
thoroughly, and of course we will. And it is impossible to 
investigate thoroughly in one day a file as serious as this. 
 
The member is making serious allegations and I certainly hope 
that he has some information for those allegations. And if he 
has information that would help us to investigate this, I wish he 
would bring them forward because we are going to get to the 
bottom of it. We view this as a serious charge, which indeed it 
is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I remind you, and this is the 
conflict of interest formula that all government employees have 
to subscribe to: a conflict of interest in any situation in which a 
public employee attempts to promote a private or personal 
interest which results, or appears to result, in a gain or an 
advantage by virtue of his position in the public service. End 
quote. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when Falcon was contacted on Friday, they 
denied that this individual even worked for them. And yet you 
know full well that to be the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, whether any impropriety occurred or not, there 
are thousands of farm families in this province who have had 
their confidential information accessible by this individual, who 
then works for a private bill-collecting agency, whether they 
want to acknowledge it or not. And what we want from you is 
what action you've taken on this issue; are you not just going to 
sweep it under the rug, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I agree 
with the member opposite. We should investigate this carefully. 
He's made a very serious allegation and I hope, when we do get 
to the bottom of this, that there is some grounds for his 
allegation and he's not just playing politics with somebody's 
name. 
 
But we certainly are going to investigate this very thoroughly. 
You asked me what I've done. We took a very quick, 
preliminary look at it, did not find any wrongdoing or misuse of 
information. 
 
We certainly are going to continue until we investigate this 
very, very thoroughly. And if indeed there was inappropriate 
action taken, or if information was misused, then we will take 
very strong appropriate action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's not for ministerial 
statements that I rise, but it is to ask leave to introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you a group of English as second language 
students, eight of them seated in the Speaker's gallery, who are 
with us here today and were here for question period. 
 
I know that all members recognize this program as being part of 
the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) program here in the province. And I want to wish 
the students a warm welcome to the Assembly, and look 
forward to meeting with them — or the member for 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden — shortly after we complete our task here 
in the House. So we look forward to meeting with you. I'm sure 
all members would want to welcome the students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, a colleague who sat in the House 
from 1956 to 1967  behind the bar, Mr. Wilf Gardiner, who 
was the minister of Public Works in the Thatcher government 
from 1964 to 1967. 
 
And I ask all members to join me in welcoming our colleague 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Expropriation Act and 
The Expropriation Procedure Act (Land and Chattels) 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Expropriation Act and The Expropriation 
Procedure Act (Land and Chattels). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that a Bill to amend The Student Assistance and Student 
Aid Fund Act, 1985 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 



March 21, 1995 

 
1021 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Teachers' 
Federation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Teachers' Federation Act be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Disposition of Federal Legislation 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 17 to move a motion of urgent . . . before 
orders of the day, to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. I wrote to you as pursuant to the rules, Mr. Speaker, 
earlier today to inform you that I wish to move a motion in the 
Assembly this afternoon respecting the disposition of the 
federal legislation designed to resolve the current impasse 
between labour and management which is reflected in rail 
transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a very urgent matter, and I ask you 
to rule on it now. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I'd like to speak to the rule 17 motion as the 
member has brought it up. 
 
The Speaker: — As members full know, under the new rules 
the member gives notice and then the Speaker will decide 
whether or not it is in order. 
 
I wish to inform the members that the request for priority of 
debate under rule 17 was received in the Clerk's office at 11:43 
a.m. today. Revised rules for discussing matters of urgent 
public importance were adopted by this Assembly on March 1, 
1994. This notice has not met the time requirements for filing 
the notice pursuant to rule 17.2. 
 
Also under rule 17.2, the notice is required to contain a 
statement why the matter is of urgent public importance. In this 
case, I find the member has not attempted to make his case in 
his written notice as required under the rule, but rather appears 
to be simply giving notice of his intention to request leave to 
proceed with the motion. 
 
I therefore find that the notice does not fulfil the requirements 
for priority of debate under rule 17. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And then, Mr. 
Speaker, with leave of the Assembly and pursuant to rule 42, I  

would like to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
And that is a motion that would address the labour-management 
dispute that we have before us with regards to the federal 
government's dealing with that dispute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion goes like this: 
 
 That this Assembly urge all federal members of parliament 

to cooperate in reaching an immediate conclusion to the 
current labour-management dispute. And we demand that 
the federal government immediately begin work on a 
national transportation policy which would protect our 
producers on products by ensuring that Saskatchewan 
maintains its reputation as a reliable supplier of export 
products. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 
 

National Transportation Policy Urged 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the leave 
of the Assembly to be able to rise and speak on this issue today. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, it is a very important issue that we 
face before us. And that is, in the whole terms of moving 
products to port and ensuring that Saskatchewan producers are 
able to maintain their livelihoods and ensure that the 
Saskatchewan economy is to survive, that we must address any 
crises that might come before us. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the process on this side of the 
House — and I believe very, very strongly in — is the 
negotiation process, the collective bargaining process. But there 
are times, Mr. Speaker, when those processes do not succeed. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is one of those times. And when they do 
not succeed, it is incumbent upon governments to ensure that 
the nation as a whole does not suffer any consequences that 
might be negative to the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole transportation issue has become quite 
controversial the last few weeks and that you will know that the 
federal government moved to destroy the age-old tradition of 
the Crow benefit and the transportation policy in this country. 
They did it, Mr. Speaker, first of all, without any thought as to 
how the payment should be made. Secondly, they did it without 
any transportation . . . without any thought as to how the 
transportation industry in this country should be organized. 
 
We need and we have been calling for on this side of the House 
from Saskatchewan for years a national transportation policy 
that will address the needs and concerns of not only the people 
in the transportation industry, but also those people who 
produce the products, who process the products, and who 
market the products abroad. 
 



March 21, 1995 

 
1022 

Without a national transportation policy, Mr. Speaker, a policy 
that would outline transportation corridors, an organization of 
the industry from the ship's hold right back to the primary 
producer no matter how many steps that would take . . . It is 
important that we do that, Mr. Speaker. Because without that, 
the consequence can be what we're seeing today. 
 
And the result of what we're seeing today, the potential, the 
strike, lockout situation is that Canada might lose its advantage 
in the world markets with regards to the very valuable and high 
quality products that we produce. Whether it be potash, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it be uranium or grain or any other product, it 
is important that the federal government maintain its 
responsibility. 
 
Now a national transportation policy, Mr. Speaker, is something 
that I have no idea why the federal government is not pursuing. 
We see strikes, lockouts, labour disputes across this country 
from time to time. Although for the most part they're negotiated 
settlements, but from time to time we see impasses. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, with a national transportation policy 
where everybody knows where they fit in the scheme of things 
and the importance and how they're . . . what their job is in 
terms of getting our products to market and how important that 
job is, could go a long way to alleviating these types of 
disputes. 
 
We must maintain the collective bargaining process; it is 
essential. But with a more organized system, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that we could see these processes go along much more 
smoothly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I call upon and we call upon all the federal 
members of parliament to immediately cooperate and find a 
conclusion to the current labour-management dispute, because 
this is that important. We call upon the federal government to 
not only begin work but to consult all the other provinces, to 
have input from every province in Canada, with regards to a 
national transportation policy. 
 
We have to have input, not only from the provinces but beyond 
that as well. We have to have input from the rail system, from 
the trucking industry, from the ports, from the producers and 
the manufacturers and all those others who are so important to 
the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen in the past few days what I would 
call a very, very weak Minister of Agriculture in Canada, where 
we see the federal minister, Mr. Speaker, not standing up for the 
farmers of western Canada with regards to the inadequacy of 
the buy-out of the Crow benefit. 
 
Now the federal Liberal government wanted to destroy the . . . 
or tried to put the nail in the coffin of prairie farmers by taking 
away, eliminating, the Crow benefit, using GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) as the excuse. I would wonder 
why, Mr. Speaker, they would not challenge the U.S. (United 
States) government to eliminate the export enhancement  

program. 
 
Why does the export enhancement program have nothing to do 
with the GATT negotiations, or very little? Or why doesn't it 
have to be cancelled if the Liberal government is claiming that 
the GATT process forced them to cancel the Crow benefit? 
 
These types of moves, Mr. Speaker, simply do not fall in favour 
of Saskatchewan farmers. And secondly, when they destroyed 
the Crow benefit, when they took it away, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan were left in the lurch with regards to any 
organization of how that were to be paid out. 
 
And this is all part of the transportation system, Mr. Speaker, 
for the future. If we don't have these organizations in 
transportation, we're going to lose. So we have western farmers 
. . . I had a call the other day from a farmer who said, I want to 
lease land. He said, do I include . . . I want to include the fact 
that the federal Minister of Agriculture says that the landowner 
only is going to get the payment of the Crow benefit, the 
pay-out of the Crow benefit. And he says, I want to include that 
into my lease, my bid for the lease. But, he says, I have other 
people, other farmers around me who are much older than I am, 
much more established than I am, who are saying they're not 
going to take that into account. So I, as a young farmer, am 
being discriminated against. 
 
And Mr. Goodale in Ottawa and the Liberals have not put 
forward a plan whereby this young farmer can make an 
informed decision or compete with an established farmer to rent 
land. Is that the kind of scenario that we need in Saskatchewan? 
 
We see the federal minister putting forward a policy saying the 
landowners are going to be paid, and then getting down on his 
knees and begging the banks and other financial institutions 
into flowing that payment through to the renters. He gets down 
on his knees to provincial governments and say, well maybe 
provincial government should enact some legislation to make 
this payment flow through to renters. 
 
Well what kind of an organization, Mr. Speaker, in the industry, 
in the whole industry, do we have with a person that is not 
competent enough to put out a plan of action to reinforce his 
political policy, his public policy? 
 
I mean it may be great politics, he may think it's great politics, 
but, Mr. Speaker, mark my words, this is going to backfire on 
Mr. Goodale. 
 
I've seen a number of issues come up at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) meeting, 
the transportation issues and how it affects producers of 
Saskatchewan, from the young person trying to establish a lease 
and establish what grains to grow so that he knows what his 
transportation rates . . . and before he knows what his 
transportation rate is, as the case is right now, people making 
seeding plans without knowing what the rate might be after July 
31. 
 



March 21, 1995 

 
1023 

Mr. Speaker, this minister, federal Minister of Agriculture from 
Saskatchewan, has sorely let down the people of this province 
— sorely. That is why we have to in this House, again bring 
forward — and I would hope that the members from the Liberal 
Party would hang around and vote this time — bring forward a 
motion to encourage all those members of parliament in Ottawa 
to come to a conclusion and stop the lock/strike-out position 
with the rail unions so that we can get our products moving 
again. 
 
(1430) 
 
And more importantly, or as importantly, or maybe more 
importantly than that, Mr. Speaker, to have the federal 
government, have this House, with hopefully the Liberal 
members voting this time, encouraging the federal party, the 
federal Liberal government, to put forward at least a framework 
or start the process to put forward a framework for a national 
transportation policy that will ensure the prairie farmers, potash 
producers and other producers and manufacturers can maintain 
their position in the world markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish we didn't have to do this. But as I said at 
the SARM meeting the other day up in Saskatoon that I 
attended, question after question after question of Mr. Goodale 
was put forward on his ability to organize this portfolio and to 
influence the transportation industry to help organize the 
agriculture industry to maintain our position in the world 
markets. 
 
Why would the people have to stand up and ask the questions? 
They asked the questions because he was unable, he was not 
able, incompetent, not able to do his job. And I think 
Saskatchewan farmers are finally seeing that. 
 
I want to repeat, using GATT — and this really irks me — 
using GATT as an excuse to take away the Crow benefit which 
is an integral part of our transportation system, Mr. Speaker; not 
saying a word, actually not really telling the truth, because 
GATT doesn't say we have to take away the Crow benefit. 
 
GATT said we had to make our programs green. Did the 
Americans use GATT to take away EEP (export enhancement 
program)? If the federal Government of Canada, federal Liberal 
government puts forward a policy to pay $1.6 billion out to the 
farm landowners to compensate them for the decrease in land 
price . . . because that's his argument. Because he didn't put 
forward a flow-through, although after that he tried to start 
making up . . . trying to talk other people into it. 
 
Where's the compensation, Mr. Speaker? Where is Mr. Goodale 
when it comes to compensation for the damage that the export 
enhancement program has placed upon the farm families of 
Saskatchewan? Where was Mr. Goodale when the subsidy, the 
EEP subsidy on barley, was more than half of the export price 
of barley? Where was he? 
 
Was he fighting for Saskatchewan farmers? Did they work on 
the program on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers? I think not. I  

think all Mr. Goodale did was use GATT as an excuse to cut yet 
more support for Saskatchewan farm families, and indeed the 
whole Saskatchewan economy — a federal minister from 
Saskatchewan who should know better and should have more 
heart than to do something like that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know other colleagues want to join in this 
debate, so I will take my place. But I would urge all members of 
this House, all members of this House to support this motion. 
Because it is important that we have unanimous support. 
 
Now I don't know if the Liberal members are going to vote on 
this or not. They've missed all the other votes when it comes to 
their federal counterparts. But I encourage them to stand in your 
place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well you can wipe your 
brow, Madam Leader of the Liberal Party, but it's true; you 
walked out. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member knows that 
it's a standing tradition here in this House that you do not refer 
to a member not being present or absent in this House. The 
member is not to refer to the presence or absentee of a member 
in this House. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I did know that and I just 
got a little incensed by the actions of the Liberal leader. So I 
apologize for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move that this Assembly, 
seconded by the member from Melville: 
 
 That this Assembly urge all federal members of 

parliament to cooperate in reaching an immediate 
conclusion to the current labour-management dispute; 
and we demand that the federal government 
immediately begin work on a national transportation 
policy which would protect our producers and products 
by ensuring that Saskatchewan maintains its reputation 
as a reliable supplier of export products. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with great 
pleasure that I'm able to enter this debate. I talked about the . . . 
last week on the emergency debate on the labour problems and 
labour disputes at the west coast, and I talked about the 
importance of having a transportation system that functions 
300, 365 days a year. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes talking a 
little bit about what's happening in my own community in 
Melville. It is a railroad terminal. And my friends and my 
neighbours, and in fact my brother, have been out on the picket 
line. And a big percentage of these individuals are also farmers. 
These are my farm neighbours and my friends. What they're 
telling me, what they told me yesterday, is that there's no 
transportation policy; something has been taken away and  



March 21, 1995 

 
1024 

there's nothing there to replace it. 
 
And I also heard stories about how in the last 6, 7, 8 years, 
there's no repairs being done on the tracks and on the cars. 
They're just being run and run and run and nobody's inspecting 
them, nobody's repairing them. And we all know what's been 
happening. 
 
There's been quite a few costly derailments in the last little 
while. And when I talk to the employees in Melville and I say, 
what seems to be going on, they say, well that's simple; I mean 
nothing gets fixed any more. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a farmer in the fall when you're getting 
ready to harvest and if you don't go through your combine and 
check all the chains and the bearings and the belts and repair 
them prior to harvest and replace them, I can guarantee you're 
going to be doing it during harvest, and you're going to have 
problems. That's the way the Canadian National Railway has 
been operating in the last few years. They have not been 
repairing; they've just been patchwork. 
 
Short of employees; overtime, overtime, overtime. No plan as 
far as replacing employees. I mean when I hired out on the 
railroad, Mr. Speaker, in 1971, I worked till 1977. And when I 
resigned in 1977 I had as many people in front of me in 
seniority as I had behind me. And if I was in that workplace 
today, I would have very few behind me. Everybody behind me 
has been weeded out. So you're looking at a lot of employees 
with a tremendous amount of service, and they still want to try 
and do some more cutting but they don't know where to start. 
 
About four or five years ago, my niece got hired out and she 
worked for a couple summers while she was going to 
university. She got her degree, she worked till Christmas time, 
and she had some health problems so she was off for a couple 
of months. And now that she had her degree she thought maybe 
she would resign — 23-years-old, Mr. Speaker. She thought she 
maybe would resign. But she thought she'd see what would 
happen. 
 
Well lo and behold, if in March she didn't get a letter from the 
company that if she would resign she'd get a $65,000 buy-out. 
A 23-year-old employee. A $65,000 buy-out; $45,000 into an 
RRSP (registered retirement savings plan). 
 
And now they've got no employees. Now they're wondering 
where they're going to go. And they blame the workers. And the 
workers are not necessarily always the ones that should take the 
brunt of this because it's management that made the decision on 
buying out young employees, employees that had a future in the 
company. And what did they do? They bought them out. 
 
And then they went to the older employees in the same contract 
and said, we've got this idea of a furlough board. Well what the 
furlough board means, Mr. Speaker, is you can sit at home 
when you're not needed, do nothing, and get 80 per cent of your 
wages. Eighty per cent of your wages to sit at home. That was  

the company's proposal; that wasn't the union's proposal. And 
then they wonder why there's a problem. 
 
It's been a problem with CN (Canadian National) management 
for a millennium — that they don't know how to run a railroad. 
And it's showing up, year in and year out. 
 
And the answer is not necessarily to say, oh bingo, let's get 
everything back to work and everything will be happy again. 
Sure, the symptoms will go away, our products will move, and 
we all would applaud that. But we've got to get to the bottom of 
the problem about relationship between the railroad and the 
workers. 
 
It would be just like if you had a horse in a barn, and it had a 
broken barn door and the horse keeps getting out all the time. 
You've got two choices: you can fix the barn door or shoot the 
horse. If you shoot the horse, the horse isn't getting out of the 
barn door any more, but you still have a broken barn door and 
you're not going to have a horse. But if you tie the horse up, 
take some time to fix the barn door, you'll have something that's 
functioning again. 
 
And that's the problem that's been happening over the years in 
transportation — the railroad, the dock workers — is that 
there's been no concise plan put forward whereby there's a 
long-term relationship between the workers and between 
management where there's not going to be problems, because 
there's always knee-jerk reactions to situations that arise 
overnight. And no long commitment, no plan. 
 
And that's what's been lacking in this country. When we see the 
Crow gone, of course farmers are wondering, where's our 
product going to go? The railroad workers and farmers, my 
neighbours, are saying, well I don't know where my product's 
going to go; and as an employee of the railroad, I don't where 
my job is going to go. Because I don't know where my product's 
going to go, which direction it's going to go. 
 
Will I have a job in transportation or won't I have a job in 
transportation? If I don't have a job in transportation, how's my 
product going to get to work that I do as a farmer when I'm not 
working on the railroad? 
 
And that is the key to the question today. It's not whether they 
should be legislated back or whether they shouldn't be 
legislated back. What we need is a long-term plan in 
transportation that's going to function and function smooth, so 
that farmers and workers and companies that move the grain 
will have their product moved through the system smoothly, 
efficiently, and on time so that everybody gets the most out of 
the system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, until we achieve that, nothing's going to 
change. Like I said before, nothing will change — we'll always 
have work stoppages and slow-downs and problems within the 
system. And that's why it's encompassing that the companies, 
the unions, and the government set aside sort of all their 
differences, and they have to come out with a plan. 



March 21, 1995 

 
1025 

And I guess it boils down to the federal government having to 
take leadership in this area. Somebody has to take the 
leadership. So that, Mr. Speaker, is why I wanted to rise today 
to speak on the importance of the resolution. I feel that as a 
member from Melville, where it is a railroad terminal, a farming 
area, a major farming area in the province, and like I said 
before, with friends and neighbours farming and working on the 
railroad, people that I know well, I felt that I had to speak out 
today on this. 
 
And I think it's — like I said before — it's very, very important 
because we need to have an efficient system. So with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm going to close my remarks and thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to get 
into this debate today, but somewhat confused from listening to 
the remarks from the member from Humboldt and the member 
from Melville. In fact it's of no surprise to anyone who's been 
following the problems with grain handling disputes, the fact 
that the member from Humboldt would try and actually remove 
themselves from some of the problems that their cousins in 
Ottawa are creating for the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and that's in fact why they brought in a softly worded 
motion today. And in fact at the end of my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, I will move an amendment to the motion which will, I 
think, more clearly focus on what the problem really is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In fact when I look at today's Leader-Post, Tuesday, March 21, 
now the member from Humboldt and the member from Melville 
were both trying to lay the blame of this dispute at the feet of 
the federal government, but in fact that's not where it is at all. In 
fact the headline says: "Foes slow Grit rail bill". And foes — 
well let's talk about who those foes are, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
quote from the first couple of paragraphs: 
 
 A rail strike that has derailed commuters and paralysed 

grain shipments could last until late this week or into 
next week after the Bloc Quebecois and NDP (the 
cousins of those people across) sidetracked a 
back-to-work bill Monday. 

 
(1445) 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill that means so much to this 
province and so much to the working people — the farmers, the 
people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it goes on: 
 
 The Liberal government's attempt to fast-track the 

legislation was blocked when the BQ and NDP refused 
to waive the usual 48-hour notice and allow the bill to 
be introduced. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, clearly it's the federal government that's trying  

to move on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan and bring 
this to some sort of a conclusion so that we don't put the 
agri-business of Saskatchewan and the farmers in Saskatchewan 
in a position where they can't move their product. 
 
And you know when I hear the rhetoric from the member from 
Humboldt . . . You know it's obvious that the fact the problem 
the grain shipments are being held up has nothing to do with the 
Minister of Agriculture and Agri-food and for the federal 
government. However we do know that the member from 
Humboldt is playing some petty politics. In fact in his silly 
game of politics, on one hand he's trying to protect the unions 
who they hope will come out and help them at election time, 
and on the other hand he's hoping that they can do this in such a 
fashion as to perhaps not put seats like his own into jeopardy. 
Well I'm telling him, he might as well do the right thing for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan because your seat's gone anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, actually we've had a few calls today already on 
this issue. And you know what they're saying? There's a lot of 
concern out there in Canada, but in Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan, that perhaps what's really happening is a bit of a 
trade-off. Now the people find it so strange that in fact the NDP 
and Bloc Québécois would join forces in halting up this very, 
very important legislation which means so much to the farmers 
of this province. 
 
But in fact, what they're curious about is perhaps there was a 
deal struck where — and I'm not the one saying that there has 
been; I'm just telling what we're hearing, and the concerns of 
the people — that there's been a deal struck that perhaps if the 
Bloc Québécois will support the NDP's protection of the unions 
in the province or in Canada, that perhaps the . . . on the other 
hand, the New Democrats are going to help the Bloc Québécois 
in, in fact, destroying Canada. 
 
I can only hope that's not the case, but it makes one wonder 
when we see such stuff coming from the member from 
Humboldt and the member from Melville. They are not standing 
up in their places to defend the farmers as they would like to 
have people believe. 
 
In fact when we talk about the problems that are coming up — 
it seems like day after day after day now — that farmers are 
facing moving the grain from their farm gate until it's loaded on 
the vessel and shipped to other countries, do you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that it goes through some 20-odd labour contracts? 
Twenty contracts that have to be dealt in one form or another 
before the farmers of this province and the farmers of Canada 
can be assured that they can go out and on their own become 
what in this House we keep saying they have to be — the best 
they can be in the agri-food business. 
 
And you people are just going to stand there, play politics . . . 
and labour contract after labour contract — they can do this 
some 20 times, Mr. Speaker, and this isn't fair to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that they would play these kind of games. 
 
But you know, one thing that is going to be a bit of a surprise, I  



March 21, 1995 

 
1026 

think, if the members opposite would pick up today's 
Leader-Post and take a look at what the farm groups are saying. 
In fact I heard on the radio today where the president of 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Leroy Larsen, was making 
comments that perhaps, you know, these labour disputes are in 
fact going to put our reputation as a reliable supplier of 
commodities at risk throughout the world at a time when we 
really can't afford . . . we're talking about diversification. We're 
talking about farmers taking a risk, trying to move themselves 
into other products and other commodities. 
 
What they can't stand, Mr. Speaker, is to have forces that are 
outside of their control — labour disputes — affect the 
shipments of their product, stop their income so that they don't 
have a chance, especially now when we're only a few weeks 
away from spring seeding in the south-west part of the 
province. 
 
And look at what you're doing. People are out there. They have 
to have this product moved to port. They're buying fertilizer. 
They're buying seed. They're repairing equipment. And you 
know what you're doing, you and your cousins in Ottawa? 
You're putting it all at risk. And I say shame on you — shame 
on you. 
 
Let's see what a few other people are saying, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact here's a quote from Jim Feeny of CN Rail. 
 
 "We felt the only way this thing would be quickly 

resolved was through legislation. If (the Bill) is delayed, 
it will cause further impact on customers . . ." 

 
 "(The delay) will impose more hardship and will cost 

customers more." 
 
Exactly what I was saying here, Mr. Speaker, yet I don't hear 
those members speaking on behalf of the farmers. What they 
would rather do is lay blame on somebody's feet when all they 
really and truly have to do is phone up their federal cousins, Mr. 
Speaker, and they should be able to do that because a handful 
of them or the majority of the federal party . . . if it is called a 
party; I have no idea what the status of the federal New 
Democrats is today. But if they would just pick up the phone 
and tell them how important this means to the farmers out here. 
 
You know it's . . . I'm sure that there are times when it's best for 
them to perhaps promote the unions — closer to election times 
 for the federal guys. But don't you see how you're . . . You 
know you're not only playing foolish politics, but you're putting 
the farmers at risk just before an election here in the province. 
And I think that's going to come around and haunt you soon. 
 
Let's see what other people say. Here is Patty Rosher of the 
Canadian Wheat Board in Winnipeg: 
 
 Farmers can't ship grain this week because last week's 

product is still backed up, said Patty Rosher of the 
Canadian Wheat Board in Winnipeg. Delays will cost 
the grain industry millions, she added. 

They're going to cost millions, she added. Now here again we 
go. You know the members opposite talk about the lack of 
support through transportation subsidies, lack of financial 
support through the federal budget. And yet time after time after 
time . . . it doesn't matter if we're talking GRIP contracts which 
they broke through retroactive legislation against the farmers, 
but what they did, Mr. Speaker, was they left — I think it was 
— some $300 million from the federal government, they left it 
on the table because they refused to put their own up because 
they don't have faith of the agri-business here, right here in 
Saskatchewan; should be ashamed. 
 
Let's see what others have to say. 
 
 The largest handler of Prairie grain is already feeling the 

pinch. 
 
 At the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Vancouver terminal, 

grain handlers loaded two ships Monday, but the facility 
has only enough grain to load vessels for a couple more 
days. 

 
I could go on and on and on of quotes from some of the people 
involved in the agri-food business, but you know it even goes 
beyond that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we're talking about potash, how's that going to affect the 
shipments of potash which, you know, for the jobs of this 
province, for the finances, the taxation they bring in, from the 
movement of potash in this province, and they're also putting 
that at risk. 
 
They're not prepared to fight for those jobs up in the potash 
mines, because they feel that it's appropriate for the federal 
cousins, the NDP in Ottawa, to carry on with such behaviour, 
making deals behind people's backs, just for their own political 
achievements. 
 
You know, and we have Ford Canada. I guess they've closed 
down one plant already and looking at perhaps closing more 
down. We have steel. That's affecting IPSCO right here in 
Regina. I don't think the members opposite realize the impact of 
what they're doing when they allow their federal counterparts 
. . . and they know them well; I mean they're all from the same 
ridings right here in the province. But they're not willing to take 
a stand for the right people in this province, the ones that aren't 
trying to make a go of it off somebody else's back, but are out 
there fighting for themselves on their own farms. And where 
are you people? Nowhere to be seen again. 
 
In fact it was yesterday that the federal New Democrat, Bill 
Blaikie from Winnipeg Transcona, spoke strongly against 
Lucienne Robillard's back-to-work legislation in the debate 
yesterday. Well it's one thing for Bill Blaikie to stand up, 
protect the unions and not really care what happens in this 
province, but I'll tell you it's quite another when members 
across are not going to stand up and fight for the farmers. 
 
Well I'll tell you, within months you're going to have to go to  



March 21, 1995 

 
1027 

the polls and you're going to have explain some of your actions. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move an amendment to the 
motion by: 
 
 Removing all the words after "that" and substituting 

them with the following: 
 
 this Assembly urge the Premier to immediately 

communicate with his federal colleagues in the New 
Democrat Party an urgent message imploring the federal 
NDP to cease their obstruction of federal back-to-work 
legislation that would force an end to the current rail 
strike and enable Saskatchewan farmers to get their 
grain to port. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Regina North West, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you read 
carefully the first motion and that: "That this Assembly urge all 
members of the federal parliament . . ." I believe that covers 
every member of every party, and which is covered I believe in 
the member's amendment. 
 
So I would ask you to look carefully to see that the motion is in 
order or not, on that basis. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I've listened to the member's point of order 
but I find the amendment in order, and debate will continue on 
the amendment and the main motion. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very happy to 
enter into this debate because not only do we have to cooperate 
in reaching an immediate conclusion to the federal 
labour-management dispute which impacts greatly on 
Saskatchewan farm families, the federal government also has to 
put its mind to a national transportation policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will likely know that by axing the Crow, 
federal Liberals left Saskatchewan producers in a very 
precarious position. Federal Finance minister Mr. Martin said 
he'd deliver almost $7 of spending cuts for every $1 of new tax 
revenue over the next three years. This saving is at farmers' 
expense and does not follow any long-term debt management 
plan. And beyond that, it is totally unfair to Saskatchewan as a 
region. 
 
Between 1995 and '96 and 1997-98, annual federal government 
department spending will drop by 1.4 billion in transportation 
and 450 million in agriculture. This is also at farmers' expense 
because program and service cuts will directly affect farmers 
and their families. 
 
Farmers need to get farmers' produce to port . . . the farmers'  

need — pardon me — to get their produce to port hasn't 
diminished. In fact it's increased because the farmers in 
Saskatchewan have been able to diversify their crop base to stay 
in farming. 
 
(1500) 
 
Eliminating the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) 
subsidy saves the federal government approximately 2.6 billion 
over the next five years. Farmers will now have to pay double 
the present freight rate. This is going to be a complete change in 
our rural farm families. The average producer's freight rate in 
1994-95 is $14 a tonne. This will more than double to about 
$31 a tonne. 
 
Here's how much it will cost people in my constituency to 
deliver their produce, just to show you the impact of not having 
some sort of a policy when you're making cuts: Cut Knife, 
present rate, $14.72 a tonne . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker 
 
The Speaker: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to have you rule on 
whether the member that is speaking to the motion or the 
amended motion is even anywhere remotely close to the topic. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have listened very carefully 
and I find the member is on the topic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I definitely am on the 
topic. 
 
I will continue showing the impact of the transportation policies 
and how they will impact people in my constituency. In Cut 
Knife, presently it costs $14.72 to deliver the grain, the freight 
rate, and it's going up to $31.07; Delmas, $14.27, it is going to 
cost $29.83; Lashburn, $14.04, it is going up to $29.18; 
Lloydminster, 13.82 up to 28.58; Maidstone — my home town 
— $14.04 up to $29.18; Marsden, $14.94 up to $31.73; 
Neilburg, $14.94 up to $31.73; Paynton, $14.27 presently, it 
will go up to $29.83; Waseca, $14.04, and now it is going to go 
up to $29.18. This is the implication of what is happening to us. 
 
The second phase of the federal government's changes to 
transportation policy next year will also revise the way the 
Canadian Wheat Board obtains revenue for movements through 
the St. Lawrence Seaway, further increasing freight rate for 
delivery points in most of Saskatchewan. What I do understand, 
Mr. Speaker, is that this change will completely redraw the map 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don't think that the member for Shaunavon or the 
member from Regina North West realize that. These two  



March 21, 1995 

 
1028 

developments result in an approximate loss of 320 million a 
year in net farm income in Saskatchewan — a drop in income 
of about 50 per cent for farm families. Any shortfall in grain 
prices will compound losses. 
 
It is paramount that the federal government, in cooperation with 
provincial governments, must immediately develop a 
transportation policy that will assist producers, municipalities, 
rural communities, and truckers. We cannot continue this 
hit-and-miss attitude that sees strikes and lockouts. 
 
Ottawa's changes to the regulatory system mean about 500 
miles of light steel rail lines and another 3,000 miles of branch 
lines will be abandoned, affecting hundreds of Saskatchewan 
communities. Fast-tracking branch line abandonment means 
higher trucking and road maintenance costs. 
 
It is urgent that the federal government do some work to 
establish a transportation plan. We have been left in the dark 
and this is unfair. I support the motion presented by the member 
from Humboldt. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I realize 
that you're very familiar with my constituency, and I'm glad you 
recognize it. 
 
In 1897 Sir Wilfrid Laurier had a dream. The people of Canada 
had a dream. Their dream was a national transportation policy 
— a railway across the vast country of Canada from east to 
west. And that was completed. And then they realized that the 
Prairies had great potential for agriculture, great potential for 
producing great quality wheat and barley and oats and all kinds 
of great crops so that it could be exported to the people of the 
world. 
 
And so there was a plan developed. And in that plan, the 
government of the day recognized the need . . . that farmers 
needed some help because they were a long ways from the port. 
And to get that good quality grain that we could produce in 
Canada to overseas markets and to other parts of the country, 
they would need to give the farmers something, because they 
just couldn't afford to ship that grain. 
 
So what they did is they set up a Crow's Nest Pass Agreement. 
It was supposed to be in perpetuity. It was supposed to benefit 
the farmers of our country, to be able to ship this grain, this 
good quality grain to the rest of the world. 
 
More than that, the railways were given land and mineral rights 
and other such goodies in lieu of . . . you know, putting this line 
across so that all Canadians could enjoy that benefit. 
 
And then of course in 1984 that was changed. The government 
of the day decided that perpetuity didn't mean anything, would 
now be the WGTA rate. And then we had governments — 
Conservative and Liberal federal governments — chopping 
away at it, year after year after year. 

And finally now, in 1995 — February 27, a day that will go 
down in history, Mr. Speaker — it's gone, it's finished. 
Perpetuity agreements with the farm people of our province and 
of western Canada — history, it's gone. 
 
Why I mention that, Mr. Speaker, is that we need a 
transportation plan. I mean Mr. Laurier in 1897 had a plan, a 
transportation plan, a policy for the country of Canada. The 
government of today . . . this is 1995, Mr. Speaker, and they 
haven't got the ability to come up with a transportation plan or 
program or vision for the country of Canada. I can't believe that. 
If they would sit down and relax and ask the farmers of 
Saskatchewan to develop that plan and that policy, that vision, 
they would be more than happy to help. 
 
But the federal government, no, it's a unilateral decision; it's 
based in Ottawa in a big white building, and that's where the 
decisions are made. No thought of the farmer in Saskatchewan. 
No thought of what it's going to mean to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The producers are confused. They're out there; they were getting 
ready to seed or they were planning what they were going to 
seed on February 27. All of a sudden, the rules change. They 
have to change their plans, and all because there is no vision; 
nobody's telling the farmers exactly what the transportation 
system is going to look like. All they know is they have to pay it 
out of their own pocket now, and that's all they know. And 
that's not fair. 
 
The elimination of the Crow was based on the assumption that 
there were going to be efficiencies in the system. There were 
going to be efficiencies in the system, Mr. Speaker, and so that 
would take the place of the cost to the farmer. And so even 
though the farmer now has to pay 30 or $35 a tonne instead of 
the 14 he used to pay, well there's going to be efficiencies in the 
system and that would cover the difference. 
 
Well the first efficiency they talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the 
elimination of branch lines in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I guess the CN and CP (Canadian Pacific) are certainly 
going to appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, because that efficiency is 
going to go directly into their pockets. The producer's going to 
pay because he's going to have to haul his grain further 
distance. The municipality's going to have to pay because 
they're going to have road damage. The province is going to 
have to pay because their highways are going to be destroyed. 
 
Well certainly they're efficiencies, savings to the CN and CP, 
put on the backs of the producers. I guess if that's what 
efficiencies are, it's a very strange efficiency to me, but it 
certainly will save the CN and CP some money; there is no 
question about that. 
 
And that's the only part of the plan, Mr. Speaker. It doesn't go 
any further than that. It gives a break to the CN and CP, and 
that's it. The federal government hasn't looked at the port 
system. They haven't looked at the main line system. They 
haven't looked at the elevator system. There is no plan. There is  



March 21, 1995 

 
1029 

no vision. 
 
And this is why, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion from the 
member from Humboldt. What we need in this province is a 
transportation policy, a vision for the future so that our 
producers know where they're going. 
 
Legislating workers back to work, Mr. Speaker, is just a 
band-aid I guess. Certainly it would be better to negotiate. And 
this is what we urge: parties to negotiate a proper settlement, 
workers and companies getting together and deciding what is 
the best benefit package and the best working conditions and 
the best salaries that both are in agreement with. 
 
In a case right now of ordering workers back to work, we 
support that in the sense that we have to get our grain to market. 
We have to satisfy the countries that are ordering our good 
quality grain. They want our good quality grain, and we have to 
provide that service. 
 
But this is just a band-aid, Mr. Speaker. There has to be real 
negotiations between the companies and the workers. They 
have to sit down and decide what is fair to both. And that's what 
we hope will happen. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that at the SARM 
convention just the other day, Mr. Goodale I believe mentioned 
that really gun control registration would actually only cost $85 
million. And that's quite interesting because if we took that $85 
million, Mr. Speaker, that would mean $2 an acre to the farmers 
in the province of Saskatchewan to help them with their 
transportation concerns. It may mean that they could upgrade 
the transportation system with $85 million that they’re going to 
spend of registering guns in Canada. 
 
So this is where we see, you know, there's no vision. They 
spend money on one hand on something else. They allow the 
farmers to pay the whole bill. It's sort of scattered all over the 
place. Nobody knows what's happening. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, in support of the motion from 
the member from Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to enter this debate in support of the main motion 
and in opposition to the amendment. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me that we have to 
have this debate today in these chambers. It saddens me, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a federal government in Ottawa who fails 
to put into place any long-term plans for our transportation 
industry. It strikes me as being quite strange, Mr. Speaker, that 
27 per cent of our goods that are moved by transportation are 
moved through the rail system, and yet there's no long-term plan 
to maintain a credible, solid, secure transportation system to 
meet our country's economic needs. 
 

As we know, Mr. Speaker, the lifeblood and mainstay of any 
economy is its ability to export and its ability to have its 
products at export position in a timely fashion that will ensure 
the reputation of efficiency will be something that will draw the 
importers of the world to come back and buy the products from 
a nation, not only the first time but on return trips. 
 
(1515) 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, should be the bottom line foundation of 
building a strong economy — the ability to transport quality 
goods to export positions to meet the time frame in which 
purchasers wish to take delivery of the products so it meets their 
ability to maintain their economies. 
 
And it saddens me, Mr. Speaker, that we have a federal 
government that fails to recognize the tremendous impact that 
they are going to have as a result of their decisions in regards to 
our transportation system in this country. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, agriculture and the agricultural 
products produced, particularly the prairie provinces and more 
particularly here in Saskatchewan, plays a very important part 
and makes up a high percentage of our export products. As a 
colleague of mine has already mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the 
production of the quality of products that we produce in 
Saskatchewan here in particular, even with increased value 
added opportunities here and even with increased value added 
opportunities both in grain and livestock production, etc., etc., 
we still have a large percentage of our product that will be 
exported. And we must maintain a quality export system, 
transportation system, to ensure those exports get to market on 
time. 
 
And if you look at other very successful countries who have 
been able to, over a period of years build up a strong, successful 
economy, those countries have all endeavoured to ensure that 
they have a transportation system that will provide the 
opportunity to move their products to market in a very timely 
and meaningful fashion. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, with the 
last federal budget, we see a demise to the Crow benefit that has 
benefited Saskatchewan farm producers for a number of years. 
 
And having had the opportunity of being in my constituency on 
the past number of weekends — and I've used that opportunity 
to speak to many farmers there — the vast majority of them 
realize that yes, perhaps there has to be some changes to the 
Crow rate benefit. 
 
They would like to see these changes be progressive changes 
and changes that would benefit them over the long haul. And at 
the same time, Mr. Speaker, they recognize the financial 
situation, the financial stress that this great country of ours is in, 
and those same farmers want to do their share in addressing that 
financial stress. 
 
But what really burdens them, Mr. Speaker, and troubles them 
deeply is the unfairness, the simple unfairness of the act of the 
federal government which has eliminated their subsidy, their  



March 21, 1995 

 
1030 

program, in one fatal swoop of the pen, that will come to an end 
on midnight of August 1, while other jurisdictions within our 
country have had a phase-out period. The eastern dairy industry 
is seeing only a 30 per cent reduction in their subsidies, but 
they're seeing that phased in over two years. 
 
What farmers in my constituency have been saying, Mr. 
Speaker, is that a federal government that had any concern, and 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, any plan for the future, would have 
approached this in a fair and reputable way by suggesting that 
they could have phased out the Crow rate benefit to 
Saskatchewan farmers over a reasonable period of time — three 
years or five years, something along that line — that would 
have gave our farm population the ability to adjust to meet the 
changing times. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that hasn't happened. So we end up 
now with, quite frankly, a lot of confusion in the minds of our 
farmers across Saskatchewan. Confusion because they right 
now, Mr. Speaker, in a traditional manner and method of 
farming, they're putting together their plans for this spring's 
cropping operation. And now as they see the freight rates 
changing, and changing very dramatically, they are left a little at 
a loss as to what crops they can produce and what they should 
be producing. 
 
Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, farmers today have to look 
at crops that will produce high quality and low quantity. And in 
our particular area where my constituency is located, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to deal with climatic conditions that are not 
conducive to growing many of these crops that are of high 
quality and low quantity. 
 
So we leave our farmers, Mr. Speaker, in a situation where they 
are very hard-pressed to make the decisions in response to the 
changes in the Crow rate and the changes in the transportation 
system that is inevitable, and find themselves in rather an 
awkward position — because as many farmers and I as a farmer 
can attest to, when you set up a crop rotation on your farm, you 
don't set it up just basically for one year; it's basically a 
five-year project. And as you use up each year in this five-year 
project, you add another one on to the end. So you have 
basically a five-year cropping plan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for a lot of us farmers in my constituency of 
Pelly, we're seeing this plan being impacted upon extremely 
negatively because a lot of the crops that we produced in the 
past are no longer going to be economically viable to produce in 
the future. And, Mr. Speaker, having from now until August 1 
to make the necessary changes, to make the diversification in 
our operation, in our cropping plans, to meet the impact of the 
federal budget and the impact of the elimination of the Crow 
benefit and the impact of what is going to be a changing 
transportation system, there is a lot of confusion in our farmers' 
minds. 
 
But what even bothers me a little more, Mr. Speaker, is that as a 
result of this, we are seeing a very negative impact upon a lot of 
the diversification attempts that farmers have made in the past  

few years. As you are well aware, that agriculture has been 
struggling through some tough economic times; and as a result 
of that, farmers have rallied to the challenge and may have 
explored new and innovative ways of diversifying their 
operation either as individuals or as communities to meet the 
changing economic financial pressures. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we're seeing a wild card being played here 
now that nobody had counted on four or five years ago, and that 
is the complete elimination of the Crow benefit. With that, Mr. 
Speaker, it has had a very negative impact. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, in some cases a death knell sentence to some of the 
new industries that we have created in this province to answer 
the challenges of the changing financial picture of agriculture. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is very distressing. 
 
But what has also happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that I get a 
sense that many of our farmers' spirits are broken. I've spent the 
last couple of weekends in a lot of coffee shops and targeted my 
opportunity to talk to the people, to farmers. And there seems to 
be a bit of a defeated attitude, I guess you could say. 
 
They seem to have given up because it looks like every time a 
farmer turns around and makes a decision, makes a decision 
based on not just this year but based on a future, the federal 
Liberal government tromps on that idea. It has gotten many of 
our farmers very disillusioned, to the point where I think we're 
going to experience some difficulty in attracting young farmers 
to the land and attracting young farmers to agriculture as a way 
of life. 
 
Very saddening, Mr. Speaker, when you think of a federal 
government who has this responsibility to all Canadians, to all 
of Canada, and yes, has to deal with change and changing 
times, but who has vested in them by the people of this country 
the responsibility to do the best they can for each and every 
Canadian citizen and to do their part to ensure that there is a 
strong economy and a strong economy that will allow for future 
expansion and future growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to conclude my remarks by saying how 
disappointed I am and how disappointed farmers across my 
constituency are in the federal government's action in two parts. 
One, the elimination of the Crow benefit; but number two, not 
having the willingness to establish a strong, sustainable 
transportation system in our country. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The debate will continue on the 
main motion. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. At the conclusion of my remarks I'll be moving an 
amendment to the main motion before us. 



March 21, 1995 

 
1031 

Mr. Speaker, there are currently between 21,000 and 22,000 
workers at CN Rail out of a workforce of 27,000 that are either 
locked out, on strike, or laid off due to the work stoppage. If 
you bring the Canadian Pacific Rail workers into the mix, the 
total increases by an additional 7,000. This situation is seriously 
affecting Saskatchewan producers and our province's 
agricultural industry, and economy as a whole. Farmers cannot 
ship grain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week's product has not moved. The work stoppages are 
costing the grain industry millions of dollars. As elected 
members of the province of Saskatchewan, we cannot allow 
disruptions to continue. Farmers cannot afford any more blows 
to their industry, Mr. Speaker, and neither can our provincial 
economy. 
 
Members of parliament must not be allowed to delay important 
back-to-work legislation that's before them. As we debate this 
motion, back-to-work legislation for rail workers is being 
delayed by elected members of parliament. And they're being 
. . . it's being delayed by Saskatchewan MPs, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan MPs are blocking this legislation. 
 
Vic Althouse from the Mackenzie constituency; Chris 
Axworthy from Saskatoon-Clark's Crossing; Simon DeJong 
from Regina-Qu'Appelle; John Solomon, who used to sit in this 
very Assembly, Mr. Speaker, from Regina-Lumsden; Len 
Taylor from The Battlefords-Meadow Lake. All NDP MPs right 
now, Mr. Speaker, are responsible, partly responsible, for 
holding up this legislation. They sided with the Quebec 
separatists. 
 
If you can imagine that, Mr. Speaker, NDP MPs from 
Saskatchewan sided with Quebec separatists to block this 
important legislation, placing the economy of Saskatchewan in 
some degree of jeopardy, Mr. Speaker; placing the incomes of 
farm families all across this province at jeopardy. And the NDP 
people across the way from us, their federal cousins are 
supporting . . . pardon me, in delaying that legislation in Ottawa 
today. 
 
It's hard to believe that the NDP caucus consisting of eight 
members would willingly engage in obstructionist tactics that 
so adversely affect the western Canadian economy, Mr. 
Speaker. Five members in the NDP caucus are from 
Saskatchewan, two from British Columbia, and one from the 
Yukon, Mr. Speaker, joined with one out of Manitoba, I 
believe. NDP forces along with the Bloc members from Quebec 
supporting the separatists in Quebec and stopping this 
legislation. Can you imagine that? And NDP MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) in this legislature have the 
audacity to stand up and say that they support Saskatchewan 
farm families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They stand in their place and say they are supportive of it, and 
at the same time their federal cousins in Ottawa are voting to 
stop the legislation, Mr. Speaker. Could you imagine that? The 
farm families of this province are outraged at the antics of the 
MPs, the NDP MPs, in Ottawa these days. 

The strike is not only affecting agriculture, the agricultural 
industry, it also impacts on coal, potash, the auto industry, and 
the tourism industry. 
 
IPSCO is currently — IPSCO here right in Regina — is 
currently sitting on about 563 lay-off notices, giving 
consideration to laying off people right here in Regina as a 
result of the rail . . . the transportation breakdown of the system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If this dispute is not settled soon, the economic impact on our 
province will be devastating. Saskatchewan producers have 
paid millions and millions of dollars over the years as a result of 
being held hostage. And it's time we stopped bearing the brunt 
of it in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I recall, last week in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, that a Reform MP 
from Alberta, I believe his name is Mr. Ray Speaker, brought 
forward legislation that would make it, the transportation 
system, the grain handling system, an essential service and 
therefore outlawing strikes in the system. And we support that, 
Mr. Speaker. We are of the belief that it should be considered 
an essential service and no longer be able to be struck by people 
that want to see the industry stop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
When countries sign agreements to buy commodities, they 
examine every facet of that purchase, from the quality of goods 
to the disruptions in delivery, Mr. Speaker. There are window 
clauses, as they are called, within these contracts that will allow 
countries to break the agreement if need be. Don't think for one 
moment that these countries will hesitate to exercise their right 
to use the window clauses. Because they will not purchase a 
commodity if it is not needed. 
 
We cannot afford to let this happen, Mr. Speaker. The members 
of parliament holding up the transport of these goods, important 
commodities, must not let this happen. The Canadian Wheat 
Board . . . recently a spokesman for them has said, mounting 
labour problems damage Canada's reputation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we can't afford to lose any buyers in such a 
competitive trading world that we all operate in, in the grain 
industry and in industries other than grain — coal and potash 
and uranium and commodities like that are internationally 
traded commodities, Mr. Speaker. Very, very competitive 
environment that agriculture particularly faces in the world 
markets these days. 
 
As we see, the Canadian Wheat Board in the last PRO, the 
projected return outlook, is suggesting that the price of grain all 
across western Canada is going to be dropping in the next crop 
year. Coupled with the changes in the Crow benefit, I suggest to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan that we are down probably in the 
$2 to $2.50 a bushel range once again — back down to where 
we are very, very hard-strapped as agricultural producers to 
make a living, Mr. Speaker. That's what's going to be facing the 
Saskatchewan farmers — a double whammy; in fact, a triple 
whammy, from the Liberals in Ottawa and the NDP here in  



March 21, 1995 

 
1032 

Saskatchewan. 
 
The first thing: the NDP stripped the GRIP contract back in 
1991, placing a lot of farmers in peril. Number one thing that 
the NDP here in Regina did. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, when it came time for this 
budget and the discussions surrounding this budget, they took 
another $188 million of farmer premiums and directed them 
towards the GRIP . . . the GRIP surplus was directed towards 
the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. The second thing that 
they did. 
 
The third thing, now we see their federal cousins in Ottawa 
blocking legislation to bring back the workers to get the 
transportation system in this country going again. That's the 
third thing that they've done. And then they stand in this 
Assembly and say they're supportive of agriculture and 
supportive of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And the federal Liberals at the same time, and their provincial 
counterparts here as well, they stand in the Assembly and say 
that they're supportive of agriculture. And what do we see from 
the provincial Liberals, Mr. Speaker? What do we see from the 
provincial Liberals, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We see them saying that the budget was regionally fair; their 
Liberal leader standing in the Assembly . . . just outside the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and saying that the budget was 
regionally fair. And then the very next day, coming into this 
legislature and voting in favour of a motion that we brought in 
condemning the federal government. 
 
The NDP House Leader recalls that. And everyone else does in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I'm hopeful that farm families 
across this province will remember it as well. 
 
And I suspect they will, Mr. Speaker. They'll remember the 
federal NDP, the provincial NDP, the provincial Liberals, and 
the federal Liberals, all standing against Saskatchewan farm 
families, Mr. Speaker — all standing against them. 
 
And I hear the member from Shaunavon chirping from his seat, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the farm families from across this 
province know that that member first of all started out on that 
side of the House, first of all started out as an NDP, crossed the 
floor, crossed the floor, Mr. Speaker, now sits as a Liberal 
MLA. And, Mr. Speaker, they recognize more than ever that the 
NDP and the Liberals are exactly the same when it comes to 
agriculture. They're opposed to the farm families of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And the things that are happening in 
Ottawa today just demonstrate that clearer and clearer, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Liberal-NDP coalition is back in force once 
again, fighting against the farm families of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Who are they representing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing that you should also keep in mind, why 
didn't the federal Liberals last week, why did they not bring in, 
in conjunction with their legislation legislating the grain  

workers back, also legislation at that time forcing the workers, 
the rail workers across this country, back to work at the same 
time? They could have done that. They could have brought it in 
at the same time. They could have done that, and they should 
have done that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see in this Assembly, Saskatchewan NDP MLAs and their 
federal counterparts, the MPs, represented their respective areas 
for so long that they have lost sight of what truly is happening 
in this strike, Mr. Speaker. And the MLA for Shaunavon 
continues to chirp from his seat because he knows what we are 
saying is indeed correct. And the voters of Shaunavon next time 
around, next election, I suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, the farm 
families across this province, the farm families in Shaunavon 
will never forget — never forget — the way that MLA crossed 
the floor, betrayed them and every other person in that riding, 
first of all, betrayed the people of Shaunavon and now are 
betraying the farm families of this province as well, Mr. 
Speaker. That's what he's doing; he's betraying the farm families 
across this province. 
 
Who are they representing? Who are they representing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? I believe they are representing the only people 
that they ever supported, this NDP government, and that's the 
union leaders of this country. The union leaders of this country 
are more important than the farm families of this province, just 
as the electoral future of the member from Shaunavon is more 
important to him about principles, more important to him about 
convictions, more important to him than the farm families of 
this province. That's unfortunately what we see from the MLA 
from Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we can only ask: why 
is it that the federal NDP members are so opposed to this? Why 
is it? And at the same time their provincial cousins here in 
Regina speak so favourably against Saskatchewan . . . or in 
favour of Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP in Ottawa, the NDP in 
Saskatchewan, the Liberals in Ottawa, and the Liberals in 
Saskatchewan will not be forgotten in this debate, Mr. Speaker, 
because the farm families recognize who is opposing it. They 
recognize who is destroying agriculture in this country, Mr. 
Speaker: the Liberals and the federal NDP and the provincial 
NDP. That's who's doing it, Mr. Speaker. And along with it, 
along with it, to cap it all off, the Quebec separatists join with 
them — to cap it all off the Quebec separatists, Mr. Speaker, 
the Quebec separatists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move the following amendment to the main 
motion: 
 
 That all words after “the Assembly” be deleted and the 

following be substituted therefor: 
 
 join together in demanding the NDP and Bloc 

Québécois coalition currently delaying passage of 
back-to-work legislation for rail workers, immediately 
cease their obstructionist tactics that are adversely  



March 21, 1995 

 
1033 

affecting the grain industry in western Canada, 
 
 and that further, that this Assembly show their 

allegiance to Saskatchewan farm families by forwarding 
a transcript of the debate on this motion to the Prime 
Minister, the federal minister, Lucienne Robillard, and 
the NDP leader, Audrey McLaughlin and the Bloc 
Québécois leader, Lucien Bouchard. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move that amendment to the main motion, 
moved by myself, the member from Kindersley, seconded by 
the member from Maple Creek. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I find the amendment in order, so the 
debate will continue concurrent on the motion and the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to stand 
in my place today at a point in time in the afternoon when we're 
finally getting this debate on track. It was important that we 
bring this amendment forward in order to get the right direction 
and the right spin on this very important issue. 
 
We have watched, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the other parties in 
this Assembly have determined to play politics with peoples' 
lives rather than to deal with the issue squarely on the merit of 
the issue itself — the merit of the issue of course being the 
effects of a rail strike on other peoples' lives. In this case of 
course, it more at home reflects the impact on Saskatchewan 
agriculture. But in reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this issue goes 
far, far beyond a few people just in Saskatchewan. And while 
we are important in terms of our industry in agriculture, we are 
few in numbers in the world around us. 
 
But the numbers are magnified and growing larger, and all of a 
sudden we see a nation paralysed by a rail strike becoming 
deeply concerned about an issue that they should have dealt 
with last week. Now that the big unions have taken on the rail 
companies and the rail companies have taken them on back, we 
find Ford Company being reported as scheduling to shut down 
their plants. All of sudden, a lot of workers are being faced with 
unemployment, and suddenly it becomes a very important issue 
to the world. 
 
Isn't that amazing, that finally it hits home that when the big 
unions take on the railroads and the railroads take on the 
unions, it's not just Saskatchewan farmers any more that are 
going to pay the price alone; now it's the workers — the very 
workers the unions claim to represent — who are going to lose 
their jobs in all of those spin-off affected areas. 
 
We've heard about IPSCO, we've heard about Ford, we've heard 
about all kinds of people in other industries and other 
job-related areas that will now suffer the impact of this utter 
foolishness that should have been corrected last week. 
 
Isn't it interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the NDP 
government asked for and legislated . . . and supported the 
legislated process of bringing longshoremen back to work.  

They did that; last week they supported that. 
 
But at the same time, could they not have had the insight to 
know that the railroad workers would also come on strike? 
Obviously they had to know that. The federal government knew 
it, the NDP knew it, everybody knew that it was just going to 
pass down the line, so why not include everybody in that first 
legislated package and legislate all workers to work and declare 
this an essential service and have it over with and done with? 
 
No. They determined, here's how we can play some politics 
going into some elections. We'll legislate part of them back to 
work, make ourselves look like good guys. All the farmers will 
say, yes, those guys are really on our side; boy did they ever go 
to work on those fellows, put them back to work. 
 
(1545) 
 
But then of course comes a little bit of the hitch from the 
provincial perspective. We've got Moose Jaw, a big railroad 
town, a big union town, and we have to make it appear that 
we're not just defending farmers and not defending big unions, 
so we'll split the issue, and we will vote one week on putting 
the longshoremen back to work, and we'll support that because 
they're way, way out there in the west coast. But now this week, 
we will support the big unions at home and we'll say we can't 
legislate these fellows back to work, because they want to vote 
in Moose Jaw. 
 
And the politics of the day and the election that is coming up 
become far more important that anything that has to do with the 
economy of our country and the jobs for our people. And that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the sad note of the business that we, in 
these assemblies, are involved with. The saddest, saddest kind 
of approach to life is when politicians start to play politics with 
other people's lives, and an election becomes more important 
than helping people to make an honest living in this country. 
And it's happened time and time before, and it's happening 
again today. 
 
And Saskatchewan of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we'll end up 
paying once again. They will end up paying as they always do 
because we are the land-locked area of this country and we 
always end up paying the biggest shot when it comes to taking 
the lumps for everybody else's foolishness in this country. 
 
And it appears that the NDP in Saskatchewan want to support 
their federal counterparts now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For 
political reasons? Yes of course, and only for that reason, not 
for what's best for our province. Because the federal NDP and 
the Bloc, now the separatists from Quebec, the Bloc Québécois 
. . . some people in western Saskatchewan refer to them just 
simply as the Bloc; I don't know if they think they're square or 
what, but it's certainly not a complimentary term out west any 
longer. And the reason, of course, that people are unhappy with 
this group down east is very clear: they refuse to waive a 
48-hour notice that would allow back-to-work legislation to be 
introduced in Ottawa. A very simple little thing that they can do 
to stop everything in this country from progressing. 



March 21, 1995 

 
1034 

And why would they do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The reason 
they would do that, of course, is plain, simple politics again. 
The news media put it right the other day. How does the Bloc 
and the NDP end up finding themselves in bed together in 
Ottawa? Well for those of you that don't know, the pure, simple 
fact of life is that people in the political science world describe 
the philosophies as being fundamentally the same. They are 
both social democrat parties determined to uphold the 
philosophies of the left. And that is the reason that they now 
find themselves in bed together, playing politics jointly. 
Because the Bloc Québécois and the federal NDP are both 
left-wing parties and they have to play some politics in Ottawa 
to try to bolster their collective interests in the political world 
around them. 
 
And they really don't care who gets hurt as a result of it, and 
that is the sad thing in our political system. Here we have the 
Bloc Québécois, a left-wing party in Quebec, that has exactly 
the same philosophy as the government in Ontario that is about 
to become dust; exactly the same political philosophy as the 
party in British Columbia that is already considered to be 
fragmenting and becoming totally blown away; and also the 
same philosophy as the Government of Saskatchewan that finds 
it politically expedient today to support the union movement 
rather than the people who are going to be hurt by this 
disastrous strike. 
 
So what do the people in the NDP hope to accomplish by doing 
this, by aligning themselves with the Bloc? That's the question 
we have to ask ourselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is the gain 
for them? Let's analyse this thing a little bit. Making the unions 
happy maybe at the expense of western grain producers? For 
sure — for sure that is what is happening. There is no question 
about it, that this is what is going on — making the union 
bosses happy, to once again try to solicit their support for the 
upcoming election. 
 
Presently there are 22,000 striking and locked-out rail workers. 
And every day this action continues, our province pays the 
price. And we're not just talking about farmers this time around; 
we're talking about every worker in every spin-off industry 
that's affected by this strike. Eventually they will all end up on 
unemployment insurance, and after it runs out, you know where 
you go from there. I don't suspect it'll go that far or for that 
many days, weeks, or months. But who knows, with the 
carrying-on that's happening in this province and in this 
country. 
 
And the members opposite sit here today and debate away the 
whole day to play politics, rather than coming up with one solid 
resolution, like our amendment, which solidly puts it on the 
doorstep of everybody concerned, rather than to support these 
initiatives that once and for all would put an end to this 
nonsense. They play politics and we debate away the day 
instead of sending the message clearly to Ottawa — get on with 
the business and get these people back to work. 
 
The federal Labour minister said she had not a choice but to 
bring back-to-work legislation because of the effects of the  

strike on grain shipments, auto parts, and thousands of rail 
passengers. 
 
And she's right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She doesn't have a choice. 
This country is clearly in financial difficulty. We're not going to 
go bankrupt tomorrow; I'm not going to try to sell that message. 
But we have serious financial problems. As any farmer in 
Saskatchewan can tell you, a lot of debt is a serious problem. 
Every person who has bought a house or has mortgaged a car or 
has bought anything on time, as most people do at some point 
in their life, will tell you that this is a very serious matter and 
must be taken seriously. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, knowing that this country is in a 
vulnerable position and cannot afford a disruption to its entire 
economic base, then the government in Ottawa does have no 
other choice but to get these people back to work. 
 
The rail system in this country is clearly too important to the 
nation as a whole, but more specifically, to the land-locked part 
of this country that we live in. 
 
Elected members are chosen to represent the people who voted 
for them; to represent the best interests of their province. And if 
the NDP government in Saskatchewan were taking that 
commitment seriously, they would be demanding that their 
federal counterparts support back-to-work legislation. 
 
Instead of handing to the federal NDP Party a support for their 
actions, they would be writing them a letter, phoning them up 
on the telephone, and sending them wires by telegraph, telling 
them to smarten up and support back-to-work legislation that 
would get rid of this problem once and for all. 
 
And not only that; they would go that step further and say to 
their federal counterparts, get in tune with the people of 
Saskatchewan and of the country and declare this to be an 
essential service and let's put this whole matter to bed once and 
for all. 
 
The truth of the matter is, 14 times in 29 years is not a good 
record. It is a bad record, and a record that's got to be corrected 
and cannot be allowed to continue. 
 
The federal NDP, Bill Blaikie, called the Bill an attack on 
workers. And further, that, quote: 
 
 "When working people are involved, all of a sudden the 

full force of the law is brought upon them." 
 
That's in today's Star-Phoenix, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now just what is that supposed to mean? It seems that the only 
group the NDP classify as workers are union workers. What 
about the working farmers in our province? What about the 
workers all across this country that are unable to perform their 
jobs because of this strike and the lockout? Mr. Blaikie's 
comments are extremely short-sighted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and reflective of how much emphasis the NDP places on  



March 21, 1995 

 
1035 

agriculture, which in plain, simple terms is zero. 
 
We have absolutely seen nothing from this administration that 
supports agriculture in any way, shape, or form. In fact all they 
have done in recent past three years is to take everything they 
can from rural Saskatchewan and take everything out of farmers 
they can possibly squeeze that's left there to be squeezed out of 
them. 
 
The federal NDP must have received flak from their union pals 
after passing back-to-work legislation for the longshoremen. 
That must be what's happened, Mr. Speaker, and we believe that 
this is probably showing in the actions of what's happening this 
week. 
 
Once again, all of the things that this government has done that 
are so unfair to the working people of Saskatchewan through 
their labour laws have already been forgotten by the labour 
leaders because they never get enough. No matter how much 
you give them, you will never satisfy them. These labour 
leaders are so greedy and power hungry that if they ruled the 
world, they would want to take a space ship and take over Mars 
as well. You will never satisfy them, and giving them more and 
more and more will never, ever satisfy them. 
 
The proof is here today. The proof is here this session of the 
legislature. You have given these unions almost the entire 
province. You now have union government control of 
Saskatchewan through the back door of legislation by the NDP. 
And they're not satisfied with that. Now they're attacking the 
federal end of it and forcing the federal NDP to block 
back-to-work legislation that would help to keep this province 
and this country from being financially bankrupted. 
 
In the Star-Phoenix today, Mr. Speaker, it states that: 
 
 The national rail shut-down, if allowed to drag on for a 

full week, could rob the economy of $3 billion to $5 
billion . . . 

 
This estimate is from the Canadian Manufacturers' Association. 
 
Now here is a group that we hadn't even heard of last week. 
Last week we heard about farmers' problems, agricultural 
problems. We heard about the potential of food not coming in 
to the ports, perishable foods rotting on the docks perhaps, and 
that got everybody excited because nobody wants to pay $10 for 
a head of lettuce. Now we had consumers that were worried. 
 
But this week we've got manufacturers that are facing the reality 
of what's going on in the world of a rail strike. Now we've got 
hundreds of thousands of people — not union leaders  
people, the workers in this country, who are going to be without 
jobs. And let's face it, Mr. Speaker, most of the people in our 
world are workers, unless they work at living off of other 
workers. We've got far too much of that in Saskatchewan. 
 
We can't afford to lose one dollar in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
not one dollar. If the national economy is jeopardized and  

potentially jeopardized, then the reality is that the Saskatchewan 
economy is a far more fragile one because we are dependent on 
so many fewer things than the national economy is. 
 
And agriculture of course is a big part of that. And it kind of, in 
a way, makes me happy that there are more people who are 
going to be affected by these strikes now because at least that 
will help to bring them into the fold of those who will not 
tolerate this kind of situation. As a group of people, the 
agricultural sector, the food producers of this country often 
stand alone trying to make a living and trying to make their 
point. But now all of a sudden the whole world around them is 
being affected too. And that is good because at least there will 
be some more pressure to help the farmers in their bid and their 
cry to have these railroads put back to work and these 
transportation situations corrected. 
 
According to StatsCan, rail accounts for 27 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, of all the transportation. Now I believe that that is a 
Canadian figure. Now the StatsCan analysis says that rail 
shut-downs will have a tremendous secondary effect on our 
economy. And there again we now have a national group saying 
exactly what we've been talking about; the spin-off effects are 
growing. It is now a national problem with economic effects for 
the whole nation and for everybody. And when they talk about 
that, they're talking about every taxpayer in this country is going 
to end up paying the price somehow. 
 
Robert Fairholm from the economic think-tank, DRI (Data 
Resources Incorporated) Canada, I quote here: "There's a chain 
reaction and domino effect all through the economy." And that's 
in the Star-Phoenix, I guess, of March 21, 1995. 
 
Here again, Mr. Speaker, we've got people who make it their 
business to study and analyse what the effects of certain things 
are on the world around us, and they are telling us that we are in 
a domino effect. And the first domino was kicked down last 
week and the rest are starting to tumble in order. 
 
Prairie Pools Inc., representing the grain shippers, estimate that 
$85 million a week in grain shipments are being held up by the 
shut-down. That, Mr. Speaker, is a tragedy of enormous 
proportion for Saskatchewan because not only are we losing 
that kind of money . . . 85 millions of dollars a week of grain 
that's not moving. 
 
Now we hear little rumbles and rumours about the Americans 
picking up our markets and filling them up for us. And once 
those markets are filled and those markets are gone, how do we 
get them back? When our buyers out there in the world say, last 
year we ordered grain from Canada but we had to go to the 
United States and get grain from them to fill the order . . . the 
Canadians couldn't do it. Our reputation as being able to supply 
what we sell is down the tubes, and we will suffer for years and 
years to come because of that attitude out in the world of 
consumers. 
 
(1600) 



March 21, 1995 

 
1036 

Not so important that we point fingers at each other and blame 
one another about who's at fault. What is more important here 
today is that we solve the problem, and we can talk the politics 
later. This is far too important an issue, not only for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan but now for the country of Canada, to be 
talked about in terms of pointing fingers. We must first solve 
the problem, get the message to Ottawa, get the message to the 
Bloc Québécois, get the message to the federal NDP. Tell them 
to get their act together and support the country instead of 
trying to support their own political cause. 
 
It's a fact, Mr. Speaker, that grain farmers will be hit hard. The 
potash will be hit hard in our province. We're going into the 
spring season where people around the world are looking for 
inputs for their crops. This is the harvest time for the potash 
industry; this is the harvest time, metaphorically speaking, for 
all of the fertilizer companies. If the rails aren't there to do it, 
the trucks will have to try and do it. 
 
Do you know how much more expensive it is to truck fertilizer 
a few thousand miles than it is to use the rail? Think about it. 
It's going to add hundreds of thousands of dollars to the input 
costs of those people who grow your food. And who in the end 
will pay for that? The consumer will end up having to pay again 
because the consumer is the person that has to eventually pay 
for the cost of producing food. And the railroad worker won't 
have a job. 
 
We've got people in the pulp industry, people in the paper 
industry. We've got simple little things like sulphur that nobody 
might even think about that need to be moved in our country as 
we head into this vital and crucial spring season. But then why 
would you pick any other time to go on strike, except when you 
can hurt the most possible people? That's always the theory 
behind striking. It's always the theory behind lockouts . . . is to 
try to force enough people into enough trouble so that you get 
your own way. 
 
Both sides are guilty, and both sides are hurting the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Canada. And it hurts our 
pocketbooks, and it's going to hurt them for a long time to come 
because this sort of thing won't go away overnight. The impact, 
the repercussions, and the domino effect will continue for years 
to come. More in the next few weeks, in obvious terms, but our 
reputation in the world will be hurt for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen headlines all over this country: BQ 
(Bloc Québécois) derails back-to-work rail legislation; 
Bouchard urging both sides to negotiate a settlement. Well the 
clear fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that negotiations are not 
working. They have had a chance to work. And he is playing 
politics in Quebec for one reason and one reason only: to try to 
make it look like it would be better for them to separate from 
this very country that he's now destroying. 
 
After he gets the country destroyed, it'll make pretty good sense 
for him to say to his people, let's vote to separate; we'll get the 
heck out of this country because it's a heck of a mess. Well of 
course it's going to be in a mess if he blocks everything that is  

being done to try to pull the country together and to keep our 
economy rolling. So I guess we've seen through what he's up to. 
 
Where does that put the federal NDP? What advantage is there 
for the federal NDP to tearing the country apart? None 
whatsoever. These people are playing politics for a provincial 
election in Ontario and one that they can't get away from in 
Saskatchewan and another one where they are being blown 
away in British Columbia. Plain and simple politics, that can be 
their only motive. They have nothing else to gain. They're not in 
control of Quebec. They aren't advocating separatism, as far as I 
know. They are socialists and left-wingers, so they are trying to 
make politics at home with the unions. 
 
Plain and simple — we have a rail strike that is costing our 
economy billions of dollars so that a handful of politicians can 
play politics in Saskatchewan, Ontario, British Columbia and, 
most disgustingly, in our national capital in Ottawa. Plain and 
pure politics, that's all it's about for these people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I plead with these people at this moment in 
time to shake your heads a little and think about what you're 
doing to the people in the world around you. Stop playing 
politics with other people's lives. Let these people get back to 
work as quickly as possible. Let's save our country and our 
province. Let's save our economy. Let's save our farmers from 
the embarrassment and the financial losses. Let's do this. Let's 
send this message clearly now and support this amendment so 
that we can get the job done. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to add a 
few words to the discussion on the resolution that we have 
before the Assembly today. It's, I believe, of serious concern to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I just want to point out a few 
problems that I see on the horizon because of a lack of 
understanding and a lack of cooperation that the federal 
government is in today. 
 
We see as an outline that last Tuesday we were in this 
Assembly, speaking about the strike and the implications that it 
would be to western Canadian farmers, potash workers, IPSCO, 
various other commodities moving through the rail network. 
And as the Minister responsible for Labour was speaking, he 
indicated that the Liberal government put before parliament a 
Bill having a request to put the union strikers back to work. 
And during his remarks I made the observation that was it only 
the longshoremen or did it include the rail workers. And then he 
made the observation. The member from North Battleford made 
the observation that he hoped it would be for both. 
 
Well as it turns out, Mr. Speaker, it wasn't. And so today we 
have the people who are in strike position numbering in the 
neighbourhood of 29,000 people. We have a serious, serious 
problem in transportation in western Canada. 
 



March 21, 1995 

 
1037 

What is really striking, Mr. Speaker, in this whole discussion, is 
the way that groups of people have taken issue with the subject. 
And I just want to point out, as we have heard in the discussion 
here today, that quite a number of the members of the New 
Democratic Party in Ottawa have decided to filibuster the Bill 
before the House asking the House of Commons to put the 
people in the unions of the rail workers back to work. 
 
They have deliberately decided that they're going to block the 
role of parliament until it is deferred and until it is deferred 
again. And that, Mr. Speaker, is in my view a detriment to the 
people of Saskatchewan; it's a detriment to the people of 
western Canada. 
 
It's interesting to note some of people that pointed out that the 
cooperation between the federal NDP and the Quebec 
separatists are . . . they're both standing there as a way of 
blocking this Bill coming to the House of Commons. And I 
believe that there is a decision on the part of the NDP, because 
most of the separatists tend to be left of centre and most of 
them have the same philosophy that the NDP in Ottawa have, 
and therefore, I believe that the whole cooperation in blocking 
this Bill coming forward is coming from the cooperation 
between those two groups, those two political parties in Ottawa. 
 
Now I believe that the federal Liberals made a mistake in not 
putting this Bill forward last Tuesday to include the railway 
workers. They made big mistake in not including it. And in the 
paper today we had an article that dealt with the Liberals 
bringing this Bill forward. And in the conclusion of those 
remarks, it indicated that there were between 21 and 22,000 
people in CN lines who were going to be on strike. Add to that 
the 7,000 people who are either on strike or locked out from CP 
rail, and you have very nearly 30,000 people who are in a 
position where they're not providing opportunities for 
transportation into the ports either in the east coast or the west 
coast. 
 
We have had indication that IPSCO has given lay-off notices to 
over 500 people. We have people who are impacted in the 
elevator system who are going to have serious problems. And 
we could go on and on. 
 
This is a labour-management dispute that has gone on for the 
last 18 months, Mr. Speaker. It has gone on for the last 18 
months, Mr. Speaker. It has gone on for the last 18 months, and 
nobody is prepared to do anything about it. And who is going to 
suffer? Who is going to suffer? It's a lot of people in the system 
that are going to suffer. And I'm going to point that out later. 
 
We have had a history of this, Mr. Speaker. We have had a 
history of this over the past 29 years; 14 times out of the last 29 
years we have had exactly the same thing happen. And that's the 
reason why it irritates every shipper in western Canada, and it 
increasingly irritates these people because they consistently do 
it over and over and over again. It's time that there was a 
dispute-settling mechanism put in place that would resolve this 
issue and then put it aside so that we can all get along with  

doing our business. 
 
It's been pointed out  and I think it's very significant  that 
there are 20 contracts between the producer in western Canada 
and the market, contracts that unions can stall and bicker and 
complain and walk out. And companies can lock these people 
out. And we are consistently, Mr. Speaker, consistently 
impacted in western Canada on each of these. 
 
I want to point out a number of places where we need a national 
transportation policy that would put into perspective some of 
the losses that have been incurred by the people in western 
Canada. 
 
First of all, we need some assurance in western Canada and 
some security that, number one, our producers are going to be 
protected. Mr. Speaker, on these 14 out of 29 times that the 
people in western Canada have been negatively impacted, 
farmers in western Canada have been most seriously impacted. 
Each time there's a work stoppage on the west coast, each time 
Saskatchewan farmers pay the demurrage. We pay it every time, 
and farmers in western Canada are sick and tired of it. 
 
As I noticed in the paper also, Mr. Speaker, that a 
longshoreman, the highest paid longshoreman earns $119,000 
 Mr. Speaker, 119,000. The average longshoreman earns 
$67,000 a year. Mr. Speaker, there isn't a farmer in the province 
of Saskatchewan that wouldn't mind having an average of 
$69,000 a year come into his pocket as income so that he can 
have a support somewhere for his farm. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, the problem is compounded each time 
these people go on strike, that the west coast, the ships who are 
scheduled to have their ships loaded, those people have to have 
payment in lieu of loss of time, payment in lieu of loss of 
shipping opportunities. 
 
And who pays, Mr. Speaker? It's the people in Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, and Manitoba who push the grain through to port, 
those are the people that have to pay for that lost time and lost 
opportunity that the shippers have in the port. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is the reason why western Canadian producers, 
whether it's IPSCO, whether it's potash, whether it's sulphur, 
whether it's grain, all of these people are totally frustrated by the 
fact that they always have to contend with these work 
stoppages. 
 
The producers in the province of Saskatchewan are negatively 
impacted. The shippers . . . Who can coordinate, Mr. Speaker, 
who can coordinate any activity in the port with ships coming in 
when you've got 20 contracts and 20 unions — 20 separate 
unions — being affected and impacted by one walk-out? 
Because the unions have this policy that they won't cross 
another person's picket lines. So who's going to go and take the 
trains to Vancouver and who's going to unload the boats when 
you have all of these people impacted by union involvement? 
 
(1615) 
 



March 21, 1995 

 
1038 

And so who's affected by, again, by the shippers not being able 
to move the product? The elevator companies in the province of 
Saskatchewan are impacted. The ships and people moving 
product from our ports to Korea, to China, to Japan, to ports all 
over the world — those people are also impacted negatively. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why there has to be some way, 
other than strike and lockout action, that is going to give an 
opportunity to do business in Canada. 
 
Who else is impacted, Mr. Speaker? It's our customers. We are 
running the serious risk of our reliability going down the drain, 
when we have had 14 out of 29 stoppages in all of this 
discussion. 
 
I want to point something out that also bothers people in 
western Canada, and that is that the offshore ports in the United 
States don't have nearly the trouble we have in western Canada 
and in British Columbia. We have way more problems in our 
west coast than they do in the shippers in Portland and in 
Seattle. I've often wondered, Mr. Speaker, at the reason for that. 
Does it have some significance that most of these unions are 
run by the Americans? Do we have an American agenda driving 
the Port of Vancouver? And I seriously believe that we have 
many of those kinds of things happening. 
 
And what does it do, Mr. Speaker? The nationalism in the 
United States will drive a wedge in the shippers. And so who 
gets the benefit? Mr. Speaker, it will be the American workers. 
It will be the American grain farmers. It will be the American 
producers. It will be the American people who haul timber 
through the ports of Portland. All of those people will get the 
benefit of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And who loses? We lose our customers. We lose an opportunity 
for markets. We lose all of these things because we cannot 
consistently supply our products to the international trade, and 
that is a very, very serious problem. And that's why the urgency 
required to get this piece of legislation into the House and 
through the books is necessary for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Those are the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting 
this amendment, so that the federal government can take 
seriously and the people in the House of Commons can take 
seriously the impact it has in Saskatchewan and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. That's the reason why I am supporting this 
amendment and the desire to send this resolution to Ottawa, so 
that the NDP, the separatists in Quebec, can clearly understand 
our position . . . and dealing with this in a positive way. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak against the amendment and in support of the original 
motion put forth by my colleague, the member from Humboldt, 
and seconded by the member from Melville. 
 
I realize that some speakers still wish to make some comments,  

so I'll try to keep my remarks brief. I'll take a few minutes 
though to express, on behalf of farmers in the Saltcoats 
constituency, their disgust and dismay on the federal 
government's actions with respect to the demise of the Crow 
benefits and the lack of a transportation policy or strategy to 
replace it, hence leading up to the problem that we have today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economy of the Saltcoats constituency is a 
mixed economy based on agriculture which involves mixed 
farming operations, grain and cattle, and also potash production 
which is a key industrial component to the Saltcoats economy. 
As well we have a fair portion of manufacturing that goes on 
within the riding. So the effect of a halt to the transportation 
situation is far-reaching. 
 
I want to add my support to the original resolution in urging the 
federal government to begin mending its ways and to 
expeditiously resolve the present transportation system 
loggerhead. It is the responsibility of the federal Agriculture 
minister, Ralph Goodale, and his colleagues in the federal 
government to see that the farmers' grain and other products 
continue to move to port. After all, as I indicated before, they 
are the government responsible for killing the Crow. 
 
And what have they done to replace it? What is their plan? 
What is their new transportation policy? Absolutely nothing, 
Mr. Speaker. And that is precisely the problem. They have no 
plan. They have no vision for transportation policy or 
transportation strategy. At best one could say that their policy is 
one of deregulation. 
 
So what does this mean to Canadian agriculture, while 
companies and producers look south, exploring alternatives on 
the Mississippi and ports in the state of Oregon? What does this 
do to building Canada? What does this do for jobs? Absolutely 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Farmers want to move their product before the Crow benefits 
are gone on July 31 of this year, before they have to pay twice 
or more for their transportation costs to move their grain. Let 
me give you some examples of the increased costs for shipping 
points in some areas of my riding. For the farming communities 
of Atwater, Bangor, Dubuc, Esterhazy, Saltcoats, Stockholm, 
Zeneta, the freight rate goes from $11.58 per tonne to $22.24. 
For the communities of Bredenbury, Gerald, Langenburg, 
Yarbo, it goes from $11.35 per tonne to $21.59. And the 
community of MacNutt goes from $12.03 to $23.48. 
 
What adds to the confusion and unrest felt by farmers with 
respect to the loss of the Crow benefits is the fact that no 
decision has been made by the federal Liberals on the pay-out 
of the Crow. We hear nothing from their provincial counterparts 
on that issue either. And perhaps that's okay because it would 
change on a daily basis anyway. 
 
Once again we can see the strategy of the Liberals: to drive a 
wedge between the farming community, the producers, and the 
working people, the people who get the product to market. We 
see the Liberals destroying the Canadian dream of a national  



March 21, 1995 

 
1039 

transportation system. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the lack or absence of a national 
transportation strategy is more than a betrayal; it has turned Sir 
John A. Macdonald's national dream into what will soon be a 
Canadian nightmare. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course I was 
up in this debate earlier on a different amendment, but speaking 
now to the amendment brought forward by the member from 
Kindersley and seconded by the member from Maple Creek, I 
find it interesting that so many of the government members 
would stand in their place and in fact continue with their 
political lines that they're not going to support what to everyone 
else is very obvious, Mr. Speaker. And that is the fact that it's 
their federal cousins in Ottawa, the federal New Democrats, as 
small as they are in number, are still up to their tricks. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the way this has been unfolding in 
Ottawa, on March 19 the federal government gave notice of its 
intention to introduce legislation to get the trains moving again. 
And when the legislation was later introduced on March 20, it 
was opposed by both the Bloc Québécois and of course their 
allies and their federal counterparts, the federal New 
Democrats. But what I find interesting is that neither party, the 
Bloc Québécois or the federal New Democrats, were opposed to 
a similar move to legislate an end to the B.C. (British 
Columbia) longshoremen’s strike, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, today at 3 o'clock Ottawa time, it was the federal 
New Democrats that were again able to block the legislation to 
put an end to this strike. And I want the Assembly to be aware 
of where the problem lies in the eyes of Ottawa. And in fact 
that's why I brought forward the amendment that I did earlier. 
However, you know, there's at least . . . you know, the New 
Democrats here of course feel that they must defend their union 
friends more so than defend their farmer — in fact they don't 
have farmer friends — defend the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know, not all union leaders see it that way. In fact at 
least one of the railway union leaders disagrees with this 
obstruction by the federal New Democrats, Mr. Speaker. In fact 
Buzz Hargrove of the CAW, which represents many of the 
striking rail workers, said he told both the Bloc Québécois and 
the NDP that, and I quote: there is absolutely no advantage or 
reason for them to delay the legislation. 
 
Now even your own union friends are warning you against 
some of your silly politics. And I would ask then that the House 
Leader of the New Democrats perhaps pick up the phone and 
call his New Democrat colleagues, most of which come from 
the province of Saskatchewan, to perhaps deal with this. And 
you know, owing to their obstructions, the Canadians now have 
the Bloc . . . or the Bloc Québécois and the NDP to thank for 
this needlessly long, strong strike that the Canadian 
Manufacturers' Association estimate could cost the Canadian 
economy between 3 and $5 billion. 

So that is why we're desperate on this side of the House to have 
you people do something that we feel is necessary and in fact 
convince your colleagues to sort of get onstream with the rest of 
Canada and the rest of the people in this province. 
 
You know among those who have the Bloc and the NDP to 
thank for this unnecessary strike — and I want you to pay 
attention, the New Democrats opposite — there are 2,500 CAW 
members at Ford Canada's St. Thomas, Ontario plant who have 
been sent home because of a shortage of parts. You're affecting 
those people with your actions; 3,900 CAW members at 
Oakville and Windsor who will be working only half time this 
weekend for the very same reason. And I'm sure that those 
people, at election time when they go to vote in Ontario, are 
going to remember some of the New Democrat tricks from 
Ontario. In fact we'll make sure they are reminded of your tricks 
out here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And then there's some 70,000 commuters in Montreal and 
Toronto that are facing long delays in getting to and from work. 
Also, Mr. Speaker, there are companies that are losing money, 
and in fact a few of them . . . half of Canada's coal exports are 
not moving due to the strike. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the member's point of order? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon 
has already once spoken to the main motion; he is now 
speaking to the amendment. And the amendment very 
specifically says, that we immediately cease the obstructionist 
tactics — that's the NDP — that are adversely affecting the 
grain industry in western Canada. And that's the essence of this 
motion, and I have yet to hear. . . the member's mentioned the 
grain industry once in his remarks, so I would ask you to keep 
him on topic. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member from Rosthern I 
think makes a very valid point of order. In fact I was just . . . 
Order. I think the member from Shaunavon knows the rules of 
this House. If he doesn't, you better learn them. 
 
I think the member from Rosthern makes a very valid point. I 
was just going to get up on my feet and remind the member that 
he has already spoken to the main motion, and he must keep his 
comments to the amendment. If he wishes to do so, I will 
recognize the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate 
the member from Rosthern being concerned and assuring that 
we stick to the amendment, which I felt I was. 
 
However, getting back to the grains industry, Mr. Speaker, and 
the companies that are being affected, the bulk export of 
commodities such as grain, sulphur, potash, are at a complete 
standstill. And in fact Canada's reputation as a reliable supplier  



March 21, 1995 

 
1040 

is suffering. In fact we've been told it's costing us between 90 
and $100 million per week in the exporting of board and 
non-board grains due to this strike. 
 
And that's why, I guess, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are very 
much in favour of the amended motion, to get right to the nub 
of the problem and have the New Democrats opposite for once 
stand in their place, stick up for the people of Saskatchewan, 
quit playing your politics — because, you know, I don't think 
the union people are with you anyways. Thank you. 
 
(1630) 
 
The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:31 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Boyd Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Britton  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I don't want to single out 
individual members, but if members simply can't take . . . when 
the Speaker says order, I will start singling people out again. 
 

Yeas 
 
Bergman McPherson Muirhead 

— 11 
Nays 

 
Thompson MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Lingenfelter Anguish Johnson 
Kowalsky Cunningham Mitchell 
Upshall Hagel Bradley 
Lorje Cline Renaud 
Murray Trew Draper 
Langford Scott Lyons 
Wormsbecker Stanger Knezacek 
Carlson   

— 25 
 
The division bells rang from 4:35 p.m. until 4:37 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen Thompson 
Wiens MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Lingenfelter Anguish Johnson 
Lautermilch Kowalsky Cunningham 
Carson Mitchell Upshall 
Hagel Bradley Lorje 
Cline Renaud Murray 
Hamilton Trew Draper 
Whitmore Langford Scott 
 
 

Wormsbecker Stanger Knezacek 
Harper Keeping Jess 
Carlson Boyd Swenson 
Neudorf Martens Goohsen 
D'Autremont Toth Britton 
Haverstock Bergman McPherson 
Muirhead   

— 46 
Nays 

— Nil 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Transmittal Motion 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would 
move, seconded by the member for The Battlefords: 
 
 That the transcript of the debate and the motion just 

passed be transmitted to the federal Minister of Labour, 
the Minister of Agriculture, and the Prime Minister, by 
the Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 
Briercrest Bible College 

 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1645) 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act respecting Our Lady 

of the Prairies Foundation 
 

Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to provide for the incorporation of 
The Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the 

Seventh-day Adventist Church 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 



March 21, 1995 

 
1041 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 04 — An Act to amend An Act respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to amend and 

consolidate "An Act respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
being an Act to amend and consolidate An Act to 

incorporate Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat Producers 
Limited" and to enact certain provisions respecting 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
 

Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule 
 
Clauses 1 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:56 p.m. until 5 p.m. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill on the following 
recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Thompson Wiens 
MacKinnon Tchorzewski Lingenfelter 
Anguish Johnson Lautermilch 
Kowalsky Cunningham Carson 
Mitchell Upshall Hagel 
Bradley Koenker Lorje 
Teichrob Cline Crofford 
Renaud Murray Hamilton 
Trew Draper Sonntag 
Langford Scott Wormsbecker 
Stanger Knezacek Harper 
Keeping Carlson Boyd 
Swenson Neudorf Martens 
Goohsen D'Autremont Toth 
Britton Bergman McPherson 

— 45 
Nays 

Lyons 
— 1 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 
Briercrest Bible College 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 01, An Act 
to amend An Act to incorporate the Briercrest Bible College, be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act respecting Our Lady 

of the Prairies Foundation 
 

Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An Act to 
amend An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation, 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to provide for the incorporation of 
The Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the 

Seventh-day Adventist Church 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. I move that Bill No. 03, An Act to 
amend An Act to provide for the incorporation of The 
Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the Seventh-day 
Adventist Church, be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 04 — An Act to amend An Act respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to amend and 

consolidate "An Act respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
being an Act to amend and consolidate An Act to 

incorporate Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat Producers 
Limited" and to enact certain provisions respecting 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to amend An 
Act respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to 
amend and consolidate "An Act respecting Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, being an Act to amend and consolidate an Act to 
incorporate Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat Producers 
Limited" and to enact certain provisions respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 
 
 


