






















































April 5, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 5, 1995 

 

 
1375 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today for the people of the Carievale, 
Carnduff, Oxbow, Kamsack areas of the province. The prayer 
reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I present these, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions that have been sent in to me from the 
south-east Alberta travel and convention association. I'll read 
the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 
rather than allocating these funds towards capital 
construction projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these come from Saskatoon, Medicine Hat, and all across 
the southern part of Alberta and Saskatchewan. And I'm happy 
to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are read and received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

NOTICES OF MOTION AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 47 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Agriculture: (1) has the 

minister contacted the federal government regarding the 
recently announced closure of all of the prairie 
agricultural employment service offices; (2) what 
actions have been undertaken by the Economic 
Development minister to ensure agricultural 
employment services offices in Saskatchewan remain 
viable; (3) provide copies of any proposal and other 
correspondence between the Agriculture minister and 
the federal government on this issue; (4) the number of 
jobs that will be lost in Saskatchewan as a result of the 
closure of these offices. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, I would 
like to introduce in your gallery today a very dear friend and a 
councillor in the RM (rural municipality) of Vanscoy, Mr. Don 
Kinzie. I know that Don will be down on business today. His 
trips to Regina are not a pleasure. So I would like the 
Legislative Assembly to welcome Don here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce someone who really is no stranger to this Assembly. 
It's Mr. Wally Sadowsky seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
and he's here today with 20 lively and bright students from Ken 
Jenkins School in the great constituency of Regina Rosemont. 
 
I'd like to ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to welcome this group 
here. They will be going on a . . . I guess they've already had a 
tour and they'll be having pictures. And they're here to be 
entertained and to be educated by the proceedings here. I ask all 
members to welcome them to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my distinct 
pleasure to introduce to you today a very important, well-known 
Saskatchewan resident, Jimmy Durocher, the new president of 
the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Durocher and I have 
worked together on a number of projects going back, I guess all 
the way, Jimmy, to 1978 when I was first elected. 
 
With Jim is Rod Laliberte, the executive director of the Metis 
Economic Development Authority. And if the two would stand 
and be recognized, we'd welcome you to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd just like to  



April 5, 1995 

 
1376 

add my greetings to those of the Minister of Economic 
Development to Jim Durocher and Rod Laliberte. And 
hopefully we'll have a moment when we can get together after 
we've been discussing future developments in the province. 
And thank you very much for coming to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, four gentlemen seated in the west gallery who are 
executive members of local 80 of the International Association 
of Fire Fighters, which is the Saskatoon local. 
 
And they are Dave Rumpel, the president; Leo Barrett, the 
secretary; and John Demkiw and Dale Farrell, who are on the 
executive and also constituents of mine. They do a good job for 
the citizens of Saskatoon and their union members, and I'd ask 
all members to join with me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
19 grade 11 and 12 students from Martin Collegiate who are 
seated in your gallery. 
 
They're here today with their teacher, Mr. Peter Flasko. And I'm 
sure all members will want to welcome this group here today 
and I hope that you enjoy question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too wanted to add 
my words of welcome to Mr. Durocher and join the ministers in 
welcoming him to the Assembly in his newly-elected position. 
 
Mr. Durocher is proof positive that politicians can come back. 
In my time as minister responsible we had many interesting 
conversations and Jim always said that it was a long time in 
politics — so welcome back, Jimmy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Expansion of Western Co-Operative Fertilizers Limited 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure today to congratulate Westco Fertilizers on the 
expansion of its terminal in Elstow in my constituency. This is 
very good news for Elstow which is about 50 kilometres 
south-east of Saskatoon. 
 
The expansion will add to the economic activity in the area. It 
will also create six full-time and seven seasonal jobs. Westco 
Fertilizers . . . Western Co-Op Fertilizers or Westco Fertilizers 
is owned by the three prairie Wheat Pools. The company was 
established in 1965 to manufacture and distribute fertilizers to  

western Canadian farmers. It has been a very successful 
company. It has total sales of more than $200 million a year and 
employs about 65 people. 
 
In 1987 Westco built a storage terminal in Elstow. It has now 
spent about $3.7 million on a new building that will double the 
terminal's storage capacity for urea, phosphate, and ammonium 
sulfate. 
 
The Elstow terminal is one of the largest of its kind in western 
Canada. It already has the largest market share in Saskatchewan 
and is looking for continued growth with this expansion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the enterprising spirit displayed by 
Westco. This expansion is a vote of confidence in 
Saskatchewan's economy. Saskatchewan's economy is now one 
of the strongest in the country and it's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
that a successful company like Westco would want to expand 
its operations in Saskatchewan. 
 
I congratulate the company on the expansion of its fertilizer 
terminal in Elstow, and continued success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Soil Conservation Week 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
National Soil Conservation Week in Canada. Of course soil 
conservation is important, not only in my riding, but across 
Saskatchewan because agriculture plays a major role in our 
provincial economy. 
 
The survey of urban residents conducted through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan green plan urban awareness program 
suggests that there is a need to raise awareness of the positive 
actions undertaken by farmers in soil conservation. Those 
positive actions include “Save our Soils” and the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Agriculture Green Plan Agreement 
which promotes development in adoption of environmentally 
sound production practices which conserve our soil. 
 
As well there are programs which promote the benefits of direct 
seedings, programs which are being conducted by the 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to conserve this valuable resource which is so 
important to our way of life in Canada. 
 
Farmers will continue to develop and promote environmentally 
sustainable agricultural practices because this resource must be 
valuable for future generations of Saskatchewan residents. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

South-east Saskatchewan Volunteers Saluted 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
take a moment this afternoon to just acknowledge the work of  



April 5, 1995 

 
1377 

volunteers across the province of Saskatchewan. Certainly this 
province has been enhanced because men and women from all 
stripes and all persuasions have taken the time to volunteer and 
give of their efforts to serve their community or to serve a 
recreational group or a heritage or a cultural fund. 
 
This past weekend in Stoughton, the south-east Saskatchewan 
region had a volunteer award ceremony, and unfortunately due 
to previous commitments, I was unable to be there. However, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the work of the south-east 
group, volunteer awards group and recreation society, for the 
work they have done in continuing to promote this recognition. 
The recognition is given in many areas such as heritage, culture, 
and recreation, and a number of individuals from my 
constituency were recognized and I certainly would be remiss if 
I didn't recognize the work of these individuals, the work of 
volunteers, and how they benefit each and every one of our 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, Sunday I was also privileged to 
attend the volunteer recognition program for south-east 
Saskatchewan which was held at the Stoughton arts and 
entertainment centre. I should add that in addition to the awards 
ceremony, we were treated to a delightful three-act comedy 
performed by the Stoughton Players called One Toe in the 
Grave, and a delicious banquet. 
 
Mainly this was a day to pay tribute to the volunteers in our 
region who have contributed their time and effort to improving 
the cultural and recreational lives of our communities. I came 
across an interesting statistic, Mr. Speaker, a statistic for 
hard-nosed bottom liners who might be a bit cynical about the 
praise we give to the volunteers who we claim make 
Saskatchewan a special place. The amount of volunteered work 
and service injects $20 million in our economy every year — 
and that's nothing to be cynical about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people were honoured and deservedly so. At 
the risk of offending those left out, I would like to mention 
Colleen Weimer of Weyburn, who was given an award for 
cultural contributions; William Rudachyk of Weyburn for sport; 
Judy Buzowetsky of Weyburn for recreation; and Jill Beck of 
Milestone, who was named youth of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those recognized and all volunteers indeed play a 
valuable . . . or have a valuable essence in our community life, 
and I congratulate all who received recognition on Sunday. 
Their special contributions have a real value in our communities 
and beyond. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Region Science Fair 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I and 
many other interested spectators got a firsthand look at the 
shape of things to come as envisioned by the scientists and  

inventors of tomorrow. 
 
The Moose Jaw region science fair of Saskatchewan was held at 
the Palliser campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology). This, Mr. Speaker, is the 
largest of the 11 science fairs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Students in grades 7 to 12 from four southern school divisions 
displayed their exhibits. They came from Davidson, Mortlach, 
Moose Jaw, and towns in between. And they came from 
Lumsden and Pilot Butte in my constituency. 
 
I could not count the exhibits but I am told that there were 37 
judges who volunteered their time and expertise. So you have 
an idea of the size and of the fine job done by the organizers. 
 
The three overall winners will now go to the national science 
fair in Whitehorse, Yukon from May 13 to 22. The next three 
winners will be featured at the Science Centre in Regina on 
April 29 and 30. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the organizers of this science fair say that every 
year the entries get better, which should encourage those of us 
who are naturally optimistic about the future. 
 
I congratulate the winners and all contestants, and I believe 
SaskEnergy and the Department of Education should be 
applauded for being major sponsors of the science fairs of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Grain Elevator at Kelliher 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today in this Assembly to congratulate the 
community of Kelliher on the official opening of its new grain 
elevating system. Development on this system was started about 
eight years ago. 
 
In 1987 a group of local farmers got together to try to find some 
alternatives to shipping their grain. They discovered they could 
save on elevation costs by loading their own grain into railcars 
by themselves. So they decided to lease a section of track from 
the Canadian National Railway and purchase a 45-foot, 
electric-driven auger. 
 
Over the years the auger could not keep up with the loading, 
and so it was decided that a grain elevator leg system with a belt 
conveyor should be used. It seems a conveyor system was the 
right choice because it was more gentle on specialty crops and 
more and more farmers were diversifying in their production of 
these crops. 
 
A 35-foot used leg was purchased and erected at the site. With a 
few other additions, this system now has the capacity to load 
about 8,500 bushels an hour. 



April 5, 1995 

 
1378 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate this group of farmers 
and the community of Kelliher for seeing this project through to 
completion. It is the determination and commitment such as this 
that is making the difference in agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we heard 
the Deputy Premier whining about how it would be unfair to cut 
his pension, how he's counting on $65,000 a year to make ends 
meet in his old age. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a newspaper article from 1992, back when 
you personally cut the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. It talks 
about Mrs. Evelyn Pomedli, a mother of 11 who lives on a farm 
near Humboldt. She was getting $105 a month from the Sask 
Pension Plan and she used that money to pay for insulin. You 
cut her pension, Mr. Minister, to $44 a month. 
 
She was counting on . . . she wasn't counting on $65,000 a year, 
Mr. Minister, like you are. She was counting on $1,200 a year 
to help her buy insulin. You said that was too much and you cut 
it by more than half, Mr. Minister. 
 
My question is this: why was it fair to cut her $1,200 a year 
pension, yet it's not fair to cut your $65,000 a year pension? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
respond to the member opposite that the situation that existed in 
1991 was created by the former Conservative government. That 
pension plan was not eliminated; that pension plan still exists. 
People are able to contribute to it if they wish. 
 
There was a subsidy that was provided by the former 
government which was eliminated because the experience 
showed that that pension plan was benefiting people of higher 
income categories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that the member raises here today, which 
was raised by the Liberal member opposite, I think is a different 
type of an issue. But changing what we did to the pension plan 
that existed there does not in any way take away that pension 
plan. Although it was changed certainly because of the deficit 
that was created by the members opposite and because of some 
of the schemes that they introduced which were not workable 
because they were never intended to work; they were simply 
intended to try to get the former government re-elected. And 
obviously that didn't work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the reason you  

gave for cutting the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is that it had 
unfunded liability. Mr. Minister, your old MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) pension plan also has an unfunded 
liability, yet you don't go after those pensions. You didn't go 
after the Premier's $78,000 a year one, or your own for 65,000, 
or the member responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) now, the member from whatever 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Churchill Downs. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Regina Churchill Downs for $60,000, nor the 
Economic Development minister for 45,000, nor the member 
from Athabasca for $46,000. You didn't cut your own for 45. 
No, instead you went after this lady who wanted to use the 
money to buy her insulin. You went after that one. 
 
How can you have the gall, Mr. Minister, to say your pension is 
fair? Your pension is what we're talking about. We're not 
talking about the other; we're just talking about the comparison. 
How can you tell us that this pension that you have is fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it's exactly the 
reasons that the member identifies why it took an NDP 
government in 1979 to change the pension system in 
Saskatchewan. In 1979 the pension system for members of the 
legislature, for teachers, for public servants, for people who 
work in Crown corporations, was changed to a money purchase 
plan because it was not possible on an ongoing basis to sustain 
the pension system as it was then. 
 
That was negotiated; that was agreed to. Everybody understood 
what the rules were prior to 1979 and they understood what the 
rules are after the '79. So it took an NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government to deal with that issue and improve the 
pension plan to the point where even the taxpayers association 
of Canada and Saskatchewan say that it is the model that other 
provinces should use. 
 
We have fixed the problem. That is not . . . We have fixed the 
problem. And I want to ask the member from Morse then, if he 
wants to apply this principle, why does he not demand that the 
senator, his former colleague, Mr. Berntson, give up his 
double-dipping, give up his senator's salary and the pension 
plan that he got, which is the old plan? Why the double 
standard? 
 
I warn the member from Morse: don't fall into the same trap as 
the Liberal leader who is full of hypocrisy on this issue and sets 
a double standard, because she wants to apply different rules to 
everybody else than she wants to apply to her former Liberal 
colleagues, I might add, just as you want to apply different rules 
to your former Conservative colleagues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, there are a  



April 5, 1995 

 
1379 

whole lot more NDP MLAs who are double-dipping, including 
the former premier, including the former premier of 
Saskatchewan, who is now on boards of directors all across this 
province and earns more than $80,000 a year pension plan from 
this. And so if you want to disqualify one, disqualify them all. 
Don't just draw the line on one. 
 
My question is to you. My question was this, Mr. Minister: will 
you place your own pension — your pension, not anybody 
else's; yours and the Premier's and the member from 
Elphinstone, the now Associate Minister of Finance — will you 
place them in the same category that all the rest of the members 
of the Assembly are today? Will you give us that assurance that 
you will do that? That's the question, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, prior to 1979, when 
an individual applied and was awarded a public service job, 
they were done so, understanding what the terms of the 
conditions of their pay and their pensions are going to be. That's 
not different than Members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member opposite that why in 
his question he does not ask, why does the Liberal senator, 
Davey Steuart, get the old pension plan and receiving the 
senator's pension as well. Why is that not an important issue 
here? Because he's a Liberal. 
 
Why is Eric Berntson, the senator, a former Conservative 
caucus, receiving a senator's pay and will receive a senator's 
pension and also receive the pension from the province of 
Saskatchewan? Because he's a Conservative, Mr. Speaker. And 
you could itemize a long list of such names. Ted Malone, who's 
a judge; Cy MacDonald who used to work for the 
Conservatives; Ian MacDougall; Cliff McIsaac. 
 
I say to the members opposite, here we are on the 43rd day of 
this session of the legislature. They don't have anything to ask 
about debt or deficit reduction, anything to ask about jobs, 
anything to ask about deficits or tax reductions because every 
time they have done that they have embarrassed themselves. 
And short of having a substantial issue, they want to deal with 
hypocrisy, and hopefully by that, write for themselves an 
election pamphlet. That's what this is all about. This has got 
nothing to do with sincerity on the part of either or the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my leader has said that he is 
prepared to go all the way with this if he becomes elected as 
premier of this province. Will you do the same thing with yours 
and allow all those from Bob Long to Allan Blakeney to deliver 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. I would ask the member to direct his question through 
the Chair rather than at any particular members in the 
Assembly. And let's cut down the noise so we can hear the  

question and hear the answers. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My leader has 
indicated that he will provide an opportunity, if elected as 
premier of this province, to do exactly that as you have 
suggested, Mr. Minister. Will you do the same thing and show 
leadership for the first time, for the first time in this province, 
of reducing your own pensions? Will you provide that to the 
Assembly here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
amazing dissertation by the member from Morse. Let us only 
examine — and I don't have the time and the answering . . . to 
answer to a question in the House in question period — but one 
only has to look to the nine and a half years when those people 
were in power to know how much they cared about good 
management, they cared about setting an example, and they 
cared about what was happening to the financial situation of the 
province. 
 
Those promises today, Mr. Speaker, sound very hollow in the 
face of what the reality and what the record is. 
 
It's much like the Liberal leader, who I noted said to the media 
in answering to a question yesterday, in which she said in 1991, 
saying that, if I were to become the premier of the province the 
first thing that I would be . . . would be to substantially cut my 
salary. She is the first one in this Legislative Assembly, in spite 
of what she said, to take a 37 per cent increase in her salary 
without blinking an eye, Mr. Speaker, without apologizing for 
it, and without even suggesting that she should do away with it. 
 
A Liberal is a Conservative; a Conservative is a Liberal, for the 
purposes of this debate. Because in desperation to come up with 
a substantive issue, they have to come down to this kind of a 
level in order to try to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Premier, your weak, your weak defence of the 
indefensible, as you try to shore up some support for the 
unconscionable pensions that you are trying to support in this 
legislature, that is going to come back to haunt you in the next 
election, rest assured. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister for 
gambling. Madam Minister, I noted with interest your refusal to 
answer any of the questions put to you yesterday regarding slot 
machines, but I'm wondering if you'd try to answer them today. 
 
Why don't you start by explaining to this Assembly the 
difference between a slot machine and a VLT (video lottery  



April 5, 1995 

 
1380 

terminal)? And while you're at it, tell us how many slot 
machines — not VLTs — how many slot machines will be 
placed around the province and who is supplying them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member from 
Rosthern for his question. I'll answer it as I understood it. If I 
haven't gotten your whole question right, I know you'll get up 
again and explain it. 
 
There is a cap of 3,600 VLTs in the province. They're the ones 
that you can go in a bar and look at them and see what they look 
like. They're an electronic gaming machine. A slot machine is 
just a different gaming technology. 
 
There's a total of a thousand combined gaming machines in the 
combination of the Regina casino and the agreement with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians; a potential of 500 in that 
portion of the agreement, a thousand in total. And that's a 
combination of gaming machines, either VLTs and/or slot 
machines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Quite frankly, 
Madam Minister, I don't think you know what you're talking 
about and I think you're dealing from the bottom of the deck 
again. You're just not playing straight with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Quite frankly, Madam Minister, there isn't a whole heck of a lot 
of difference between a slot machine and a VLT, because lots 
of money goes in and very precious little goes out; that's the 
bottom line. And you're playing the old shell game with the 
number of VLTs and slot machines in the province, removing 
them from one facility, and then you go ahead and place them 
in another. 
 
And I want to give you a quote, a quote from a sign that was in 
the Buffalo Buck Casino. And that Buffalo Buck Casino sign 
read, and I quote: 
 
 In keeping with the provincial government's 

commitment to address the impacts of the influence of 
electronic gaming, the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Commission has adjusted the number of VLTs 
in this casino. Effective April 3 the number of VLTs in 
this establishment will be reduced from 198 to 100. 

 
Well, Madam Minister, we're making progress. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the member please put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I want to ask you, Madam Minister . . . and 
thank you for finally admitting VLTs and their numbers have a 
negative impact. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. If the member doesn't put his 
question, I'll recognize somebody else. Ask your question. 

Mr. Neudorf: — The question, Madam Minister: can you 
confirm that in those machines that will be relocated to other 
facilities, that what you are really doing is just expanding the 
impacts of electronic gaming from one community and moving 
it to another; that the total impact, negative impact, will still be 
there. Would you confirm that, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
thank the member from Rosthern for his question. Now I know 
that you're not ignoring all the answers you've received on this 
subject on purpose, so I'll just assume that you either have a 
short memory, you've lost your Hansard, and you can't take a 
look at it. 
 
But the fact is I've explained a number of times, that in response 
to concerns around VLT gaming, we placed a cap on the 
number of machines in the province. Now the exhibition 
association . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! This is the last warning 
I'm going to give in general. I'm going to start naming 
individual members. There is just too much interference either 
when the member asks a question or when the minister is trying 
to answer. Please give them a chance to at least ask their 
questions and answering the question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As was acknowledged subsequently in 
a further news report, the exhibition association did 
acknowledge that there was an agreement for interim use of 
those VLTs, but there are many legal site contractors 
throughout the province who are entitled under the legal terms 
and conditions of having VLTs to have them, and due to the 
cap, they're being redistributed throughout the network. 
 
Now you know that, unlike your government, we allocated $1.5 
million to education and prevention. And perhaps you might 
have considered doing that when you expanded bingo, 
privatized bingo gaming, in the '80s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan people have been listening to this NDP 
government try to justify why some members deserve special 
pensions. Today I want to table a letter. It's a letter which is 
signed by the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan to a resident, a 
senior in a our province, stating why this pensioner and his wife 
must have their pension reduced. And I quote: 
 
 I realize it is disappointing to have the guaranteed 

minimum pension subsidy of your pension 
discontinued; however given the current financial crisis 
facing Saskatchewan, the government simply could not 
afford it. 

 



April 5, 1995 

 
1381 

My question is to the Deputy Premier this afternoon. Those are 
your own words, sir. How is it that you're so willing to reduce 
this elderly couple's pension in the name of fiscal restraint, but 
the same standards don't apply to yourself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have already 
responded that there was a necessity in 1992 to make some 
changes because of the difficult circumstances which the 
former Conservative government left behind. 
 
But I want to ask the member from Greystone why she sets the 
double standard. I want to ask her if she is really sincere and not 
being hypocritical here today. Why she talks about, when asked 
whether she had just about the only . . . was the only person in 
the legislature who has been making a significant more money 
than any other member, she said, well of course. But things 
have changed. I have more responsibilities than the average 
member. And I want to say, how can the member opposite say 
that when it is her who has a four-day week in this legislature 
and has declared a personal holiday for herself every Friday. 
How can the member say that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order! I think the 
answers are getting a little too personal and . . . Order, order. 
Order. I will ask members to please direct their answers through 
the Speaker and their questions through the Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I respect what you're 
saying here so I won't go back into that. But I want to continue 
by asking the members opposite: how can she justify taking a 
37 per cent increase in her salary while she says to everybody 
else, including public servants and teachers . . . because under 
her proposals they will be next. There is no doubt about it. The 
other shoe will fall if the Liberals ever have a chance. How can 
she justify that and single out one group of people, leaving out 
Liberals and former Liberal members of this Legislative 
Assembly? Why is it such a hypocritical position that she takes 
here today simply in the interests of her own partisan political 
needs — because she has nothing else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the reasons why no one in this province, especially the 
700 or so people who were in Weyburn last night at a 
nominating meeting, have absolutely no belief in anything this 
government says is the total hypocrisy. 
 
I wonder indeed, if today the Minister of Justice is going to 
disagree with the extra pay for extra responsibilities, or if in fact 
he's going to remain at his MLA salary now that he's back in 
cabinet. If he in fact is going to forfeit the 75 per cent pay 
increase he automatically got today, 75 per cent for every 
person who became a cabinet minister in this government; 79 
per cent when the member from Kindersley became the Leader 
of the Opposition. Let's talk about reality here and stop this 
foolishness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this elderly couple, this elderly . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I wish the member would put 
her question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
elderly couple is but one example of hundreds of people 
throughout our province, and they were told by this Deputy 
Premier, in writing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I've asked the member to put her 
question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Deputy Premier, you have indicated 
that you work very hard and that is why you deserve this 
exorbitant pension. Other people work extremely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. This is the last time. If 
the member does not put her question, I'll recognize somebody 
else. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Deputy Premier, how do you explain 
the fairness in the double standard that you've created between 
yourself and other people in the general public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me talk 
about fairness and double standard by referring to a letter which 
the Liberal leader wrote to the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly Board of Internal Economy some time ago, before 
she even had a caucus in this House. And the reason I read . . . I 
raise this, Mr. Speaker, is because she did say that the Minister 
of Justice, who's now a minister, should not have a minister's 
salary. That the minister from . . . that the member from 
Kindersley, the Leader of the Official Opposition, not have an 
increase because somehow that doesn't make any difference 
why she got the 37 per cent. 
 
But before she had that caucus, she said in her letter: I 
respectively submit for your consideration my request for 
special funding. Although present legislation indicates that two 
members are required to achieve official party, I would like to 
request your approval for special funding. 
 
On the one hand, she says the rules made me do it, when she 
took the 37 per cent; on the other hand she says, in spite of the 
rules, give me more money, Mr. Speaker. That's the double 
standard we're hearing about here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the new Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, it's 
been an interesting week. I noticed that earlier in this week, 
people across this nation were quite pleased to see that baseball 
workers or the replacement players in baseball were fired and 
we can get on with the deal of playing baseball. Now I see the 
Premier has gotten rid of the replacement minister and we have 
a new minister. 
 



April 5, 1995 

 
1382 

Mr. Minister, I did ask a question though of the former minister 
regarding the investigation into the Phoenix case and the 
parameters that were given to the independent prosecutor. And, 
Mr. Minister, we had asked at that time if the minister would 
give us the information or the letter that he had sent to the 
prosecutor that laid out the guidelines for the investigation into 
the Phoenix affair. I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, will you table 
that for us today, please? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's good to be 
on my feet during question period again. And I thank the 
member for his question. I'm going to have to tell the member 
that I have to inform myself on that question. I'll report back to 
the House later. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, just a further question to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, while the former minister promised to 
provide that information, it's unfortunate, but we found out 
afterwards, while it was supposed to come to us, the media did 
actually get one. And there are a couple of points I'd like to 
bring to your attention — maybe you'd review these as well — 
regarding the letter and the two major flaws we find with it. 
 
First of all, the prosecutor can only recommend whether 
Phoenix Advertising or any of its employees should be charged. 
Secondly, the investigation should be left open ended so that 
the prosecutor is free to recommend charges against any 
individual he sees fit. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it seems to us that what the former minister 
did was place a strait-jacket over the investigation. I'm 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you're willing to open that up and 
allow for a total and independent investigation so at the end of 
the day the public in general can feel that they have been served 
well by this investigation. Will you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
from information coming across the House that the letter has in 
fact been made public, which is probably the answer to the 
member's first question. But I'll check into that. 
 
I think though that the member is off base with respect to his 
last question. Surely the issue here is whether or not the 
prosecutorial decisions in Saskatchewan, made here with 
respect to Phoenix, were or were not correct, and that question 
of whether or not that exercise of prosecutorial discretion with 
respect to Phoenix Advertising was appropriate or not. In other 
words, what does the special prosecutor think should be done 
with respect to Phoenix? 
 
Now if the member is suggesting there should be some kind of 
a massive fishing trip conducted by a special prosecutor, we see 
no need for that. There is not a scintilla of evidence that 
anybody else is involved. The question which was raised in this 
House by the hon. member was the question of whether or not  

Phoenix should be charged, and that's the question which of 
course has been referred. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No 56 — An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take a 
great deal of pleasure to rise today and move second reading of 
a long overdue Bill. And I emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Bill is long overdue. And as I carry on with my remarks and 
come to my conclusion, I think it will be obvious why I think 
so. 
 
This is a Bill which will give recognition to the many thousands 
of volunteers with which our province is very blessed. Since 
1985 the Saskatchewan Order of Merit has recognized 
exceptional individuals. However, only a few could be 
recognized for their service as volunteers. This Bill establishes 
a system of recognition devoted entirely to volunteers, the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
I have said that this Bill is long overdue. This is because 
Saskatchewan has the reputation of having the most volunteers 
in Canada without any exception. In fact the social and 
economic growth and development of our province could not 
have been achieved without the dedication of the thousands of 
people who unselfishly gave of their time and skills to the 
betterment of their neighbours and their province. While some 
have been recognized on a local level, it is time that we as 
province recognize the important role volunteers have played 
and continue to play in Saskatchewan's growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our people have been offering their services since 
the early days of our province, and even before. The first 
settlers quickly recognized that to survive in the harsh and 
unforgiving environment, they had to rely on each other, they 
looked out for each other, and from that early involvement with 
neighbours was born a tradition of volunteering. 
 
That spirit of cooperation, of working with one's neighbours for 
the betterment of the community, has been passed on from 
generation to generation. As our population grew, hospitals 
were needed, and it was volunteers who worked to organize our 
province's first hospitals. Hospital boards, school boards, and 
other similar groups were first formed by volunteers. 
 
Farmers realized that they could not increase the opportunities 
to market their product if they worked . . . if they worked 
together, they could increase those opportunities. Cooperatives 
were formed. And from them grew such organizations as the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the cooperative movement, credit  



April 5, 1995 

 
1383 

unions, and many other organizations that have had a profound 
impact on the development not only of Saskatchewan but all of 
Canada. 
 
This year, Saskatchewan celebrates 90 years as a province. In 
those 90 short years, our people have created a compassionate 
and a caring society  a society which has it roots in volunteers 
who have worked together to help bring about our 
Saskatchewan of today. 
 
And what of today, Mr. Speaker? Does our society still require 
volunteers? Because from time to time I have heard people say 
that they are not important. I do not agree. One need not look 
very far to find the answer to that question, and I say it's a 
resounding yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 6,000 registered charities in 
Saskatchewan, almost of all of them served by volunteers in one 
capacity or another, and without them the charities could not 
operate. These volunteers touch almost every segment of our 
society. In winter, we see them in our rinks coaching youngsters 
in skating, in hockey, in ringette, in curling. In summer they 
move to the ball diamonds, soccer and football fields. 
 
(1415) 
 
Many of our elderly could not stay in their own homes without 
the help of volunteers who visit, who deliver meals, clean walks 
in the winter, and cut grass in the summer. Cultural 
organizations, youth groups, churches, service clubs, and the 
list is endless and one could go on and on. 
 
So why do people volunteer, Mr. Speaker? It is certainly not an 
easy thing to do. With the increased pressures in our society, 
people must make a greater effort than ever before to devote 
their time and resources to volunteer service. It often means real 
personal sacrifice of time from work and from the family. 
 
In true Saskatchewan spirit, our people volunteer because of 
their tradition of concern, of caring for their neighbours. They 
volunteer again and again and are rewarded by knowing that 
they have helped their fellow citizens. It is safe to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that without volunteers society would collapse as we 
know it. And yet they receive little recognition. 
 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal will help correct that. It gives 
us an opportunity as a province, and as a provincial community, 
to say thank you to these unsung heroes, to recognize their 
generosity, to put them forward as role models for all of us and 
for our young people. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge and to thank 
Mr. Jack Glasser of Regina, the designer of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. It is a beautiful design that will tell everyone 
that the wearer is a unique and a special individual who has 
given unselfish service to society. I know it will be worn with 
pride. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is with much pride and with great pleasure 
that I now am able to move second reading of The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to deal with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
While the minister didn't comment on it, there are two parts to 
this particular piece of legislation. One is the volunteer 
recognition which is very, very important in this province. It's 
the volunteers of this province, Mr. Speaker, that are the glue 
that holds our society together. They're the people who make 
the things in our small communities in particular, but also in the 
larger urban areas, who make our society work. 
 
When I think to my own communities, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn't 
for the volunteers, there would be no skating rink. If it wasn't 
for the volunteers, there would be no community hall. There 
would be very little, if any, support for seniors in my own 
community if it was not for the volunteers. And in fact in a lot 
of cases, Mr. Speaker, it's the seniors that are providing support, 
volunteer support, for the seniors. 
 
In my community a group of the ladies who are seniors 
themselves put on bake sales, provide lunches at auctions, to 
support additional facilities for the seniors' nursing homes. 
They provide the new television sets; they provide the VCRs 
(video cassette recorder); they go in and provide entertainment. 
And it's all done on a volunteer basis, Mr. Speaker, with no 
reward other than the satisfaction of helping someone else. 
 
I think back to Kara Smith, who is a four-year-old little girl 
from the community of Carievale, who needed a heart 
transplant. Mr. Speaker, the community of Redvers, which is 35 
miles away, who didn't know Kara Smith or her family, put on 
two concerts to provide funds to support that family while they 
had to stay in Toronto. 
 
That's what volunteers are all about, Mr. Speaker, in our small 
communities. They do all those things that need to be done to 
make the community work and to keep the people together. 
 
It's just not the individual volunteers, Mr. Speaker, that provide 
this service in our communities that need to be recognized, for 
whom this type of award is very important. It's also the 
corporate entities within our communities, Mr. Speaker, that 
provide that kind of support. 
 
With Kara Smith it was Canadian Air that provided the 
opportunity for her parents to travel to Toronto. It was Ronald 
McDonald House that provided accommodations for them and 
assisted with that air travel, Mr. Speaker. So it's the volunteer 
people within our communities and the corporations that assist 
in that that deserve the recognition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we're in favour of an honour to be presented to those 
people who make such large, long-term, lifelong commitments  



April 5, 1995 

 
1384 

to their community and to the support of those communities. 
That kind of recognition was given three years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, when the federal government came out with their 
125th anniversary commemorative awards that were given to 
volunteers and to people who serve . . . who provide public 
service to their communities. 
 
In my own communities, Mr. Speaker, those awards went to a 
couple of gentlemen that are well up in their 80's who have 
provided unselfishly of their time and of their efforts to support 
their communities. One was a long-term mayor of the 
community of Alida. Approximately 40 years he served as 
mayor, dedicated most of his life to that job, Mr. Speaker, and 
he was one of those recipients of the Canada 125 medal. He 
would be a worthy recipient, Mr. Speaker, of this type of 
Saskatchewan volunteer award. 
 
The other part of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the changing of our 
provincial bird. Now the bird itself, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is 
not changing, although I can't be sure about that because they're 
changing the Latin name for the bird being recognized. So I'm 
not exactly sure, Mr. Speaker, and we will have to get into this 
with the minister, whether they're changing birds or they're just 
changing the name of the bird, because in consultation with two 
different encyclopedias, I come up with different answers. So 
it's going to be very . . . I think we're going to have to get into 
this a little bit with the minister to determine what is happening, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to do further research in contacting the ornithological 
societies, Mr. Speaker, to determine exactly which bird is going 
to be recognized as our provincial emblem, I believe we need 
some more time to look into this, Mr. Speaker. Therefore at this 
time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 35 — An Act 
to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 
1993 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to make a few 
comments as we debate the Bill in adjourned debates because I 
want to raise a few issues and a few concerns and then spend a 
little bit more time doing some research. 
 
We're dealing with Bill 35, Mr. Speaker, talking about The 
Department of Economic Development Act, 1993, which was 
passed two sessions ago, and now we need to amend that. And, 
Mr. Speaker, some of the concerns that we have I want to 
highlight at this time. 
 
The minister, in his second reading speech, indicated that this is 
a simple matter of being a housekeeping Bill. And certainly on  

the face of it, it might appear to be just that. However we have 
from experience learned not to take everything at face value that 
the Minister of Economic Development might say in this 
Assembly. 
 
So when I look at the Bill, Mr. Speaker, it's about a half a page 
long. And now there are two kinds of Bills that give me some 
concern. It's the voluminous Bills that are 2 and 3 and 400 
pages long — and you don't know and you can't really find out 
what is hidden between the pages — or these extremely short 
Bills that pretend to be rather unobtrusive and something not to 
be concerned about. 
 
And as I did some research already, Mr. Speaker, it becomes 
evident that there are some fairly glaring questions that are 
going to have to be asked. But then of course in order to be able 
to ask intelligent questions it does involve a little bit of 
research. And I've done some already, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The apparent effect of the Bill is to extend the loan powers of 
the minister — the loan powers, the ability to set interests rates, 
the ability to seize chattels, to seize goods, and then also to be 
able to sell them off. These are the powers that are going to be 
attributed to the Minister of Economic Development. 
 
And then there are special, Mr. Speaker — at the same time — 
special specific reference to the new northern development fund 
as it's called. And that allows, Mr. Speaker, this minister to set 
interest rates, to set the terms of the loans, and then also, as I 
have said before, allows him to sell off seized property from 
any loans that might have been defaulted from. 
 
Now this, as the minister says, corrects a gap that was caused by 
the repeal of The Economic Development and Tourism Act. 
But, Mr. Speaker, there's a couple of things that the minister is 
not telling us. 
 
And firstly I have to wonder why this was not put into the 
original economic development 1993 Act if it is such a standard 
provision as the minister would have us believe. 
 
And secondly it seems to me that the government already has 
powers that describe . . . through the provisions of clause 16 of 
the original Act which allows the Lieutenant Governor to set 
regulations for anything mentioned in the Bills. Specifically, I 
might add, including loans. 
 
But then of course you start looking into the reason and the 
cause for this, and you realize that this provision, this new 
provision, requires regulations to be passed by OC (order in 
council) and published — not the new one and the present Act, 
but in the 1993 Act while this Bill allows these matters to fall 
entirely under the minister's discretion. 
 
So I guess what we're saying, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister 
of everything will now also be the minister that can decide who 
gets a loan, how much that loan is going to be, what the interest 
of that loan is going to be, the terms of repayment, Mr. Speaker. 
And it's not going to have to go through an OC, an order in  



April 5, 1995 

 
1385 

council. 
 
And that is significant because order in council is where the 
cabinet as a whole has to make a decision and pass that 
regulation. And then after the entire cabinet — not just the 
Minister of Economic Development — has made that decision, 
then it behoves the government to gazette it. In other words, to 
publish the results so that the citizens of Saskatchewan can see, 
can know, can understand what is going on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that will not have to be the case and 
everything can be done within the parameters of the Minister of 
Economic Development's office himself. 
 
Now it's noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, to note also that the minister 
tries to distract us in his speech by saying that this Bill only 
impacts on the northern development fund. Now I would admit, 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, that is the most immediate effect. That 
is the most immediate impact of this Bill. We'll talk about that 
in a little while. 
 
(1430) 
 
However, what the minister would again like us to ignore in this 
House is that the provisions of the old economic and tourism 
Act referred exclusively to the northern revolving fund. 
 
What this Bill does, it expands the minister's discretion for the 
entire length and breadth of his department. I repeat that, Mr. 
Speaker. This does not restrict it to the northern development 
fund only, but rather gives that minister the power of those 
items that I have already enunciated for the entire breadth and 
length of his department. And we know that that is a massive 
department dealing with million and millions of dollars. 
 
It allows this minister to strike deals with whomever he pleases 
under whatever conditions he pleases, with no reference 
whatsoever to either this Assembly or even to cabinet. And we 
oppose this Bill on that basis, Mr. Speaker, because we believe 
this to be a very dangerous move. And we will certainly be 
giving the minister opportunity to explain why we should 
change our minds, because like so much that this government 
has done, it runs contrary to the fundamental tenets of 
responsible government. And as well, given the substantial 
funds as I have indicated that this department controls, we 
believe that the taxpayers of this province will be, quite frankly, 
poorly served by this broad fiefdom being afforded to the 
minister's office. 
 
However let us leave this discussion aside for the moment as 
these are issues that we will be undoubtedly exploring in greater 
depth and greater detail as we get into the committee stage of 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since the minister in his remarks waxed eloquent about the new 
northern development fund, I would like to take a few moments 
to address the government's northern economic development 
initiatives and indeed, Mr. Speaker, for that matter, its 
economic development strategy as a whole. 

The minister said in his second reading speech that the main 
reason for this Bill is to bring the provisions of the new 
northern development fund more into line with the old northern 
revolving fund. Now let it be noted that our caucus is in favour 
of promoting these special economic development needs of the 
North, and we have long been supporters of programs such as 
the northern revolving fund. 
 
However it looks like this government took the idea of a 
revolving fund a little too seriously. They seem to have just 
revolved the old program into a new one that has much the 
same mandate and guidelines, but at the same time with a lot of 
potentially shady consequences. So they're not really doing, Mr. 
Speaker, anything new for the North. They are recycling old 
programs so that they can make impressive news releases. 
 
Now the flip side of the coin is, I suppose, our caucus should be 
flattered that the current government thinks the previous 
government's programs were so good that the best that they can 
do is to imitate them, and so I will take that as a compliment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
While there may be a clever political strategy involved here, it 
is poor economic development strategy. And I think it develops 
and it illustrates too well the poverty of ideas that exist on the 
other side of the House, and the very title of the economic 
development Act points to this. It used to be Economic 
Development and Tourism, but this government dropped the 
Tourism department it seems and they finally just threw up their 
hands and said, well let someone else do that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I took a look at the explanatory notes as 
well that accompanied this Bill. And usually what happens 
under the explanatory notes, it gives guidance and reasons for 
some of the changes that the amending Act is supposed to 
accomplish. And I find that as I go through it that I'm getting 
more questions being raised in my mind than answers being 
given. 
 
And we are currently involved in doing research on this Bill so 
that in fact we will be a credible opposition when we take the 
minister to task in the Committee of the Whole. And we need 
just a little bit more time to accomplish that objective, Mr. 
Minister. So I beg leave now to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before we proceed to consideration of 
the Bill, I would ask the Minister of Health to please introduce 
the officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To assist in our 
deliberations this afternoon are Mr. Bryan Middlemiss, health 
statutes . . . he'll be working particularly on the health statutes 
Bill. He is the director of the medical care insurance branch.  



April 5, 1995 

 
1386 

Drew Johnston, a professional analyst with the department. 
Bonnie Swan, who is director of our medical laboratory 
licensing branch. And Rick Hischebett, who is a solicitor with 
Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it's 
interesting to note, and one would ask why we indeed have the 
Bill 38, An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes, before us 
today. 
 
If I'm not mistaken, from some of the discussion we've already 
. . . that has taken place in the second reading speech given by 
the minister, I believe the minister had indicated that part of the 
reason for this Act was the fact that no-fault insurance has 
created some problems, and in order to cover off some of 
problems that have occurred in the way payments are made, is 
the reason for the Act. 
 
And it would seem to me that possibly when the government 
was arguing and proposing the no-fault insurance Act last year, 
that there should have been some discussion at least with the 
department as to how payments would take place and whether 
or not this Act should have followed the Act that we had 
introduced last year, rather than coming in this year. 
 
And I'm wondering whether or not the reasoning for the Act, if 
there's been a difficulty in collecting payments for fees due to 
negligence or other injuries as a result of the changes to the 
no-fault insurance Act. And I'm wondering if the minister could 
bring us up to date as to the real purposes and reasons for this 
Act and why we're debating it today; whether it would not have 
been more appropriate last year. 
 
But I guess at the end of the day, the real responsibility of this 
Assembly is to make sure all Acts conform and pick up where 
different Acts may interfere with original Acts. 
 
So if the minister could just bring us up to date on the real 
reasons for the Act before us and the implications of the Act 
and how it addresses some of the inequities regarding payments 
that are made under the original Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for his 
comments and questions. There is some accuracy in what he 
says. Certainly that a portion of this piece of legislation is as a 
result of changes to the insurance structure and payment 
structure over at SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
under the concept that now is in place. 
 
I wouldn't say that this created a problem; it has created a 
change. And so recognizing that change  and indeed the 
change was anticipated  we felt it was appropriate to bring 
the legislation in the first session after the change has occurred. 
And so that's why it's in this session. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, 
that amendments consolidate authority under The Department  

of Health Act for the costs of insured medical and hospital 
services that must be recovered by the department where these 
costs were incurred as a result of negligence on the part of 
someone else. And is that true, Mr. Minister, that it does incur 
the . . . where these costs were incurred as a result of 
negligence, is that true that it allows the consolidation of these 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, yes. Yes, this is true. This is 
really in essence no change. What has happened . . . what has 
been happening for many years is that costs are recovered from 
insurance companies, primarily of course in our circumstance, 
from SGI. 
 
What this does is to consolidate this under The Health Statutes 
Act. So what we're doing is just kind of consolidating the 
legislation. It consolidates what's been going on for many, many 
years, and it takes into account the new circumstance with the 
insurance mechanism at SGI. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, last year the former minister, 
Minister Simard, announced in her release, and I'm quoting 
from the release here: 
 
  . . . announced an agreement has been reached with the 

Victoria Square Medical Clinic in Regina on a new 
method of payment for its doctors. 

 
 (And it was a) . . . three-year agreement between 

Saskatchewan Health and the clinic comes into effect 
June 1 . . . 

 
 . . . where funding will be provided to the clinic on the 

basis of the number of residents it serves for the 
majority of services provided. This means 
population-based funding will take the place of the 
traditional fee-for-service method whereby doctors are 
reimbursed strictly for the specific services they 
provided. 

 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is this Bill basically 
addressing some of the aspect of that type of billing as well? 
The amendments we're discussing, are they necessary not only 
because of the no-fault insurance, but as well the introduction 
of the new population-based funding arrangements that you've 
arrived at? And I'm wondering how many other clinics have you 
arrived at or have made these arrangements with. Is it still just 
the Regina or the Victoria Square Medical Clinic or has it 
expanded beyond that? And I wonder if you could explain that 
for us, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair; to the member, yes. He 
has this correct, that the legislation also now takes into account 
those situations where positions are being reimbursed on an 
alternate payment mechanism from fee for service. The current 
circumstance has allowed this to happen in the areas of 
fee-for-service payment. Now this broadens it to encompass the 
kind of alternate payment mechanism that the member refers to 
in the news release from the Victoria circumstance here in  



April 5, 1995 

 
1387 

Regina. 
 
I don't have at my disposal right now, the exact number of 
alternate payment circumstances there are in the province. I 
know that there are a number of them and we are regularly 
being approached by medical doctors and others to talk about 
pilot projects and alternate funding mechanisms. So I don't have 
the exact number here, but this will provide that we can recoup 
no matter whether it's a fee-for-service arrangement or whether 
it's a capitation or a salaried circumstance. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, based on this arrangement with the 
Victoria Square Medical Clinic — and I'm sure by now you've 
got some figures to kind of show whether or not it's working; 
whether it's a better arrangement or more workable arrangement 
— I'm wondering if you could indicate to us what type of costs 
may have incurred . . . been incurred; whether or not you found 
it to be somewhat of a saving to the health care and health 
funding in the province of Saskatchewan versus the strictly fee 
for service. 
 
And as well could you also indicate the type of acceptability or 
the amount of acceptability, whether the professions themselves 
. . . I understand it . . . I'm just going to read a further paragraph 
from the news release. 
 
 This arrangement is also more flexible (it says). There is 

much more incentive for physicians to work with other 
health professionals in meeting their patients' overall 
health needs because their reimbursement is no longer 
tied to providing specific services. 

 
Now based on those comments — and it's almost, well not quite 
a year later; we're about 10 months after the fact — are you 
finding as I indicated earlier that there are some opportunities 
for a more effective use of the health dollar? And as well, do 
you find that physicians in general, especially in clinics such as 
this, find it easier to work together in meeting the health needs 
of individuals? And I wonder if you could basically bring us up 
to date on how it has worked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to suggest to the 
member perhaps we could have a much more informed 
discussion about this specific Victoria Square project and other 
alternate payment mechanism projects that are happening 
around the province in a different context. The officials who are 
with us here today are the officials with the technical expertise 
around the piece of legislation that we're working with here in 
committee today. We don't have some of the statistical 
information that you're requesting in your questions. 
 
I want to make clear to the member that the piece of legislation 
that we're dealing with is not legislation which enables alternate 
payment mechanisms to occur, or pilot projects like the Victoria 
Square project. This legislation is not enabling legislation for 
that purpose. What this legislation does is accommodate under 
The Health Statutes Act, a collection of fees, whether those are  

paid under a fee-for-service mechanism or under one of these 
new payment mechanisms. 
 
So this legislation does not enable that to happen, and in that 
regard it's not related closely to your questions. I'm going to 
suggest perhaps to the member that we could discuss this in the 
process of estimates. I'd be very happy to discuss it with him 
there. 
 
I can say generally, without the advantage of the expertise of 
departmental officials, and I know we both appreciate that as 
these projects have been unfolded, these pilot projects are being 
tested, there is a certain receptivity among the medical 
community to look at these various options. And we know from 
the experience, for instance, of the community clinics which 
have served in our province for many years with salaried 
physicians, that in fact it can be a very viable yet alternate 
method of payment for doctors. 
 
So I'd ask the member that we might postpone this more 
detailed discussion about the Victoria Square and about the 
alternate payment mechanisms and the pilot projects that are 
happening and their success, and the good news that may be 
happening there until we're into the process of estimates, which 
we may get to later this afternoon or at some early opportunity. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I'm just 
going to go back to some of the comments I made in response 
to your second reading speech and just bring out a couple 
points here. And then maybe you could add to them or just 
correct me if I'm wrong. 
 
But I understand the Act allows Saskatchewan Health to 
continue to recover negligence-related medical and hospital 
costs in the new insurance and health funding environment. 
And prior to no-fault, Saskatchewan Health could directly 
recover medical and hospital costs caused by automobile 
accidents where those costs were due to negligence on the part 
of someone else. And this is no longer possible under no-fault. 
 
And SGI has agreed to reimburse Saskatchewan Health for 
these costs. Costs are expected to be around 4.5 million 
annually. I understand Saskatchewan Health will still be able to 
recover health costs incurred due to someone else's negligence 
with the claims unrelated to automobiles and with respect to 
non-resident auto accidents. 
 
And this Bill also accommodates cost recovery for third-party 
liability medical claims in situations where fee for services is 
not applicable  more specifically, for population-based 
funding medical doctors. 
 
Now that comes back I think to part of the discussion we just 
had. And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just correct 
me if I'm wrong — have I understood somewhat of where the 
Bill is going and the intent of the Bill? And just explain that a 
little carefully so we've got a better understanding of what the 
Bill is actually doing for us. 
 



April 5, 1995 

 
1388 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member has it exactly 
correct, exactly as he has described it here in the House this 
afternoon. That is the purpose of the Bill. 
 
Again I would repeat that what is happening here is not 
something new; it has been happening for many, many years 
where the Department of Health has been able to reclaim some 
monies where there has been negligence involved. These 
monies have come from the insurance companies, and in our 
case primarily from SGI through auto-related accidents. 
 
The total amount of money typically has been about $4.5 
million, so it's not a small amount of money, and an important 
part of our health budget. And what this legislation does, it just 
enables that to continue, that process to continue under the new 
insurance scheme in place at SGI, and taking into account other 
methods of payment than fee for service. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I gather from what 
you've just indicated, this just allows the continuing process of 
recovering funds for in specific matters such as negligence in 
certain situations and also community-based funding programs. 
It allows that process to continue. 
 
I understand as well that it allows . . . to help streamline the 
existing health legislation. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair. The streamlining 
essentially is to bring under this one piece of legislation 
provisions which now exist under two other pieces of 
legislation. So these are brought from The Saskatchewan 
Medical Care Insurance Act and from The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act. These provisions are now being brought 
together and streamlined under The Department of Health Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, does this 
basically affect anyone in the field? Does the Bill create undue 
hardship for anyone as far as medical professional at all? Or are 
the recommendations coming as a result of concerns raised by 
the medical profession or specifically just the department itself 
trying to streamline the whole process of funding in the area of 
health in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, essentially, Mr. Chair, there is no 
one beyond government itself that is essentially affected by this. 
It is to streamline under the piece of legislation and it's to reflect 
both the change in the insurance provisions at SGI and to effect 
change to adapt to the new payment mechanisms being made 
available to medical doctors, particularly capitation. 
 
So beyond the functions of government itself, there will be little 
or no effect in the community. What has happened for many 
years will continue to happen. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The 
Medical Profession Act, 1981 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could 
you just update us on the purposes of this specific Act and 
whether or not there are direct . . . individuals directly affected 
such as people within the medical field. 
 
And who would have brought forward the recommendations 
and why would they have been brought forward? And whether 
consultation took place between the different sectors of the 
medical professions before you had dealings with this Act so 
that at the end of the day, that we know when the Act is passed 
and comes into effect, that we're not going to have people on 
our case because we didn't raise appropriate questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the issues that are within the 
amendment to the Act here essentially came via concerns being 
raised and issues being raised, not concerns, by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons and from within the Department of 
Health, and in particular, at least with one of the provisions, 
from our mental health branch. 
 
Just to review with the member some of the provisions of the 
Act. Currently a Minister of Health in the province has the 
authority to require the College of Physicians and Surgeons to 
issue special licences to psychiatrists and medical health 
officers who are employed in the provincial public service even 
though they may not yet meet the full requirements for 
registration as a specialist. 
 
Now on April 1, just days ago, these individuals who have 
served the people of Saskatchewan working with the 
Department of Health have now been transferred to employees 
of the district health boards, with the transfer of all the 
community-based health services. 
 
And so the amendment that we're here debating today will 
ensure that these particular physicians will not lose their special 
licences that have been issued. And so this is a timely matter 
and it's important in maintaining the licensing of those 
particular health care-givers. 
 
Now there are also some changes here again which came 
through joint discussions with the college and the department 
with recommendations from the college and much consultation 
of course with the college. And these amendments we might 
describe as matters of accountability and public accountability. 
And it brings consistency also with other pieces of newer 
professional legislation. 
 
And so for instance, as you know, within the Act the time 
period in which the public can take civil action against a 
physician for negligence is changed from 12 months to 24 
months. And so we've gone from a one-year period . . . this Act 
would take it to a two-year period. 
 



April 5, 1995 

 
1389 

And another amendment that we're looking at here in this piece 
of legislation allows the college's committee which investigates 
patient complaints, the ability to apply to the courts for 
subpoenas for witnesses to testify. And it is believed that this 
will assist the college in properly investigating a variety of 
complaints. 
 
A third amendment which we see as improving accountability 
will require the College of Physicians and Surgeons to file an 
annual report with the Minister of Health. 
 
There is a third section or a third issue being dealt with here, 
and this is the amendment that will concern provisional or 
temporary licences, which we believe will make the Act more 
flexible by removing reference to specific countries' 
qualifications. 
 
That kind of detail is subject to change over time, and that kind 
of detail we believe is better suited to the by-laws as opposed to 
being within the Act, so that each time a change is needed it 
needs legislative change. We believe that's perhaps better suited 
to the by-laws to give a little more flexibility. Now of course 
any by-law change still has to be approved publicly by the 
Minister of Health. 
 
There are two other announcements concerning the use of the 
college's . . . or the college's use of legal counsel and the 
assessment of fees. These are also proposed to make the Act a 
little more flexible and workable for the college and for medical 
doctors practising in our province. 
 
We have consulted of course with the . . . not only with the 
College of Physicians of Surgeons but also with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and to my knowledge there 
have been no major concerns raised by either group or by 
anyone beyond those groups. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
indicated that there is an extension of length of time, from 12 to 
— and did I hear you say 24 months? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Twenty-four months — or a time period where 
people can make complaints against . . . I would imagine that it 
would be against a medical officer or a professional if they feel 
their negligence has come into place. 
 
I'm wondering why you would extend that period. What's the 
rationale for extending it? It seems to me 12 months or a year 
gives you . . . or gives a patient adequate time. Or are there 
cases where medical problems in some types of procedures may 
tend to show up past that time period? Is that one of the reasons 
why you've allowed or opened up or brought forward that 
extension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think shortly put, Mr. Chair, we believe  

this does allow the public, individuals who may have a concern 
or a complaint, a greater period of time in which to access their 
right to express that concern and have it investigated. And so 
we do see it as in some ways a public issue with accountability 
and benefit to the public. 
 
However it also brings this piece of legislation into a little more 
consistent stance with other pieces of newer . . . newer pieces of 
legislation. It also then makes this Act consistent with The 
Limitation of Actions Act. And finally, it was a 
recommendation of the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So putting those things together, and again with consultation 
with the college, we believe this is the right thing to do, both for 
the profession and for the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you as well have indicated that 
these amendments to the Act may make it, I think indicated may 
make it, easier for individuals to come and practise medicine in 
this province, and I'm wondering . . . It had something to do 
with regards to the naming of doctors from different countries, 
and right now I know that that's one of the major complaints of 
the medical professionals looking at Canada. 
 
It's the format and the red tape that they must go through in 
order to come into this province. And we're fortunate in the area 
of the province that I represent to have some very good and 
excellent qualified doctors. However one of the areas they find 
a little bit of frustration in, especially in trying to get 
professionals into the rural communities, is the type of red tape 
and the legislation that is there today and the writing of exams. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what I'm asking you, does this address the 
writing of exams and some of the red tape that's involved? Or 
the format, is it simplifying the format for people who would 
like to come and practise in Saskatchewan to come and practise 
here? Or what specifically are you talking in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to try and be very 
accurate about this. For the member, no, this will not have an 
impact on the examination process. The college establishes its 
examination process. 
 
What this change is, my understanding is that under the current 
Act, there are a number of countries actually identified in the 
Act — in the Act itself — which are recognized and which 
medical qualifications are recognized by the college. Now 
these, I think, just generally because of our tradition and history 
in Canada and in Saskatchewan, these tend to be 
Commonwealth countries that are identified in the Act. Now we 
know that the world is changing, and for instance if we wish to 
welcome a physician from Holland into Saskatchewan or if we 
wanted to recognize the qualifications in Holland, it would 
require a change in the Act. 
 
What this will propose to do is to take that list of countries out 
of the Act and rather put it into the circumstantive by-laws, so  



April 5, 1995 

 
1390 

that it can be more flexible; as the college recognizes other 
qualifications from other countries, that they can be changed in 
a by-law. Now again I would remind the member that any 
by-law of course, change still has to be approved by the 
minister. But it provides a little more flexibility rather than 
having to amend the Act each and every time the college would 
recommend that another country be added to the list. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, then it really 
doesn't address the red tape or the format that a person would 
go through in applying to come and practice in Canada. There's 
still a time period and certain number of exams that must be 
written prior to . . . and I think that's one of the biggest concerns 
many people would look at coming to Canada. 
 
But the biggest problem is the misunderstanding that I think 
individuals run into as to the qualifications, how they qualify. 
What's the process? Some doctors, a couple of doctors in our 
area actually, came in and found out that they had to go back 
out to apply for . . . and I'm not exactly sure of the total format. 
But then even to write exams, it took quite a while before they 
had an opportunity to write their exams. And in the process, 
they're sitting in a state of limbo as to whether they continue to 
practice or whether they should even be looking at practising in 
this province. 
 
And in rural Saskatchewan specifically, many of the physicians 
have chosen in the last little while to look at rural areas, and 
certainly people in rural communities who have been hit by a 
number of the changes in health care would like to guarantee 
that they will have access to doctors, that doctors would choose 
their community. 
 
So what you're saying, this doesn't specifically deal with that 
issue. Is there another area that in dealing with that issue or is 
. . . maybe that's something that we'll have to discuss a little 
more openly in a broader format I guess in department 
estimates. But maybe you could respond, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I'd be happy to try and 
respond at least partially. We can have a further, a further 
discussion if the member wants. 
 
The member I think understands that the provision of licensing 
physicians in Saskatchewan does not belong to government, but 
belongs legislatively and appropriately to the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons who establish their processes and 
examination processes and so on. Now I recognize that some 
may argue that the process is too stringent; others may argue the 
other side of that equation. I think we would all agree we do 
want some relatively stringent provisions for the licensing of 
doctors who will practice in our communities. Now that work is 
left to the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
Now I'm told that the process in Saskatchewan, as compared to 
the processes as it exists in other provinces, while it is stringent 
and in many ways parallels what does happen in every other 
province of Canada, is still seen to be the most flexible 
licensing procedure of . . . if not the most, one of the most  

flexible licensing procedures across Canada. 
 
So I recognize that the by-laws which respect to the 
examination of physicians who will be coming to practise in our 
province from another jurisdiction are quite stringent. It is a 
matter that is determined by the College of Physicians and not 
by government. 
 
Now what is happening here is that the very first, the very first 
issue that the college will look at when determining whether a 
physician should be licensed to practise in our province, the 
very first issue on the list will be, is that person a graduate of a 
university that is approved by the council, from a nation, from a 
university that is approved by the council? 
 
Now up until this change, the nations that have been approved 
under legislation have all been listed in the Act. They have 
tended to be Commonwealth countries. Because the world is 
changing and because we know people are coming to our 
province to practise medicine from around the world — they 
are many anxiously coming and looking forward to practising in 
our communities — this will in essence take that first provision, 
that list of countries, and put it into by-law where it is more 
flexible and can be changed with some greater ease to reflect 
the changing world that we live in. 
 
But just to be very clear with the member, that the provisions 
for testing and licensing are the purview of the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. And I'm told by the officials here that 
if you compare our provisions with any other province in 
Canada, we have one of the most flexible systems of any 
province. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this committee rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
I said, for the minister, it was his last Bill. I'll withdraw the 
motion actually. 
 
The Chair: — Is that by leave, that the member withdraws the 
motion? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 37 — An Act respecting Medical Laboratory 
Technologists 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to emphasize 
that it is our belief that Acts governing professional associations 
in general are very important for the protection of the public, 
the professions, and those directly involved in the  



April 5, 1995 

 
1391 

professions. Therefore it is important that we give the Bill 
before us appropriate consideration. 
 
It appears from the comments we have received that the 
government and its officials did take some time to consult with 
the Saskatchewan Society of Medical Laboratory Technologists, 
the SSMLT, and representatives from the association. As well, 
Mr. Chair, it appears that this association is in agreement with 
the recommendations put forth in this Bill. However I make this 
comment with some reservation because as we have seen in the 
past, this government's idea of consultation is too often 
one-sided. In other words, the government talks, and everybody 
else has to listen. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to take this opportunity to recognize the 
commitment the SSMLT has made to the goal of achieving 
self-governing legislation. The association has endured several 
set-backs and revisions which were required in order to meet 
the specifications of both the current and previous government. 
As you can imagine this process has been incredibly difficult 
for the association due to the indecision and inaction by the 
previous and present governments. 
 
As well the number of set-backs the SSMLT has endured has 
resulted in considerable expense to the association. I applaud 
the SSMLT and its proactive stance with respect to legislation 
affecting the practice of medical laboratory technologists. And I 
commend the members of SSMLT for their resilience in 
striving towards their goal of self-governing legislation. 
 
The third party caucus views the proposed Act as important and 
deserving of this Assembly's support. We have no objection to 
the sections relating to self-governance and we will be 
supportive. 
 
However as it relates to the government's role in dealing with 
professional associations and its so-called consultative process, 
I will be putting forward a number of questions. 
 
(1515) 
 
First, there appears to be inconsistency in the way the 
government deals with professional associations during the 
consultative process. Specifically, it appears there are 
inconsistencies in what some associations are being told by the 
government. This raises the question of fairness relating to how 
the government deals with associations on an individual basis. I 
will be bringing forth this concern as it relates to specific 
sections of the proposed Act. 
 
Secondly, it appears the government's role in the development 
of this Act and its insistence on specific wording of certain 
sections reveals the government's overly bureaucratic and 
dogmatic approach. 
 
We know that this government has shown time and time again 
how ineffective and overly bureaucratic it has become, and we 
all know this type of approach does not serve the best interests 
of the public nor the professional associations the government  

deals with. Therefore I have some questions in this regard for 
the minister today. 
 
Concerning section 8(1), it states: The Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may appoint two persons who reside in Saskatchewan 
. . . (to) council. Why does the government believe it is 
necessary to appoint two people as members of the council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I'm going to resist the 
temptation to ask the member who wrote this stuff that she's 
reading in the House this afternoon because I'm sure she didn't. 
I'm sure she didn't. 
 
I will answer the member's question. Now her question would 
suggest . . . Because it asks why would we appoint two public 
representatives to the council to represent the interests of the 
public, I presume she's saying we should perhaps only have 
one, or perhaps we should have none. I don't know the 
argument that she's making here. 
 
I can tell her why we have two. We believe that in professional 
councils who serve the public it is proper and appropriate that 
public representation should exist. Now not in such numbers 
that those public representatives have the ability to steer the 
course or direction of the professional association, but to 
represent the interests of the public whom these professional 
associations serve. 
 
Now in this case if you read the Act carefully you will note that 
it says, may appoint two. So essentially we're saying may 
appoint up to two individuals. It may be one or it may be two 
but it most likely will be two because it's our view that there 
should be a public representative present at the meeting of the 
council. And in many circumstances one may not be able to and 
so there will very often be two. 
 
Now I'd ask you to compare that to other provincial 
jurisdictions where in other provincial jurisdictions up to a third 
of the council will be appointed as public representatives. And 
indeed in one jurisdiction it's up to half the council. So I think 
this is a very reasonable, and I would assume, from the member 
of the legislature . . . one who would assume this is an 
appropriate thing, to have public representation on a 
professional council. So that's the reason. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. It's interesting to note 
the government deems it necessary to appoint people. Isn't it the 
minister who approves all regulatory by-laws? Therefore isn't 
this appointment redundant? Doesn't the minister serve in this 
role of protecting the public's interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Chairman, I'm a little 
surprised that the member seems to be taking the tack that there 
should not be public representatives on the professional 
councils. It surprises me. I want to say to the member, that 
surprises me, that point of view. 
 
Yes, the minister of course approves the by-laws, of course. But 
the public representatives will be part of any disciplinary  



April 5, 1995 

 
1392 

actions, any disciplinary hearings that I'm sure you don't want 
the minister involved in. I'm sure you don't want that. And yet 
I'm sure you would want public representation there to represent 
the interests of the people of our province whom the profession 
serves. 
 
And so I reject the argument that I think you're making, that 
there should not be public representation on the council simply 
because you have a Minister of Health who will approve 
by-laws. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — What assurances can the minister give that 
these appointments won't be just more patronage appointments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, when appointments to 
professional boards or councils are made, at least under this 
government's purview, we will accept nominations that come 
simply from the general public. Some of the nominations will 
be made in fact by the council themselves. 
 
Whoever will be nominated and appointed to serve on a 
professional council will be someone who has some interest 
and very often experience — if it's a medical council, interest 
and very often experience of the work. But these will be people 
from all cross-sections of life in our province. We accept 
nominations from the broad public, and we accept and very 
often appoint nominations that come directly from the council 
themselves. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Minister, can you tell me why the Act 
provides for the government appointees to get paid at a rate the 
government determines and that they are paid by the 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this has been the practice for 
as long as I'm aware in the province. And the principle has been 
that these are going to be public representatives, that they 
should have their expenses met by the public through the tax 
dollar. I think that's reasonable. 
 
And secondly, that it provides then therefore no sense that there 
can be any conflict of interest if they were receiving any 
sustenance or travel  which is what's really paid, is for meals 
and travel, accommodation on occasion  that somehow that 
money or support was coming from the association to which 
you were a public representative. And that's been the practice 
for a very long time. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Minister, we understand that the 
government wants to keep uniformity throughout its legislation 
regarding Acts affecting professions. Therefore the government 
told the land surveyors' association that they, the association, 
would have to pay the government's appointee. However in the 
case of the SSMLT, you have decided . . . and the government 
will determine the per diem rate, and the government will pay 
its appointees. Why is there this difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'm not able to answer for the 
land titles or whatever it is that the member raised. If she wants  

to raise that with the appropriate minister, I'd invite her to do 
that. I'm here explaining the new legislation and — if I may say 
— the welcomed legislation by medical laboratory technologists 
in our province. It's a very welcome legislation, and that's why it 
surprised me that the member sort of started with a very 
negative approach to this piece of legislation. 
 
Under this Act the public reps will have their travel and 
accommodation and meal expenses and so on met by the 
department. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Well as I stated in my opening remarks, 
Minister, we also support this legislation, but there are some 
inconsistencies in how you deal with the professions in which 
you're developing these Acts. 
 
The proposed Act respecting the medical laboratory 
technologists states that the minister shall remunerate and 
reimburse for expenses. But that's inconsistent. It was the land 
surveyors' association which your government also dealt with. 
As a professional organization, you told them in order to keep 
uniformity — now whether this is in your job as minister or as 
your job as a member of cabinet — they were told in order to 
keep uniformity their association would have to pay the 
government appointees. Why the inconsistency and 
misinformation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is consistent within the 
health area, and I simply do not have at my disposal resources 
to understand or explain the land surveyor's situation. But it is 
consistent with the various councils and the professional 
associations, like the medical laboratory technologists, in the 
field of health, and that's simply what I can report. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Minister, other proposed Acts such as The 
Real Estate Act states the real estate commission is responsible 
for per diem for government appointees. Any work that those 
appointees do must be paid by the real estate commission. Why 
has the government not followed the practice as it relates to The 
Medical Laboratory Technologists Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'd be happy if the member 
wants to move an amendment that the public representatives on 
the medical laboratory technologists council, if you want to 
move an amendment that they be paid by the association, then 
please do and we can debate the amendment. 
 
What I'm telling you is that this is the way we do it. I've told 
you the rationale for it, and I can tell you that's consistent with 
other health councils. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Will you commit, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Flavel: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



April 5, 1995 

 
1393 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
ask the members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me 
this afternoon in welcoming Mr. Steve Gherasim to the 
Legislative Assembly, here watching the proceedings this 
afternoon. Steve comes from Dysart, Saskatchewan, and is a 
very influential person in that town. And I would ask the 
members to please welcome him here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 37 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As to section 13(2), 
this section appears to be as good as all . . . bylaws need to be 
reaffirmed at each annual meeting. This will keep things up to 
date. However, does this create a time-consuming process for 
the association and make the entire process cumbersome? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think I recognize the 
concern the member has, but certainly in the long period of 
consultation that went into the writing of this Act, the 
association itself did not see this as a concern. I'm sure if they'd 
have seen this as a concern, they certainly would have raised it 
with us and it would have, I'm sure, been reflected in the 
drafting. 
 
So I'm in some ways here relying on the long period of 
consultation that took place. I recognize the issue that you raise, 
but I guess I don't see it as a particular concern and apparently 
neither do the medical laboratory technologists. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Minister, in section 15(2) it states: 
 
 Where the minister does not advise the . . . (association) 

in writing within 90 days of receiving copies of the 
regulatory bylaw . . . the regulatory bylaw or amendment 
is deemed not to be approved. 

 
Therefore if the association doesn't hear from you after 90 days 
then the by-law or amendment is deemed not approved. Do you 
think that's a fair way of dealing with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there are essentially two 
reasons for this. One is to provide a certain period of time so 
that the minister, through the department, would have time to 
consult with other affected parties or professional groups about 
any by-law change, and indeed the public or other members of 
the legislature for that matter. 
 
And so it does provide a period of time but it also puts a 
restraint there, for also on government and on the minister, that 
obviously it must be done within 90 days. So it's an endeavour  

to provide a period of time, but not to just leave it wide open so 
that a minister could just not pay attention to duty here and 
leave this in an extended period of time. So it's in essence . . . 
(inaudible) . . . on the government of the day to get it done. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — A bit of political pressure. 
 
Wouldn't it be fair that you should notify the association in 
writing if you don't approve the by-law? Wouldn't it . . . rather 
than just . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, that would always be the 
case. That would always be the case, is the case, and would 
always be the case. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — In the case of it not being deemed approved 
in that 90-day period, how can the association be sure you've 
dealt with the issue? How can they be sure their request isn't 
sitting in a file somewhere? Shouldn't there be some onus on 
you to get back to them in writing with your decision, whether 
it's approval or disapproval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the officials that are with us 
here today, who tend to be the people who deal with this in a 
real life basis, by the time the minister's attention is drawn, 
there will have been a great deal of background work 
completed. 
 
As soon as a professional association makes a by-law change, 
that will be immediately brought to the attention of the 
Department of Health, the officials that are responsible, who, 
knowing the time deadlines, immediately begin whatever 
process they need to follow, whether it's a legal consultation or 
whether it's consultation with affected groups or parties. 
 
And I'm assured by the officials that their experience of the 
professional organizations would indicate that the organizations 
are continually and consistently in touch with the department to 
be sure that progress, appropriate progress, is being made so 
that the by-law will receive the appropriate ministerial signature 
and approval in the prescribed length of time. 
 
And so because of the interest of the associations in the 
procedure, it's almost impossible that either officials within the 
department or a Minister of Health could, in your phrase I think, 
see this go into a drawer somewhere and not get attended to, 
simply because of the pressure on an almost daily or weekly 
basis by the affected association. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Is there a particular reason it's 90 days? Is it 
. . . For instance, in the Act respecting trading in real estate, 
your government determined that the superintendent who is 
appointed by the minister has only 30 days to approve or 
disapprove and must notify the commission in writing. As you 
say, you do notify them. Is there a particular reason for 
choosing 90 days? It seems to be a fairly long time. 
 



April 5, 1995 

 
1394 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, a little bit of history here. The 
90-day period was something first suggested by the registered 
nurses back in 1988. It was adopted. And other professional 
groups looking at that particular work have determined that 90 
days seems to be an appropriate length of time, and it has been 
sort of replicated then from the first suggestion in 1988 by the 
nurses. 
 
And the officials here with us today assure me that when 
by-laws are changed, that the approvals often go through much, 
much quicker than a 90-day period. That is a fairly extensive 
period of time. But I suppose there may be a circumstance, if 
you need some exceptional legal advice or want to do an 
exceptional bit of consultation, you want to leave yourself that 
little bit of extra room. But in most cases it doesn't take by any 
means the 90 days. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. Section 17 appears to 
be good for the public as the association is required to provide 
information to the public at no charge. This will provide good 
access to their information. My question is why the government 
makes professional associations provide information to the 
public at no cost if the government itself charges the public fees 
for much of the information it provides, such as in the land 
titles information. Isn't this a double standard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think we would want to be 
very clear in this discussion about what is actually being 
provided without charge, and then compare that what is 
provided by various departments of government. In this case, if 
the member reads very, very carefully, the legislation, we are 
here talking about the register being kept of all of the members 
of the association. That register is to be kept, as the legislation 
says, at the head office of the society. And what is free of 
charge is that the register shall be, and I quote: 
 
 open for inspection by all persons, without fee, during 

normal office hours of the society. 
 
So I would read that to say that the register is present in the 
head office, that it . . . for all persons would be able to come to 
that office and view the register and to check if an individual's 
name is in fact registered as a medical laboratory technologist 
under this piece of legislation and this description in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it is not a matter that there are services being provided 
or whether there's not a process here of mailing out information 
or packaging out information. It is simply that the register is 
available and is open for any citizen of the province to view, to 
consider, to check if an individual's name is on the register. 
That's what's being provided without charge. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you for clarifying that, Minister. 
 
I have a question as it relates to section 18. Why the need for 
issuing temporary licences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — One or two situations which might apply  

here, and that would be someone who may be coming to 
Saskatchewan and wants to get established in a job or in a 
practice right away and there may be some delay in getting their 
qualifications moved through the system. That might qualify for 
temporary licensing. 
 
The other circumstance, and perhaps more common, would be 
the brand-new graduate who may be given a temporary licence 
just until the transcript of marks and so on can be attained. 
 
So these would be relatively, in my view, relatively short-term, 
temporary licences. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Minister, I'm told that if the graduate 
receives his or her official marks and does not pass, then the 
licence can be revoked. Don't you think it would be in the 
public's best interest to not issue temporary licences in this case 
and wait until the person qualifies, even in the case of someone 
coming in from the outside, before any licence is issued? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think, Mr. Chair, I should clarify that 
each of the medical laboratory technologists will take a 
Canadian exam. They may have graduated and the marks of 
their graduation and their training may be immediately 
available, but the Canadian exam, there may be some delay in 
getting the transcript of those marks. 
 
So I think . . . I would assume in the vast majority — the vast, 
vast majority of cases — someone who has graduated through 
the work will achieve a passing grade on the Canadian exam. 
So in essence the temporary licence will be based on the 
graduating from the more local educational institution. But the 
delay is often due to the Canadian exam. So that's why the 
association appreciates the ability to license temporarily. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Again I ask about the public's best interest 
here, and I just wondered if there's any possibility of difficulties 
as a result of these temporary licences. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think, Mr. Chair, to be fair, the member 
raises I think what is a matter of some concern. However, we 
know that in all of our professions we do try and provide some 
flexibility. The member from Moosomin, if you were listening 
earlier, was concerned about the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, for instance, being too inflexible in terms of their 
willingness to licence. 
 
Those who will graduate in the studies towards medical 
laboratory work will have achieved . . . to pass through that they 
will have achieved a fair base of knowledge. Someone coming 
to our province from out of country, having trained, will have a 
pretty secure base of knowledge. 
 
The association itself, you will note in terms of its registration 
and even in terms of temporary registration, are obliged to 
ensure that the individual involved is of quote, good character. 
And I think there is some real assessment made by the 
professionals before they even issue a temporary licence. I'm 
sure they don't just write out licences with a Xerox machine. 



April 5, 1995 

 
1395 

And so I think that what this does is to provide enough 
flexibility. If for instance the person who's come to our 
province and wants to practice but for some bureaucratic delay 
at the other end — a sheet of paper doesn't get sent out on time 
— I think the professional associations like some flexibility; 
that they know this person is going to do good work and they 
can provide a temporary licence. 
 
It is an important point to consider, reflecting the conversation 
we had with the member from Moosomin earlier, because we 
certainly don't want a circumstance where regulations and 
restrictions are loose, permitting those to practice that may not 
be qualified. But at the same time, I think we want to provide 
our professional associations, knowing their professionalism, a 
little flexibility and which I think the temporary licence 
represents. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. I'm coming to the end 
here. Section 24 states that: 
 
 The discipline committee may accept any evidence that 

it considers appropriate and is not bound by rules of law 
concerning evidence. 

 
It would seem to me that that allows for a heavy-handed 
approach. It allows for the association possibly to take away a 
member's right to earn a living. 
 
I understand why this may be a necessary discipline. However if 
the association has the ability to exercise such a punishment, 
then the rules governing evidence should be followed. Wouldn't 
it be logical to set up some form of rules governing disclosure 
in this section? By disclosure I mean the revealing of all the 
evidence to be presented by the prosecution to the accused for 
presentation at a hearing or trial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to respond to the member's 
question . . . it's a good question. This is, number one, 
consistent with essentially all pieces of professional legislation, 
that the professional legislation will not require adherence to 
the rules of law concerning evidence. Because those, as you 
will know, are very onerous, very onerous. 
 
Now if through the . . . you will see in the legislation and with 
all professional legislation, this does not deny an individual or 
an association access to the courts. And if issues are not 
resolved here, then of course there is the further step of access 
to the courts where in fact the rule of law regarding evidence 
does indeed apply. But in that circumstance, then one has 
accessed I think a fair bit of legal advice and everything else. 
 
So this is consistent with like professional legislation across the 
way. And it and no other piece of professional legislation can 
deny access further to the courts. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 47 inclusive agreed to. 
 

(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just before I move to report 
the Bill, I do want to thank the officials from the department 
who have been with us here today. Their help has been 
invaluable both for myself as minister and I think also to the 
members of both the official opposition and the third party in 
the House. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to join with the minister as 
well and extend my appreciation to the minister and his officials 
for having taken the time to come and address the questions that 
we had regarding the Bills that have been presented to the 
House this day. Thank you. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 37 — An Act respecting Medical Laboratory 
Technologists 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — The last time that this department was before the 
committee was on March 20. I'll ask the minister, if there are 
any different officials from that time, to introduce them. If there 
are not, then we'll proceed directly to item no. 1. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know that we  



April 5, 1995 

 
1396 

don't have a lot of time here until the minister has to leave, so 
we'll just pick one issue that I think he can deal with in short 
order, and that's the issue, Mr. Minister, on private clinics. 
 
And I have a newspaper article dating back November 5, 1994 
where I guess it was the former minister of Health . . . Mind 
you, I guess you would have been associate minister of Health, 
so you're fully aware of this situation. Regarding some 
legislation that may or may not be coming forward dealing with 
some private clinics, can you tell me . . . are you able to tell me 
where that's at today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, around that legislation or that 
concept of legislation, I know the federal minister has been 
encouraging provinces to be looking very seriously at that kind 
of legislation. We are still in the process of looking at it and 
doing the consultation. In fact as late as today there were some 
discussions held, I'm told, with the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) still around this very subject. 
 
Now it is the recommendation of the federal minister that each 
province put into place this kind of legislation. We have not yet 
made the decision. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, what will the legislation . . . 
Can you give me in a general sense what the legislation is 
intended on accomplishing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In essence, Mr. Chair, this kind of . . . 
this legislation or this concept in legislation is simply a matter 
of providing government with the legislative tools to regulate 
and define the type of medical facility that you would want to 
license in your province. 
 
So it's in essence a legislation that provides for licensing 
powers to government on medical clinics. That's in essence 
what this kind of legislation is proposed to do. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, wouldn't it have to go 
further than just the licensing of private clinics? In fact it would 
have to have something to do with how private clinics are going 
to receive extra payment over and above what the insured 
service would allow from the Department of Health. I would 
almost think that's one of the major concerns. Is that not 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, in essence, Mr. Chair, what this . . . 
it is in some ways enabling legislation, regulatory legislation 
which would determine whether fees could be charged. That 
would give the government that kind of regulatory authority. 
 
And I want to assure the member that under the provisions of 
the Canada Health Act and so on that we do believe facility fees 
do represent extra billing. And we're not interested in the 
concept of facility fees as they exist in some other places, and I 
know that the federal government's not interested in that either. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in your view, in your 
view is there a need for private clinics given the fact that we  

have huge waiting lists? And we've raised that in this House on 
many occasions. In fact some types of surgeries, I don't even 
know if they can be done in the province. I know from the area 
of the province that I'm from, several people go off to Medicine 
Hat or Edmonton or Calgary so it would appear to me, in 
knowing so many people that are on lengthy waiting lists for 
months on end, that there is a need for some private clinics. 
 
So I want to know, in your view . . . from your point of view if 
there is a need and in fact if you feel there is a need. Can you 
outline what procedures are . . . in what kind of clinics we're 
talking about? Examples like an eye clinic but then take that 
further. Can you give me a list of what sort of clinics we're 
talking about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to make just a few 
brief points, and I'll give the member an opportunity to respond. 
 
Number one, I would dispute his observation that we have huge 
and long, long waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
would dispute that. In some geographic areas, with some very 
specialized surgeries there are some waiting lists, and these 
sometimes reflect very much the waiting lists of a small group 
of physicians. 
 
The one that I believe the member is coming towards would be 
a matter of cataract surgeries. Now there is in some, for some 
doctors, particularly in Saskatoon, a relatively lengthy waiting 
list. For other ophthalmologists the list is much, much shorter 
— in fact would not be described I think as extremely lengthy at 
all. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now what's been happening in Saskatchewan is that the volume 
of cataract surgeries has been growing very, very rapidly. For 
instance in 1988-89 there were a total of 3,082 cataract 
surgeries conducted in Saskatchewan. In last year, 1993-94, that 
number had jumped to 6,774. That's 120 per cent increase in 
cataract surgeries which are being done in our publicly-funded 
institutions through publicly-funded medicare and not in the 
circumstance of the private clinic. 
 
And so it is our view that the waiting lists in Saskatchewan 
generally should not be described as being extremely long, that 
there are particular areas where the waiting list and related to 
particular doctors and some very particular surgeries — and 
here I refer to cataracts — where there will be a longer waiting 
list. But it's our goal to deal with that waiting list in the context 
of the public system. It is not our desire or do we foresee the 
growth of private clinics which charge exceptional fees for 
individuals to have the service provided. It's our goal to have a 
good level of service and a quality service provided in all of our 
public institutions. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, then . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I think we have to wait until one of the other 
questioners comes up, so I'm going to carry on if you don't 
mind. 



April 5, 1995 

 
1397 

Listening to the minister, I can only assume that what I hear him 
saying is that the government feels that there is a need. But if in 
fact your only concern is the payment, I'm not sure then where 
you would stand — either you do feel that there is room and a 
need for private clinics in the province, or there isn't. In fact I 
think, to narrow this down, if in fact you feel there is a need  
and I get that from your comments, especially for private eye 
clinics; we'll use that example — then, Mr. Minister, one would 
have to wonder. Firstly, I would want to know how you would 
expect private clinics to receive the funding that they would 
require, you know, given the fact that they're not funded by 
government. 
 
In fact their equipment and their building and their staff and 
everything is going to be paid from more private sources. So of 
course they're going to need some topping up to whatever, you 
know, over and above whatever the province is going to pay. 
 
And if it isn't in fact helping the province to a great deal, to a 
great extent, then how would you suggest . . . if you do feel that 
the clinics are needed, how would you suggest that the extra 
funding that's going to be required for these clinics, where 
would it come from, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, what we are suggesting is that 
monies to provide the quality service that we all desire and need 
should come generally from us all in a shared, publicly funded 
medicare and that my treatment and my ability to access 
treatment should be based on my need, on my medical need, 
and not what's in my wallet. That is the fundamental principle 
of medical doctor and hospital services, and that principle we 
would want to maintain without question. 
 
Now we have been able over the last number of years, as I 
indicated, when we're talking particularly about the cataract 
procedure, we have been able over the last five years to provide 
for a 120 per cent increase in the number of cataract procedures 
being provided in our province under publicly funded medicare. 
And so we have been finding and moving resources and 
shifting resources to where the need is, and that's the process 
that continues. And I know that our district boards, where the 
cataract procedures are being conducted, are always reviewing 
their operating times and their resources to try and provide as 
much of the services as possible. 
 
Now what we have also done is to ask our utilization 
commission, the Health Services Utilization and Research 
Commission, to review the process of cataract surgeries as they 
have reviewed other utilizations and other processes and 
procedures in our province. And if they believe it's warranted, 
that they would bring to government and to the medical 
practitioners recommendations which may improve accessibility 
or improve the scheduling of the procedures. 
 
And so to speak to the member's question, how do we fund it? 
Well we've been finding resources to increase the number of 
surgeries; we've been doing that for the last five years. That's a 
continual process of shifting resources to where the need is 
greatest. 

And finally, to utilize the expertise of the Utilization and 
Research Commission to review and monitor the procedures. 
And this is to maintain what we think is so fundamental to 
medicare, so fundamental to medicare, and that is the 
fundamental principle that our doctor and hospital services and 
our medical care services should be based on our need and not 
on any ability to pay. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, what you're talking 
about, and I guess most would agree with this . . . it shouldn't be 
based on the ability to pay from an individual point of view. 
But I guess then if that's the stand you're going to take . . . and 
I'm not saying I disagree with that. But then of course if there's 
a need and these private clinics are going to fill that need . . . 
and in fact you can't continuously shift resources because . . . I 
mean, we don't . . . I hear from you day after day; we don't have 
resources for . . . and then fill in the blank, as far as health care 
goes. I can only assume by this then that the government has 
got to be willing to support this financially, if you're saying 
you're not going to put this charge to the individuals. 
 
So once the government finds it unable to shift resources, 
which are few, then what are your options, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I sincerely do look forward to 
an opportunity I think to continue this discussion with the 
member at some further length at a future time. 
 
But let me just reaffirm this government's commitment to the 
principle, the fundamental principle which I hear the member, I 
think, in his debate suggesting that we should move from that 
principle . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now he says he 
didn't say that. But I hear the member making an argument or at 
least a quasi-argument that says we should maybe move to 
some sort of private provision of health care services, medical 
and hospital and doctor services, because there is a need. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to reaffirm that medicare works when we're 
all in it together. And the principle that our medical services — 
doctor, hospital services — should be available on the basis of 
need and, Mr. Chairman, not on the basis of what we have in 
our bank accounts or in our private health insurance or in our 
back pockets, but based on our need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair: — This was last before the committee on March 
13, and so I'll ask the Minister of Labour to reintroduce his 
officials to members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you. Behind me I have Janis 
Rathwell, who is the assistant deputy minister; to my left is Jeff 
Parr, the director of policy and planning; over to the extreme 
right is Graham Mitchell, the director of labour relations; and 
beside me is Brian King, the deputy minister. 



April 5, 1995 

 
1398 

While I'm on my feet, Chair, I would like the page to take this 
over to Mr. McPherson. It's in regard to a question he asked last 
time we were before Estimates concerning a jurisdictional 
comparison of group home workers across Canada. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
officials. Minister, we have some questions that we'd like to ask 
you today. To begin with, your department went through some 
major changes last year with the introduction of The Labour 
Standards Act and The Trade Union Act amendments. Now has 
any assessment been done on the cost incurred by your 
department in implementing these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The cost to implement The Labour 
Standards Act, the total amount $180,175. In regard to The 
Trade Union Act, the comparable amount is $24,305. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, on page 
91 of the Estimates, I guess, we're looking for . . . your 
administrative costs went up by nearly $120,000 over last year. 
Would this be attributed to the implementation of the 
amendments? If not, then to what is it attributed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I think it's $122,000 increase you're 
referring to. Personnel services increased by $67,000 or 7 per 
cent. Other expenses increased by $51,000 which would be 14 
per cent. We're looking under other expenses in terms of 
completing the centralization of computer funds. Those would 
be transfers from labour relations and conciliation, Labour 
Relations Board, Workers' Advocate, and the disabilities 
directorate. Within that 51,000 as well, there were funds for 
ergonomic furniture, and there was a transfer back to policy and 
planning, which was a reduction of $4,000. That would make 
up the amount that you're referring to. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Minister. Your 
labour standards department is actually getting $100,000 less, it 
would appear, than last year. How do you explain this in light 
of this branch's expanded responsibilities? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — There's a $22,000 reduction for 
classification salary adjustment. These would be decreases. 
There was a transfer of communication funds to the planning 
and policy of $59,000. That's still within the department but to a 
different branch. And there was the amount of $20,000 which 
was deleted. That was the one-time funding associated with 
review of the Act. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — The first number that you gave was 50-some 
million, I believe. I wasn't just hearing really carefully. What 
other department are we talking about there? I need a little 
better understanding of what happened there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'm not talking of another department. I 
was saying that the funds are still within our Department of  

Labour, but it was transferred from the labour standards branch 
to the planning and policy branch. And so those communication 
funds will still be available within the Department of Labour. 
It's just that they're used by another branch within the same 
department. That amount was $59,000. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Where would I find that in the Estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Under the planning and policy branch. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We shall take a look as 
soon as we get a little break in the action here and have a 
chance to check that out. 
 
Now would your department have any responsibility for 
assessing the cost of these changes to government operations 
generally? If so, what is the role and what were your findings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Are you asking the cost to overall 
government? I'm not sure of your question. If you could just be 
a little clearer on that, please. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I think we're talking about the costs of 
bringing in the new labour standards Acts and the . . . let me see 
now. Okay. The implementation of the amendments from The 
Labour Standards Act changes and the other Act changes that 
you implemented from last year's legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — But costs to whom  to the general 
public, to the department, to government, to whom? Which 
costs are you talking about? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I referred a couple of questions back to page 
91 of your administrative costs that went up nearly $120,000 
over last year. 
 
Now we asked you if this would be attributable to the 
implementation of the amendments that you put into your other 
Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union Act. Now we want 
to know would your department have any responsibility for 
assessing the costs of these changes? 
 
Somebody must have made some assessments and done some 
research on what these things were going to cost the 
government and the people of Saskatchewan. Did the 
Department of Labour do that, or did some other department, 
like CIC, did they pay for the research that was done? 
 
Obviously you must have known something about what you 
were doing in terms of the cost of implementing all of these 
programs so that you would be able to budget for it in last year's 
and this year's budgets — particularly this year's budget. So 
what we're asking you quite simply, sir, is did you budget for 
this, or have you any responsibility for it in your department, or 
did somebody else pay the costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well for the review and the 
implementation of the legislation, we pay the costs internally 
within the department. In fact I referred to one section where  



April 5, 1995 

 
1399 

there's a one-time cost item that was for review of The Labour 
Standards Act. That won't be there because we don't anticipate 
in reviewing the Act again this year. We've made the changes 
that we saw fit to make as a government. 
 
There will not be any ongoing costs to the changes in legislation 
within the department. There may be reallocation of priorities 
within the department. That will either be done within the 
resources we have, or in future years we may find that we want 
to put more emphasis on some particular area. That's an 
ongoing assessment that's done internally with the executive 
managers within the department. And we would then make that 
request at budgetary time under which you would have the 
scrutiny, as the process is unfolding here today, in future years. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Do you have any new 
inspectors or board members or any other sort of new staff 
being hired to implement the new legislation? And if you do, 
you may as well go on to what the cost would be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We have within the budget this year 
anticipated that there are going to be two new positions within 
the education information under the new Labour Standards Act 
amendments and regulations. There'll be one new position for a 
northern mining initiative. There's another position, which is a 
secretarial position, within labour relations and conciliation. So 
we anticipate about four positions that will be new to the 
department this year. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — And how much will that cost the taxpayer to 
hire these new people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The anticipated cost of that is $80,000 
for the positions associated with The Labour Standards Act; 
30,000 for the position with the mining initiative, and . . . what 
is the amount for the secretarial? And there's no cost to the 
secretarial position in labour relations and conciliation; it's 
going to be taken from funds that are reallocated within the 
department. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Now, Minister, the labour standards changes 
obviously are going to result in the hiring now of some more 
people. It's going to cost the taxpayers $80,000. You suspect 
that the first question that somebody's going to ask me when I 
leave here is, what exactly do these people do? 
 
So I guess I might as well try to pre-empt that and say to you, 
what exactly will these people be doing to earn $80,000 
enforcing The Labour Standards Act. You alluded to some 
education. Who would they educate, if that is their role? Or are 
they some kind of police officers that enforce? Or do they go 
out and check to see that the regulations that have set up are in 
fact being followed? Or do they sit around and wait for 
complaints? What is the process here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We want our department to be a 
proactive department. And by proactive, I mean that we want 
our employees to be understanding of the concerns that 
employees have, as well as the concerns that employers have.  

We don't have any policemen, as you refer to it as, within the 
department. We have people there who operate as labour 
standards officers, and we want labour standards officers to 
educate those who are employers and those who are employees 
— employees of their rights and employers of their 
responsibilities. 
 
Our desire being proactive in the department, is to make sure 
that all people in Saskatchewan can in fact comply with the 
legislation regulations that are there. If we find that situations 
are there where employers are not complying with The Labour 
Standards Act, we want to encourage employers to comply. 
And for whatever reason they may not be complying, we want 
to be understanding of those reasons. We want to be able to be 
helpful in getting employers to comply with The Labour 
Standards Act and regulations. And where that doesn't work, 
then we will in fact enforce The Labour Standards Act and the 
regulations. 
 
It's important though for the department to be proactive in 
educating the public as to what the rights and responsibilities 
are under The Labour Standards Act and the regulations, 
sometimes controversial, mind you, that flowed from those 
statutes that we passed within this legislature. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, what further education and training 
was done in your department to prepare your officers for the 
new legislation, and at what cost would that have been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — There's no cost associated with that; the 
training is done internally. 
 
We have a number of professionals within the department and 
we want to launch a proactive direction for the department. The 
training that we do is in-house, internally, and we want the 
people who have contact with the public to approach the public 
in an understanding way so that we can have a harmonious 
relationship between employees and employers throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This training from time to time may be augmented with people 
external to the department. These might come from other 
resources within the government, or resources from the private 
sector, to be able to provide some extra training we might want 
at some point in the future. We don't anticipate that happening 
within the first year, and therefore that's not reflected in the 
estimates that are presented before the legislature here today. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I see on page 92 of the Estimates we have a Labour 
Relations Board, and then in subvote 7, page 93, we have a 
labour relations and conciliation. And when I read what the 
board does, and in fact the monies that are provided under 
subvote 7, it appears to be the same duties that are performed; 
the same monies are being spent for the same duties being 
performed. So can you tell me why that is; in fact what role 
each would play? 
 
I don't know who the people we'd be talking about . . . in fact,  



April 5, 1995 

 
1400 

perhaps that's a good question. Can you provide a list, the 
names of who is on the Labour Relations Board, everything 
from the staff and legal counsel? And in fact who these people 
drawing these salaries, which are just about like amounts as the 
Labour Relations Board, who these people are? Are they one 
and the same? Could you supply that to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I don't know what you're looking at, 
exactly where they read the same. They may read the same in 
the Estimates, but they certainly perform different functions. 
 
The labour relations and conciliation division within the 
Department of Labour would provide some policy direction to 
the department from time to time. But their main role would be 
to look at areas whereby there's a situation where there's a 
collective agreement in place, say, and there's been a stalemate 
in terms of the agent for the collective bargaining, both on 
behalf of the employer and employees. 
 
In this case the department may be requested to provide a 
conciliator. We would provide conciliation out of that particular 
branch of the department, and it would be to try and resolve the 
issues or at least get the employer's agent and the employee's 
agent back to a bargaining table to resolve some dispute that 
would be between them. 
 
In terms of the Labour Relations Board, it's a very different 
function. I suppose before I go to that though, within the labour 
relations and conciliation, almost all the employees that are 
there are permanent professionals of the department. Some of 
the people that they would appoint from time to time as 
conciliators might be drawn from outside and be taken on for a 
very short-term contract, only to conciliate within the particular 
dispute that may be there. 
 
The Labour Relations Board is very different. The Labour 
Relations Board would be there as a quasi-judicial body. They 
function independently from the department or independent 
from myself as the minister. And the Labour Relations Board 
provides rulings mainly in regard to The Trade Union Act. 
 
(1630) 
 
And where there have been concerns as to The Trade Union Act 
maybe being violated, either on behalf of a union or an 
employer within the province, the Labour Relations Board 
would hear both sides of the dispute, look at the regulations and 
the legislation that is in place, and make a determination as to 
who is right. They will provide rulings to resolve disputes that 
have been brought before them. 
 
The current chair of the Labour Relations Board is Beth Bilson. 
She's on leave from the College of Law at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Her appointment runs out . . . her current 
appointment runs out I believe in June of this year. 
 
The other people who are part of the Labour Relations Board, I 
will send over to you a copy. There's a vice-chair of the board. 
There are employer representatives and employee  

representatives that are on the board. 
 
Because of the new Trade Union Act the list may or may not be 
accurate for very long into the future because I'm in the process 
now of doing consultations that flow from The Trade Union 
Act, to appoint a Labour Relations Board group of people. 
Some will be from the employee side, some will be from the 
employers side, so that they will sit and adjudicate on hearings 
that come before the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, that's fairly detailed 
but I'm still wondering if the labour relations and conciliation 
board — or I guess it's not a board, it's a body — is there 
overlap? Some of the conciliation mediation services that are 
provided by the labour relations and conciliation body, are they 
then moved over to the Labour Relations Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — No, as I said before, the Labour 
Relations Board is a quasi-judicial body and it would be 
frowned on, if not illegal, for the department or myself to 
interfere with the workings of the Labour Relations Board in 
terms of their adjudication over disputes. So there is no direct 
relationship there in the day-to-day operations of Labour 
Relations Board in terms of them adjudicating in disputes. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, by your comments I assume 
then that the labour relations and conciliation body does have 
— and I don't want to use the word that you had, interference 
— but do you play a role as minister then in resolving some of 
the disputes that this body would be looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Yes, in terms of labour relations and 
conciliation, I believe Graham Mitchell, who is here today, is in 
charge of that branch of the department. And there would be 
requests made to me sometimes -- sometimes requests made 
directly to the department to appoint a mediator, a conciliator, 
an arbitrator, I guess in some cases. And so we have a role in 
that but that's usually where both parties have decided that they 
want arbitration or mediation or conciliation. And then if they 
can't agree . . . If the member would listen because this is 
important, so he don't ask another question that's asking for 
clarification. 
 
Usually where there's a dispute, both sides will try and agree 
who they want to do the arbitration, mediation, conciliation. 
They only come to us when they can't decide on who they want 
as the umpire. If they can't decide on who they want as the 
umpire between the two bodies then they'll come to us, 
sometimes myself as the minister, or directly to the department 
to ask for us to appoint someone because they can't agree on 
who it should be between them. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, when we're talking 
about roughly a half a million dollars that it cost to run the 
board and a half a million dollars that it costs to run labour 
relations and conciliation body, and when I look at this — from 
your own document, Mr. Minister — and it talks about both 
groups are really involved in solving disputes between 
employers and employees, if in fact all you need is a body to  



April 5, 1995 

 
1401 

pick mediators or conciliators or whatever, why couldn't some 
of these functions be done by the board themselves? You know, 
perhaps there's quite a savings of money that could accrue to 
the province if in fact he had these powers given to the board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the labour relations people are 
basically part time; not all the people are employed. And I'll 
send over to you a list of currently who are the employer 
representatives, who are the employee representatives, and the 
Chair and the Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board. These 
people are only paid on a per diem basis, that are the employer 
representatives, the employee representatives, for the time that 
they actually sit on the board. 
 
People within the department are professionals that are there on 
a regular basis and they have more to do than just the 
appointment of arbitrators, mediators, and conciliators; they 
have a policy function within the department. So they're the 
ongoing public employee professionals within the Department 
of Labour. 
 
In regard to the Labour Relations Board, they serve, as I said, a 
quasi-judicial function to rule over disputes that cannot 
otherwise be overturned. And the two really do have a quite 
different function. 
 
If you were to do away with one or the other, you would 
actually incur greater costs; there wouldn't be cost savings. And 
I'll send you across this list. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Mr. Minister, are you telling me then 
that if the Labour Relations Board consists of a lot of part-time 
people or are just paid on a per diem basis for days that they do 
some work and that's going to amount to half a million dollars? 
 
What I'm saying here is, couldn't one of these bodies replace 
both of the existing ones? Because it looks like their roles 
parallel one another to me. Perhaps you maybe need a few more 
officials in one or the other, but I would almost suspect that 
there's no reason why you couldn't form one group or one body 
out of the two. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I think if you talk to any employer 
or any union or any unorganized workplace or any employer 
who had an unorganized workplace, there wouldn't be any I 
think that would agree with the statement you make. 
 
Because the two serve very different functions. One's a 
quasi-judicial body. And just because some of the people are 
part time in terms of their appointments, it doesn't mean that the 
board doesn't function on a regular basis. 
 
Labour Relations Board functions pretty well full time. The 
labour relations and conciliation branch within the department 
is also a full-time work that has the responsibilities given to 
them by the statute of this legislature which creates the 
department. 
 
And certainly it may appear to you that there's some overlap,  

but the two don't overlap. They serve totally different functions. 
And as I say, any employer or employee's agent who have 
appeared before the Labour Relations Board or requested the 
services of the branch within the department could quite well 
back up what I'm saying, is that they serve different functions 
and they're both necessary, and they've both been around for a 
long period of time. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, all right, we see that 
there's a $155 a day per diem for all the representatives here. 
But the Chair and the Vice-Chair, could you tell me what these 
people would be paid on a full-time basis, I would assume — 
Chair and Vice-Chair. Could you tell me what kind of salary 
and benefits they would have. And in fact when did the Chair, 
Beth Bilson, and the Vice-Chair, John Hobbs, both of Regina, 
when did they assume these positions and who did they 
replace? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — the Chair of the Labour Relations Board 
currently receives $7,085 a month. As I said, she's on leave of 
absence from the College of Law in Saskatoon. She was 
appointed three years ago this coming June. She replaced 
Richard Hornung, who was the Chair of the Labour Relations 
Board at that time. The vice-chairperson of the board, John R. 
Hobbs, receives a salary of $6,907 per month. He was put into 
that position in 1984. The person he replaced was a Graham 
Mitchell. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, there was a fellow that I 
thought worked with the Labour Relations Board, Mr. Dennis 
Ball. Can you tell me if he's . . . if he still plays a role with the 
board or when that role was finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — He was the Chair of the Board before 
Richard Hornung, and he is no longer associated with the 
Labour Relations Board. So he would have been there some 
time . . . some time more than three years ago. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 
had a couple of questions that came to mind as a result of your 
last portfolio and your new portfolio. I was recently at the 
CAPP (Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers) meeting 
in Calgary, and as you know the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers are interested in developing the energy 
business in Canada, western Canada, and Saskatchewan. 
 
And they were . . . they seemed to be concerned about your 
labour legislation, particularly when they look at pipelines and 
oil development and investment. And when they looked at The 
Trade Union Act and the Crown tendering policies, The Labour 
Standards Act, it was . . . they had a lot of questions. And I 
wondered if you in your other life, in your previous life, had 
thought about maybe informing those that are major investors 
in energy development, like pipeline development . . . 
SaskEnergy might want to build a pipeline. And obviously if 
you have a labour relations and union policy that tends to be 
labour only, particularly with the Crown tendering policies in 
some of your recent legislation, it's not particularly well 
received by those that might like to bid on that. 



April 5, 1995 

 
1402 

Have you given that any thought in terms of how you might 
explain it to those that would invest in energy here and in 
energy projects, given some of the more, if you will, strident 
labour legislation, pro-union or only-union legislation that's in 
the province? 
 
And the second question related to that, do you know other 
jurisdictions in Canada that have been as, if you will, union 
only or pro-union when it comes to economic projects and 
economic development as you are now? I suppose you could 
find it in Ontario, maybe it's . . . Bob Rae has introduced some 
of that. Anybody else, or are you kind of leading in this area 
with your . . . some would say with your chin. 
 
So two points: how do you reconcile your portfolio now with 
the one that you used to have — encouraging energy and 
pipeline development and all kinds of energy projects — and 
square that circle with the rather opposite view that you're 
taking now, certainly from the oil patch point of view, from 
energy, because they're not quite comfortable. And would you 
explain that to people that you normally used to visit with when 
you'd go to say, something like the CAPP conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I haven't appeared in Calgary since 
the change in my portfolio, but I've certainly talked to many of 
the people I did business with as the minister of Energy and 
Mines and they've not expressed quite the same thing to me as 
what you express here today. 
 
The reconciliation in my own mind, I have no problem with that 
whatsoever. This government has worked consistently to try and 
create a good climate in Saskatchewan, to develop our economy 
and to develop our residents of our province along with the 
economy, as the economy improves. 
 
And we have no intention as a government of damaging our 
good relationship that we've had with the oil and gas industry. 
We have no intention of damaging the good relationship that 
we have with the working men and women of this province. 
And you put out a case that the two are diametrically opposed 
to each other. 
 
I submit to you, member from Estevan, that the two are not 
opposed to each other. That as long as we provide a stable 
climate in Saskatchewan and show that there's some planning . . 
. the planning is evident in the balanced budget that we have 
before this Legislative Assembly today; the stability is 
demonstrated by the good quality of workforce that we do have 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
And work continues to increase in the oil and gas industry in 
this province. There'll be more pipeline work done, at least on 
the gas side, this year than ever before in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I'm quite comfortable going into the same 
offices in Calgary that I went into over the past few years as I 
would if I went into those same offices today. I have no 
problem at all in reconciling the role I have now as to the role I  

had before. 
 
The Premier chose to appoint me as the Minister of Labour and 
I'm happy to be the best Minister of Labour I can be in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I don't see that in any way 
opposing the position I had before; was to work with the oil and 
gas industry to develop that resource within the province. 
 
And I think that the hon. member would serve the province 
much better if you would look at ways of telling people in 
Calgary that you know, that Saskatchewan is a good place in 
which to do business and invite them to enhance the business 
activities they have here. And maybe you and I could work on 
that as a bit of a plan for Saskatchewan so that not only the 
business side receives benefit, but the working men and women 
of this province receive a benefit as well. 
 
So I give that to you as my answer to the question and the 
hypothesis that you make that somehow what we do in 
Saskatchewan in one case is bad for working people, and on the 
other case is bad for business. I don't take that view. I take the 
view as those being complementary. And I think that the role I 
had before serves me well within the ministry of Labour, not 
only from the business side but also from the working men and 
women of this province. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the energy world, as you 
know, Mr. Minister, certainly has been dominated by those that 
really support, if you will, a free enterprise approach. And the 
member from Swift Current might not believe that, but that's 
the case. In fact the NDP, if he wants to look at it, aren't doing 
that well in Alberta, not doing that well in Manitoba, aren't 
doing that well in B.C. (British Columbia), and aren't doing that 
well in Ontario. 
 
So he knows that and he probably hates to hear the truth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well and they're starting to find out about the 
NDP in Saskatchewan. The truth about the NDP is that the 
former minister of Energy had some difficulty with 
co-generation projects. And the oil patch and the energy 
business are saying, well I wonder if he's going to take the same 
attitude into his Labour portfolio. 
 
And what they want to know, and I'd be interested, Mr. 
Minister, you said that they support your labour legislation. I'd 
like to have any letters that you could table from the oil patch 
that support your labour legislation, whether it's The Labour 
Standards Act or The Trade Union Act or your Crown tendering 
policy or your workers' compensation. Could you come up with 
some letters that show that the oil patch in Saskatchewan or 
Calgary or major investors really support your labour 
legislation? And I'd like to see it because I'm just going to call 
you on that. 
 
Number two, if in fact you're going to produce more pipelines 
and you're going to have people bidding on the pipelines,  



April 5, 1995 

 
1403 

would you describe what sort of bid you would accept. In other 
words, is it union only? Does it fall under your Crown tendering 
policies where your union-only legislation would apply? 
Because the oil patch would be very interested in knowing that. 
In other words, if you're going to build lots of pipelines and I 
thought I heard you say you were, what is the . . . how would 
you describe your policy in an NDP administration to the oil 
patch that might bid on that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well first off I didn't say that the oil and 
gas industry supported the labour legislation. What they support 
is the business climate, the environment, the working climate of 
this province. 
 
And I think that one of the most destructive forces in 
Saskatchewan is you. You were when you were premier and 
you are today. You come in here and you string out a line of 
rhetoric. You sit in your seat and you laugh at the House of 
democracy in this province. You spread misinformation about 
what this government stands for and what this great province 
stands for. 
 
Instead of coming here and laughing and tapping your fingers 
around, you should go away and go off to the private sector 
somewhere where you profess to have such great expertise, 
even though I don't even know any place where you've ever 
made a contribution to the private sector. Unless you consider 
your time at the university as being in the private sector. 
 
And you come here and you try and make mockery of a 
government that provides a very stable business climate within 
this province — in fact I would say one of the most stable 
business climates certainly in the past decade, if not the past 
several decades. And it can be held up to testament in that the 
unemployment is lower, the budgets are balanced, there's a 
good business climate, working men and women have a chance 
to thrive in this province. You have people coming into the 
province, returning home, because there's a land of opportunity 
here; you have companies that are expanding their businesses in 
rural Saskatchewan; you have new companies coming in to do 
business in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that you should be ashamed of yourself, trying to 
misconstrue the facts within this province. I don't know what 
you say to the oil and gas people in Calgary, but if it's the same 
thing that's said in this legislature, then I feel badly that you, as 
a former premier of this province, would go to Alberta and 
spread misinformation about this province. This province has 
one of the most stable workforces, one of the most stable 
business climates, of any province in Canada right now. 
 
We may not be booming but we sure aren't busting as we were 
in the years that were destined under your government, where 
you racked up $15 billion debts, perpetual deficit budgets, 
businesses that couldn't thrive in this province, an oil and gas 
industry even that were scared to do work here because they 
didn't know what you'd do next. They were tired, business was 
tired, working men and women were tired, of you making deals 
on the backs of cigarette packages with the cabinet colleagues  

that you had that used to sit on this side of the House. I say, as a 
former premier, you should be ashamed of yourself for the way 
you conduct yourself. 
 
If there was ever a destructive force in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it was you, sir. And maybe you should try and 
ask some questions that deal with the legislation and the 
estimates that we have before us here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the minister won't 
answer my question. I asked him quite specifically: if 
companies bid on pipeline construction, what are the rules and 
regulations if private sector companies bid on pipeline 
construction under your labour legislation, particularly with 
respect to Crown tendering policies and as it applies to labour 
and trade unions in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
People in Calgary and those that would invest in pipelines want 
to know. What you've given me, and I'll certainly send them, is 
a non-answer. You just got right into the politics and said, oh 
no, I just want to talk about politics. 
 
Why don't you just describe to the oil patch what the rules are if 
they want to invest in pipeline construction in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They don't know. And what they do know is that 
they don't like what they've seen in changes to The Labour 
Standards Act, The Trade Union Act, the Crown tendering 
policy, workers' compensation. And they just want you to come 
clean and tell them the rules. Because the last time, you didn't. 
 
The last time on the co-generation projects you said, here are 
the rules; send us your money; send us the projects. And your 
reputation is following you into the Labour portfolio. You've 
got some serious reputation problems. 
 
That's why the Premier moved you out of there. He's put you in 
Labour, and the oil patch is saying, what is going on now? And 
your colleagues know that. It's very clear, Mr. Chairman, his 
colleagues know it. They say, well geez, they finally found him 
a portfolio where he couldn't do quite the damage. And yet 
everybody's watching your performance and saying, well would 
you tell us what the rules are so we can invest. 
 
Give me the name of any energy companies that support your 
economic development strategy associated with labour. Don't 
leave out labour. You said they support the balance. But don't 
leave out labour; include labour. Give me one oil company, one 
gas company, one energy company, that supports NDP labour 
legislation that we're talking about here today. 
 
Well obviously you can't, and you won't. So at least describe to 
me and to them what are the consequences of them bidding on 
and investing in pipeline development in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They need to know the rules. 
 
I asked you very clearly and very specifically, and you avoided 
it. So I want to come back and ask you, as the members have 
said, one more time. And I'm going to keep asking until at least 
you can design something here that we could send them, or you  



April 5, 1995 

 
1404 

agree to send the energy businesses that would invest in 
pipeline development or energy construction or co-generation, 
just what in the world are the labour rules and regulations in the 
great province of Saskatchewan under the NDP administration. 
 
I don't think there's another government in Canada that has rules 
anything like it. And those other jurisdictions in Alberta, British 
Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario, and indeed Americans, are 
saying, where did this come from? Where did the ideas come 
from? 
 
Did they come from Bob Rae? How's he doing these days? Well 
Bob Rae, he's kind of at the bottom of the barrel. 
 
Did they come from B.C.? How's B.C. doing these days? Well 
B.C. is not that good politically for the NDP. Maybe it was the 
labour legislation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 
members opposite say, well tell us about Saskatchewan. And 
we're asking, and tell us about the labour legislation. Explain 
how the labour legislation is going to impact in the province of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to companies investing in bids for 
pipeline development and/or other projects. 
 
Could you design a letter or a statement in this legislature that 
we could take to all those potential investors in the energy 
business in Saskatchewan that would describe the 
Saskatchewan labour legislation scene, particularly as it applies 
to the Crown tendering policies? And I would suspect, and 
maybe the minister sitting next to you over there could describe 
it — he's in charge of it now — how the labour legislation 
would apply to say TransGas. If indeed TransGas was going to 
build pipelines, could you describe how people would bid for 
that construction project under the umbrella of the new NDP 
labour legislation? 
 
Now you haven't sent anybody in Calgary that I know of the 
results of your legislation. You certainly haven't sent them the 
results of your Crown tendering policies. And if that's the case, 
they'd be very interested in receiving it. 
 
So it's very obvious, by you not answering my question, that 
you're ashamed of it. In the circles of investment that would 
come into Saskatchewan, even when I asked you pointedly, you 
say, well the NDP has a nice, broad economic environment 
here; but you wouldn't comment about labour. 
 
Because in your last portfolio you pooh-poohed the labour 
legislation. And those in the private sectors knew that you were 
cuddling up and saying, oh well, we're open to the private 
sector and open to the private sector and open to free enterprise 
and all this stuff. 
 
And then they said, well you didn't treat us all that well when it 
came to co-generation; maybe you didn't know what you were 
talking about. Now you got the Labour portfolio and you got 
them worried. They're worried. Because they thought, well 
maybe the Premier just gave you that portfolio because he didn't 
know what else to do with you, and that you would treat them 
with the same roughshod fashion as you did when you  

were minister of Energy. 
 
Now we're asking specifically — if you're the Minister of 
Labour — what's the policy for Alberta and American and other 
firms who want to come in and bid on Crown projects, 
TransGas projects, other energy projects, here in the province of 
Saskatchewan? What are the rules? 
 
And if you haven't sent them those rules, then I'm going to ask 
you to table the lay of the land. What's the legislative 
environment that they're going to bid on? Is it similar to 
co-generation projects that you promoted in the past? How does 
it compare with other jurisdictions? 
 
In other words, if they were bidding for a project in B.C., 
Alberta, Manitoba, or Ontario, or in the United States, could 
you compare the labour legislation? And if you're so proud of 
your environment here, you just jump to your feet and say I'd be 
happy to compare it. Here is how an energy company would be 
received in the province of Saskatchewan if it bid on say 
TransGas pipeline projects. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we want you to do that so in fact we can 
sell that and market it and send it to the jurisdictions around 
North America that are in the vicinity of Saskatchewan, so that 
they'll know the truth about what you've done. And the truth 
will obviously be interesting to those people who would want to 
spend probably tens of millions, sometimes even hundreds of 
millions, of dollars in the province of Saskatchewan to make 
sure that they can get a return on their investment. 
 
Now a lot of them I suspect, would be non-union. If its 
non-union . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. It now being 5 
o'clock, the Committee of Finance will rise, report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 


