






















































May 18, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 18, 1995 

 

 
2417 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have about 
500 signatures to add to the most publicly demanded project in 
our province this year. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
programs towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 
These come from all across Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and I'm happy to present them on behalf 
of the people of these three provinces today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
rise today to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Arcola, Steelman, 
Lampman, Fox Valley, Rosetown, Brock, Herschel, Sovereign, 
Landis, across the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
hundreds of petitioners also who want to throw their weight 
behind the gun legislation. And I will read the prayer only: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners this afternoon come from 
Kindersley, Rosetown, Outlook, Sovereign, Yorkton, Glendale, 
Eston, Turtleford, in fact all around the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, a 
group of 52 grade 7 and 8 students from Vincent Massey 
School, which is located in my constituency, and they're in the 
west gallery. And with them, Mr. Speaker, are their teachers, 
Morris Sulatyski and Lynn Driedger. And they're also 
accompanied by Val Beyette, Margurite Wolfe, Marlene Bacik, 
and Laura Seidle. 
 
They visited some sights in Regina. They'll be touring this 
building. I'll be having a visit and refreshments with them, Mr. 
Speaker; we'll have our photo taken as well. And I'd like all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming the 
students from Vincent Massey School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also want to 
introduce a constituent of mine, Mr. Alec Postnikoff, who's 
seated in the west gallery and he's the former director of 
education for the Saskatoon (West) School Division and also 
for the independent schools. And I'd just like to welcome Alec 
here as well today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased also 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
legislature, a high school group sitting in the west gallery from 
Pangman. Twenty grade 11 and 12 students are here today to 
visit the legislature along with their teacher, Doug Sully, and 
chaperons Gene Kessler, Marion Scott, and Al Huckabay. 
 
I'd just like to welcome the students here today. I hope they 
enjoy question period. I'll be meeting with them later for a brief 
discussion and refreshments and a picture. I'd like all members 
to join me in welcoming the high school students from 
Pangman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly, a group of 15 guests that are from the Ukraine. And 
they're with individuals from the University of Saskatchewan. 
And they're seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I'm going to attempt to read their names, if I may. First we 
have their instructor, Volodymyr Fisanov, if he would stand 
please, and if others would stand as I read their names. Also  



May 18, 1995 

 
2418 

students Oleksandr Badovskyi, Ruslan Vakarjuk, Victor 
Hohots, Igor Melnytchouk, Volodymyr Roskrut, Yuri Yurichuk, 
Alina Joukhimets, Zhanna Parashchuk, Natalie Rustovit, and 
Kateryna Fedorak. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I'd also like to introduce a couple students 
from the University of Saskatchewan, Kelly Kobes and Jenara 
Franklin, if they're here, if they would stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — They're accompanied by Hans Michelmann 
of the University of Saskatchewan and Kelly Kozak, who's an 
administrative assistant to the University of Saskatchewan 
international. So we'd like to welcome all these visitors to our 
Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today it is my pleasure to introduce another group of 
students. This group has 54 grade 4 students from the Wadena 
Elementary School, accompanied by their teachers, Reg Glennie 
and Joan Sweatman. They also have chaperons Bev Cyr, Viola 
Mill, Isabel Fidelak, and the bus driver — who probably has the 
hardest job — Marcel Pelletier. 
 
And I will be meeting with these students later, and I wish them 
a good trip, and I hope they learn something here today. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the students from Wadena and 
particular Reg Glennie who is from my constituency and who, 
every once in a while, comes down as an MC (master of 
ceremonies) for some of our sportsman suppers, and I'd like to 
welcome Reg and the students here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a special privilege 
for me to introduce seven people who are seated in your gallery 
today, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, although I know they need no introduction to many 
of the members of the Assembly here. 
 
I'm very proud — and I know my colleagues are — to associate 
ourselves with these folks who have two things in common. 
One, they're known to be winners and leaders in their own 
communities. And secondly, they will all be New Democrat 
contestants in the next provincial election, whenever that might 
be. 
 
If I might introduce them to you and ask them to stand as I do: 
the candidate for Battleford-Cut Knife is Sharon Murrell. If you  

please stand, Sharon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — For Estevan, Larry Ward. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — We'll just ask members to withhold applause 
and I'm sure everyone will want to go crazy when I'm done 
here. 
 
For Moosomin, Glen Gatin; for Regina Lakeview, John Nilson; 
for Regina Sherwood, Lindy Kasperski; for Swift Current, John 
Wall; and for Wood River, a familiar face to the members of 
the Assembly, Allan Engel. 
 
I'll ask all members to show them welcome to the Assembly 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Athabaska Airways Inaugural Flight 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh how soon they forget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tuesday truly was a good day for Athabaska 
Airways, for Saskatchewan tourism and business, and for the 
travelling public of Saskatchewan and the northern United 
States. 
 
The official ribbon-cutting ceremony for the inaugural flight of 
the new Williston to Regina to Saskatoon and back route took 
place. This new route will have connections on our end to 
Prince Albert, Stony Rapids, and La Ronge. On the other, there 
are easy connections to Minot, to Bismarck, Dickinson, in 
North Dakota, and to Denver, Colorado. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is no longer on a single 
east-west air axis. We can get there and they can get here much 
quicker and more efficiently. 
 
So I would like to today join with my colleague, the member 
from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton, and others, in congratulating 
Athabaska for becoming the first air carrier in Canada to 
receive a licence under the new open skies treaty. 
 
I know that Athabaska is excited about the potential for 
bringing visitors from the States into Saskatchewan and that our 
already vital tourism industry will be enhanced. Obviously an 
increase in tourism will mean more jobs, more economic 
activity in our province, so I think that's very good news. 
 
The Glass family and the management and the staff, Athabaska 
Airways, have shown admirable entrepreneurial initiative, and 
we look forward to the activity that their new venture will  



May 18, 1995 

 
2419 

create. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Promotions 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that congratulations are in order today for a couple of 
government employees from Regina. Now I'm not referring to 
the employees that have been outside the Legislative Assembly 
here today asking the government not to negatively affect their 
livelihoods and their families' livelihoods. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I'm referring to a couple of people who have 
done very well by this government. And I think I'll quote from a 
letter, Mr. Speaker, and I think it sums it all up: I'm very 
pleased to formally announce the promotion of Garry Simons to 
senior executive management positions in SaskTel. 
 
Now we all remember Garry as the former CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the New Democrat Party and a campaign 
organizer. It goes on to say: his team will include SaskTel 
Mobility, the sales and service, the network service divisions, 
under the respective leadership of Diana Milenkovic, also a 
former secretary and political aide for nominations to the 
Premier. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, patronage is doing rather well by this 
government even though the Premier told us before the last 
election that would never happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Allan Blakeney receives Distinguished Canadian Award 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on a 
definitely more principled note, I would like to say that during 
his presidency, John F. Kennedy once spoke at a White House 
dinner to a group of Nobel Prize winners. He said this was the 
greatest gathering of intellect ever in that dining-room, except 
when Thomas Jefferson dined alone. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have our own Jeffersonian equivalent, 
Allan Blakeney — Rhodes Scholar, professor of law, president 
of the World Federalists of Canada, maker and author of 
Canada's constitution, and former premier of Saskatchewan. 
And on Tuesday night he became the recipient of a 
Distinguished Canadian Award from the Seniors' University 
Group at the University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very few people in Canada who, by 
their deeds of a lifetime, give real definition to the term, public 
service. Allan Blakeney is one and I am proud to know him. 
 
There are other members here who have a longer and closer 
association with Mr. Blakeney. But I, like many others, think of 
him as a mentor — because of the thoughtful integrity of his 
ideas, because of his precision and clarity in expressing them, 
and because of his patient willingness to exchange them with  

students and colleagues alike. 
 
I was happy to see him recognized by the seniors' group and I 
know we all share their admiration and gratitude for his lifetime 
of service, first to Saskatchewan, and lately to the world. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Big River Trade Show and Roadeo 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
the session coming close to an end, I know members will have 
lots of free time on their hands. Just in case they can't find 
something that will fill that time, I would like to invite them to 
two events in my constituency. 
 
On May 27 and 28, Big River will host the Big River Trade 
Show and Big River truck roadeo, and both of these events will 
take place in the Big River arena area. 
 
The trade show, Mr. Speaker, is the fourth annual and will 
feature more than 60 exhibitors, businesses, artists, 
craftspeople, and hobbyists. Meanwhile, the truckers and 
loggers' roadeo involves about 60 contestants. And the 
competitions include skidding, falling, bucking, and truck 
driving. 
 
The events are key to Big River, with 1,000 people or more 
expected to attend. At this time I want to wish the organizers 
good luck and to invite everyone to Big River on May 27 and 
28. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pilot Butte Library 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
want to congratulate the Pilot Butte Library, my home town 
library, for having been chosen as branch of the year for 1994. 
 
The award was given at the Southeast Regional Library's annual 
meeting in Weyburn recently. Out of 50 branches, the Pilot 
Butte branch library was recognized for overall improvement in 
the performance of a branch. 
 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, the Pilot Butte Library was cited for 
its ongoing efforts to encourage new uses for the branch and to 
raise library funds. In 1994, Pilot Butte conducted many 
different programs that were innovative and well used. These 
included a summer reading program, puppet shows conducted 
by older children for younger children, and a drama performed 
in the library. Fund-raising included selling oranges, bingos, 
bottle drives, and running concessions at ball tournaments. 
 
The library was noted for remaining open on evenings and 
Sundays. As well, circulation reached 14,549, meaning on 
average everyone in Pilot Butte read 10 books last year. Ours is  



May 18, 1995 

 
2420 

a smart town, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm also pleased to note that the Pilot Butte branch was 
runner-up in the branch programing award. 
 
I want to congratulate all staff, volunteers, and users of the Pilot 
Butte Library, especially Anne Wolff who's the librarian. This 
award belongs to everyone because the Pilot Butte Library is 
truly a community library. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thank you to Legislature Staff 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For some reason day 
71 just seems to be the right time to acknowledge that there are 
a whole host of folks around this building that help us do our 
jobs effectively. 
 
I'd like to acknowledge the effective work of the pages who 
serve us here in this Assembly, courteously and efficiently; all 
Clerks of the Assembly at the Table and elsewhere and their 
staffs who keep proceedings working smoothly; to those who 
work in Hansard to ensure an accurate record of the 
proceedings gets out promptly and accurately; and to those in 
the library for their effective research for us and our staffs. 
 
To the Sergeant-at-Arms and the security staff — who are 
looking good, particularly good, this session, Mr. Speaker — 
for helping us all feel secure; and also to visitor services for 
helping all the people who visit this building to feel welcome; 
to those in the Dome Cafeteria for keeping us fed, and 
sometimes a little bit overfed; to those in Property Management 
for keeping the building spic and span; and to our caucus staffs 
for doing their best to help us look good. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, to yourself for keeping these 
proceedings moving reasonably orderly most of the time. Mr. 
Speaker, the members feel privileged to be served here 
proficiently, competently, and courteously. And I know that I 
am joined by all members of this Assembly when I say the two 
most important words in the English language — thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sergeant-at-Arms’ Retirement 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 1985 
a 27-year veteran of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) was appointed Sergeant-at-Arms in the provincial 
legislature. I refer of course to Mr. Bill Goodhand who, after 
retiring from the RCMP, was in charge of the legislative 
security unit of the Wascana Centre police for several years 
before taking his appointment. 
 
Mr. Goodhand was the first full-time Sergeant-at-Arms and is 
responsible for the overall security of the Legislative Building. 
 
In 1985 the new Sergeant-at-Arms had a goal: to make the  

Legislative Assembly highly accessible to the public yet 
maintain a high level of security. Mr. Speaker, I believe he has 
accomplished this goal, and security and accessibility are an 
important component that complement responsible and open 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill Goodhand is a friend of this legislature. He 
brings personality and humour to pomp and ceremony. His 
great respect for procedure and protocol is evident every day. 
He is able to maintain professionalism while ensuring a human 
touch in his day-to-day encounters with staff and members of 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill Goodhand has the respect of all members of 
this legislature and will be remembered as a friend. I know that 
all members will join me in wishing Mr. Bill Goodhand a long 
and happy retirement, and especially very extra special luck on 
the senior PGA (Professional Golfers' Association) tour. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Construction Contract 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, your union-preference 
tendering policy has already been shown to be costly to 
taxpayers, but now we see an example of its adverse affect on 
Saskatchewan small cities and towns and its barriers to local 
employment. 
 
In a recent article in the Battleford telegram local contractors 
have indicated that it's possible local people will not be 
involved with the new $1.5 million SaskTel building. Mr. 
Premier, the reason is simple: local contractors who bid on your 
contracts will be forced to terminate long-standing employees 
to make room for union workers parachuted into their 
communities by international union halls based in Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you tell this Assembly how this jibes with 
your promise to create jobs for local people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I thank the hon. member for his 
question. I think that he doth overreact a little bit to the 
situation on the building that he's referred to. I would encourage 
all contractors to apply for construction contracts that are 
tendered through the commercial Crown corporations in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The whole intent behind the Crown corporations tendering 
policy was to give a level playing-field for all contractors in the 
province, whether they be union firms or non-union firms. And 
certainly, as a government, we've tried to accomplish that and 
we encourage all contractors to apply on those contracts as they 
become available. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, that's not what  



May 18, 1995 

 
2421 

the contractors in North Battleford are saying. Local electrical 
contractor Malcolm Smith says he won't be bidding for the 
work in the SaskTel project and neither will a vast majority of 
the contractors that he knows. 
 
In fact in the article, he says that your union preference policy is 
a trap aimed at forcing all companies in the province to become 
unionized. And the more unions there are, the more political 
donations there are for the NDP (New Democratic Party) to get. 
 
Now he says and I quote: “This policy was created for one 
reason — to get the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to directly line 
the NDP pockets.” 
 
Mr. Premier, this is a stinging indictment of your failed 
economic development policy. It shines a light on exactly what 
this is all about — a patronage at a massive scale. We now 
know this helps you, Mr. Premier. But given the fact that most 
of the North Battleford and area contractors will not be bidding 
on your SaskTel contract, can you tell me how this benefits the 
people of the North Battleford area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would say to 
the hon. member that we would want to encourage all local 
contractors to apply on the work that becomes available. It's 
certainly a bit of an exaggeration put out to a large extent by the 
members of the former administration. 
 
We believe that the Crown construction tendering policy will 
work. We encourage those people who are local contractors to 
apply. We feel that the process put into place will have a level 
playing-field for them. And certainly it's not the intention of 
this government, Mr. Speaker, to disrupt the standard business 
practices of any of the contractors in the province. We 
encourage them to, in fact, apply. 
 
If there is some misunderstanding, as you state, from the local 
area, I'd be more than happy to meet with those individuals and 
they should seek further clarification on the policy as it has 
been put down in the document agreed to by the commercial 
Crowns and by the association involved. And I think it has 
fairly broad acceptance, if the members opposite would only 
give it a chance to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well wrong again, 
Minister. This is not a level playing-field and the people up 
there have already read the contract. They know what's in it and 
they know what they want to stay away from. 
 
This is not the sort of thing that just comes from people trying 
to grind an axe or to create some kind of a smokescreen like 
you and your cronies. 
 
This comes from people, this comes from contractors, who are 
worried about their livelihoods and their communities. This 
comes from people that know what they're getting into and  

what they don't want to be into. And it also comes from the city 
council. 
 
Mr. Premier, on Monday the North Battleford council voiced its 
disapproval of your union preference policy and backed the 
local contractors. They have asked whether or not the SaskTel 
contract can be exempted from your policy. What is your 
answer to their request, Mr. Premier? Would you exempt the 
SaskTel building from your union favouritism policy and in 
doing so save the taxpayers thousands of dollars and preserve 
local jobs for local people in the Battleford area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate very much that the 
people in the North Battleford area do need the work, they need 
the contracts; and I again encourage them to enter in the 
bidding process. Even the incoming president of the chamber of 
commerce, as I understand, on a provincial level, says give this 
policy a chance to work. And that's what we're asking. 
 
We don't want people to be excluded. We want people to be 
included. And we aren't going to exempt one particular project 
from an overall policy that has been agreed to. We operate 
differently. We set out plans; we implement policies of this 
government. Unlike the former administration that worked on a 
piecemeal basis without any plan and drove this province into a 
$15 billion debt that we've had to climb out of and struggle out 
of over the last previous years of this administration, and we'll 
continue to do that. We think that we have a plan in place that 
will work. 
 
For heaven's sake, give this a chance to work and I think it will 
bear fruit just like the balanced budgets that we've had to bring 
into place under some very trying circumstances. We'll continue 
to proceed with the determination for economic development 
and jobs in this province second to none anywhere in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker. Obviously, Minister, your 
program has been put to the test. It has its experiment. It's not 
working and the only people that like it are the unions and the 
government. And the contractors and the business people don't 
like it. 
 
Mr. Premier, you and your NDP government have said time and 
time again that you were going to create an environment 
conducive to economic development and job creation. Instead 
you have done exactly the opposite through massive tax 
increases and unfair tendering policies. As a result you have 
resorted to buying jobs with taxpayers' money just before the 
election. That's all you've got to offer. 
 
It's indicative of this entire session and it's indicative of your 
entire term of office. Bonni Clark of the Battleford Telegraph 
sums it up nicely. And she says, and I quote: 
 
 In its efforts to bolster the union strength in numbers, it  



May 18, 1995 

 
2422 

 appears the provincial government may have done so at 
the expense of smaller private businesses. In this part of 
the world where PST is a major issue, where economic 
development is needed, and where people want to make 
a life for themselves, it is unfortunate we will most 
likely be forced to support outsiders rather than our own 
friends and neighbours. 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, it's time you pulled your head out of the 
sand and rethink your position. It's time you repealed this union 
favouritism and instead support the Saskatchewan jobs and 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. Will you do that today, Mr. Premier, 
for the people of The Battlefords and the people of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member seems to be 
purporting that he represents the people of Battlefords. 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, I represent the people of The Battlefords 
constituency and intend on doing so for a fair amount of time 
into the future. 
 
This government stands on its record of bringing in a balanced 
budget, making sure that we serve the people of Saskatchewan 
with some plan which goes beyond just today but into the 
future. And I think that the member will find out very soon that 
that plan will be borne out with fruit by people who support 
what this government has done in Saskatchewan. 
 
In regard to the Crown construction tendering policy, I tell the 
member again: give this a chance to work. Give this a chance to 
work for a year. We'll have a look at it and we'll see whether it's 
working or not. If it's not working, then we'll do a bit of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I want to call the member 
from Maple Creek to order. He can't get up and take a lengthy 
time at asking his question and then constantly interrupt when 
the minister is trying to answer the question for him. 
 
So I'd ask him to please . . . Order. Please quit interrupting 
when a minister is answering his question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I'd suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 
hon. member opposite go out and look for fossils instead of 
regurgitating some of the old lines that came from the previous 
administration. 
 
This government, under the direction of the Premier, has done a 
very good job in terms of economic development. I point out to 
the member opposite that Saskatchewan has only one-third of 
the labour unrest of other jurisdictions across Canada. 
Saskatchewan has a very stable work environment. 
 
We have people investing in this province like never before to 
expand their businesses, new businesses coming in, jobs being 
created. Be positive about what's happening in Saskatchewan. 
Don't keep spreading this negative doom and gloom around the 
province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Battlefords Constituency Office 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
to the Minister of Labour, the man that claims that he represents 
The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Minister, your NDP colleague, Dick Gibbons, has informed 
the media that a charity is finally being selected to receive a 
donation from your NDP landlords, PDN Ventures. However, 
Mr. Gibbons is refusing to say which is the lucky charity. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you could spin the old 
wheel of fortune and tell us who the lucky winner is. Which 
charity is the beneficiary of your taxpayer-funded generosity, 
sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — If you promise not to accuse me of 
grandstanding going into a provincial election campaign, I'll tell 
you here this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm sure 
that most taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan would love 
to see the Minister of Labour stand up and tell us which charity 
he has been able . . . which charity has the Minister of Labour 
become the sugar-daddy of North Battleford for, with his 
taxpayer-funded office scheme. 
 
So if Mr. Gibbons won't tell us, Mr. Minister, which charity has 
been selected, why don't you just cut out the anticipation that 
we all have and cut to the quick and do it in question period 
rather than waiting for later in the day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Battleford Union Hospital Foundation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I'm 
sure, Mr. Speaker, that given what has transpired with health 
care in this province under an NDP administration, these people 
need a little help. 
 
And I'm sure that the Union Hospital fund in North Battleford 
is probably a very worthwhile charity. I'm sure people in that 
community, Mr. Speaker, donate on a very regular basis to the 
Union Hospital fund in North Battleford. 
 
But do you know what, Mr. Speaker? Because the Minister of 
Labour found a little loophole for his NDP-run corporation, 
charged the highest rent in the province of any MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly), got up $35,000 that probably 
would have never seen the light of the Union Hospital 
Foundation, and because it has, it's been found out. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2423 

So I ask you, Minister of Labour, and I ask you, Mr. Premier, 
particularly, because you didn't answer it yesterday, do you 
think it's appropriate for the office rental money of the MLA 
from North Battleford, taxpayer-funded money, to now be 
going to the Union Hospital in North Battleford because it is 
coming up short because of your policies? Do you believe that's 
proper for him to do that in this Assembly, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I appreciate all the notoriety here 
this afternoon. I want to make three basic points. First off, to 
dispel the false information that that member passes out; he 
says that I pay the highest rent. In one of the years there are at 
least 18 members of the Legislative Assembly that paid higher 
rents than I do. I believe it was the '91-92 period when Gary 
Lane was still a member of this House, he paid $16,000 rent 
that year. The same year the member from Estevan, the former 
premier, paid $15,000 rent in that year. During that same year I 
paid $10,320. 
 
For my constituency office, I paid $860 a month when I went 
into it in 1986. Today I still pay $860 a month for rent in my 
constituency office. It has never changed. 
 
I tell the member what the Premier said in estimates yesterday. 
If you have some example of wrongdoing, quit making these 
accusations and turn the file over, either to the Board of Internal 
Economy or the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to do 
an investigation. I would be very happy to be able to have an 
investigation into my constituency office to clear the air and 
stop the false accusations that you have continued to make on 
my character and the character of this government. Shame on 
you, member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, whether he's got the highest rent in 
the province or he's got the lowest — do you believe it is 
proper, Mr. Premier, do you believe it is proper for this type of 
a charitable donation to be made to the Union Hospital fund or 
any other fund in the city of North Battleford or anywhere else 
in this province with MLAs’ office allowance money being 
used in this way? Do you believe it's proper, Mr. Premier? 
 
It's time to get on the record in this House of whether you think 
that is the way this province should be run. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I would point out to the member and to 
the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the arrangement in my 
constituency office is one between a tenant and a landlord. I am 
quite sure that the member opposite who asked the questions 
would not feel that anybody should be able to tell his landlord 
what to do with the rent money he pays for his constituency 
office. Nor can I tell the landlord, who owns the constituency 
office that I'm in, what they do with the rent that I pay to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everything in regard to this is within the rules of 
the Legislative Assembly. It's within the rules of the Board of 
Internal Economy. And if the member suspects otherwise . . .  

(inaudible interjection) . . . and members calling from the back, 
"not", take it to the Speaker, take it to the Board of Internal 
Economy. Please, take it to the RCMP and stop making the 
accusations, stop making the accusations that are falsely based 
and cast innuendo on myself. 
 
Likely all you're doing is helping get me more publicity in my 
riding and you'll be beaten even worse when it comes election 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Hospital Closure 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, throughout this session we've seen this particular 
government constantly messing up and then trying to fix up one 
issue after another, from gaming to pensions to health care. 
 
And first the NDP say, well there are no health district deficits, 
and then they're forced to admit that there were. And then the 
Minister of Health says, well, oops, I guess they're $15 million. 
And then the Provincial Auditor comes along and says no, 
they're $30 million. Not only has the NDP undermined the 
quality of health care, they now have placed the entire system in 
financial jeopardy. 
 
So my question this afternoon is to the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Minister, is it true that the Regina District Health Board intends 
to speed up its planned closure of the Plains hospital in an 
attempt to deal with their serious deficit situation? Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think I can refer the 
Leader of the Third Party to the front page of the Leader-Post, 
or the third page of the Leader-Post, where the Regina District 
Board has made quite public what is in fact happening. They 
have a group of highly respected health care planners who are 
working with them and their capital planning regarding the 
Plains hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's there for the Leader of the Liberal Party to read on the third 
page of the Leader-Post today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 
it is very, very interesting that finally we have the Minister of 
Health stating that indeed it is true they're going to speed it up, 
that he's had to call in reinforcements from B.C. (British 
Columbia) because his health care reform has finally gone into 
a state of collapse. It's interesting that he chose not to go to the 
people in this province first who had expertise, to avoid these 
kinds of problems in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Plains hospital was built to serve the residents 
of rural communities all throughout southern Saskatchewan. 
Those individuals went out with ice-cream pails and bake sales 
to collect money to help finance that particular hospital. And all 
over this province this government has closed facilities without  



May 18, 1995 

 
2424 

a back-up plan in place, shut down beds in urban hospitals who 
neither had the staff nor the budgets to cope with increased 
patient loads. 
 
Mr. Minister, given that neither the General nor the Pasqua 
hospitals in Regina have plans to be able to absorb patients that 
will be displaced by this early closure, this is a recipe for added 
chaos. Why should patients and staff at any of these facilities 
believe that the situation that we're going into now is not just 
another NDP health care disaster waiting to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it may take a moment to 
respond to everything that the Liberal leader says in this House. 
 
Again today we see the leader, who would want to lead this 
province, twist the facts — twist the facts — to create some 
political points for her effort, Mr. Speaker. She talks about 
outside experts — the nerve! She, who would bring in 
Texas-style auditing to health care in Saskatchewan. Now this 
matter of twisting the facts seems to be contagious among the 
Liberal candidates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here I see her candidate in Melfort, one Rod 
Gantefoer, saying, quote: that the health care districts are much 
too small. Now here, Mr. Speaker, I see her candidate, Dr. Jim 
Melenchuk, saying that the health care districts are what? Much 
too large. Here I see her candidate here in Regina in the Regina 
Lakeview constituency — Gary Johnson — saying, well it's just 
right because we're going to continue with health care reform. 
And what does the member from Shaunavon say? Well he says, 
it's all wrong and we're going to go back to the old way. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the debate in this House and the 
debate across Saskatchewan, because it is an important debate, 
would be well served if the Leader of the Liberal Party would 
be consistent, not attempt to twist the facts, and share with the 
people of Saskatchewan what truly is her plan, which is a 
Texas-style audit on health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, if these people, and 
particularly the commander-in-chief of the New Democratic 
Party whose health care slogan is now, save medicare, sell your 
hospital; if these people had bothered to do any kind of audits, 
had ever gone to the experts in health care in this province, 
there wouldn't be this kind of mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this so-called plan would require $100 million in 
upgrades to both the Pasqua and General hospitals. The planned 
savings that would be realized if the Plains is closed is going to 
amount to $10 million a year. And this money crunch comes at 
a time when the Regina District Health Board is predicting an 
operating deficit of what — $4 million. And they tell us that all 
these so-called savings are going to go to wellness. 
 
Well I want you to explain, sir, how all of this is going to add  

up. Okay. Here's your question. Given that you're going to 
spend 10 times the annual savings from closing the Plains just 
to renovate alone, how can there be any money at all left over 
for your wellness? Explain that to the people of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the Liberal leader and 
member from Saskatoon well knows, this capital planning is 
developed by the Regina District Health Board. It's in a widely 
distributed plan called Towards 2000. 
 
Now the last time that the Liberal member got up in this House 
and did what she's doing today, which is attacking the Regina 
District Board, the CEO of the board had to go public and say, 
well that information is just false. And I'm afraid again we're 
going to have that kind of circumstance. 
 
Now I want to know how this is going to add up, Mr. Speaker. 
She talks about reducing the size of government; she says 
shrinking the size of government by 5 per cent. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, within the Department of Health that means a 
reduction of $80 million in the Department of Health alone, 250 
government-wide, $80 million out of Health — that's what she 
proposes. 
 
Now add to that what her federal Liberal cousins are going to 
deliver on this province — and we're not sure yet how many 
tens of millions or hundreds of millions that's going to be — 
now that, Mr. Speaker, puts the scare back into medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addictions Treatment 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, you've 
told us many times how well your gambling addiction program 
is working. I was wondering if you could explain the overall 
goal of this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a VLT (video lottery terminal) addict goes 
to one of your counsellors for treatment, what is the goal? Is it 
to help them stop playing VLTs, or is it simply to cut down the 
amount of money they're losing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, whenever an individual has 
an addiction problem, that problem will be dealt with by a 
professional in the field of addictions counselling. In most 
cases, I think it will be an abstinence then from the problem, 
whether it be a liquor addiction or a drug addiction or a 
gambling addiction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm glad 
that you said it's an absolute end of the problem, because I think 
between controlling the amount of money they're losing and 
stopping it is a very big distinction. Because we've learned from  



May 18, 1995 

 
2425 

other gambling . . . gambling addiction counsellors that the 
stated goal of your addiction program is something called 
controlled gambling. 
 
Your goal isn't to help gambling addicts to quit playing VLTs; 
it's simply for them to cut down on the amount they are 
gambling. Controlled gambling, Mr. Minister. That's like 
advocating controlled drinking for an alcoholic. And most 
people who work in the addictions problem area will tell you 
that's the wrong approach. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you advocating controlled gambling for 
VLT addicts when complete abstinence is a much better 
approach? And why don't you take a stronger approach and help 
them kick the habit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what the 
member is quoting from or where he gets that kind of 
information. I repeat that those who have a . . . when someone 
has a problem, they will be treated by a professional. 
 
When we talk, Mr. Speaker, about the control of gaming 
opportunities, the public of Saskatchewan know what we're 
talking about. It is a complete control of the gaming 
opportunities in our province. 
 
That is limiting — limiting the number of VLTs in this 
province. That is negotiating limits on the number of casinos 
which, by the way, Mr. Speaker, is something quite, quite 
different than we've seen in Conservative Manitoba and 
Conservative Alberta where the opportunities of gaming in 
those provinces are significantly, significantly greater than in 
the province of Saskatchewan where we have, where we have 
chosen to control and regulate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally let me say this. In your Conservative 
Manitoba and your Conservative Alberta and Conservative 
wherever you want go, you will not find the commitment to 
prevention, education, and treatment that you'll find here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Environment Department Renews Partnership with 
SARCAN 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take great 
pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, in announcing that my department 
has renewed its partnership with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rehabilitation Centres for another five years. 
 
SARCAN has been overseeing the province's beverage 
container collection and recycling program since 1988. In that 
time it has made it one of the most comprehensive recycling 
systems in North America, one that all Saskatchewan residents 
can be proud of. 
 

Since opening its first recycling depot, SARCAN has grown 
from the ground up into an effective and efficient recycling 
network with 68 people in 62 Saskatchewan communities. And 
in building this wonderful program it has been able to bring 
environmental, economic, and social benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the last fiscal year alone, SARCAN recycled 160 million 
non-refillable, used metal, plastic, and glass beverage 
containers. By diverting this potentially harmful material from 
landfills, our province's environment is healthier and cleaner, 
and we are closer to our goal of providing a sustainable future 
for our children. 
 
SARCAN also offers our province an important social service. 
The company employs 250 people on a permanent basis, more 
during peak periods, and the vast majority of its employees are 
persons with disabilities. 
 
The employment opportunities offered by SARCAN are yet 
another way in which people with disabilities can contribute to 
and benefit from the general feeling of prosperity that we're 
now feeling here in Saskatchewan. 
 
SARCAN also makes good business sense. SARCAN's 
recycling operations generate millions of dollars for our 
provincial economy, through wages, rents, transportation and 
processing, and we are proud to be able to support it and watch 
it grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARCAN creates jobs, keeps recycling dollars 
here, and reduces waste that would have ended up in our 
municipal landfills. These are concrete, tangible benefits for the 
province of Saskatchewan and the people of our great province. 
And I can only see these benefits continuing with the renewal 
of our agreement with SARCAN. It is a prime example of the 
type of cooperation we encourage here in Saskatchewan and 
that the people of Saskatchewan have come to expect. 
 
We offer SARCAN our continued support and commend all 
SARCAN employees for the great work they have been doing. 
They should be proud of their continued environmental 
leadership. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it's good 
to see that at the dying days of the legislature that the ministers 
responsible have reverted to their bush-league tactics of not 
providing any copies of the ministerial statements. We thought 
that . . . while they had started that way at the beginning of the 
session, they haven't done so since then. 
 
Mr. Minister, SARCAN is indeed is a very good program, a 
very good program that was developed by the previous 
administration in the early '80s to help two areas of this 
province — one being the environment, and the other being the 
handicapped people of this province who had difficulty gaining 
employment. The SARCAN program was put in place to assist  



May 18, 1995 

 
2426 

them. 
 
But it's been a very good program. Unfortunately, it's come to 
light now, Mr. Speaker, that there are some very serious 
problems developing in this area dealing with harassments and 
assault on the very clients that the SARCAN program was 
designed to aid. And the minister has been abdicating his 
responsibilities in that area by trying to deny responsibility and 
pass that responsibility off onto others. 
 
He's more than prepared to rise and stand in his place to seek 
the glory that he can try to gain from making announcements on 
this area — that it's the renewal of the five-year contract, Mr. 
Speaker — but when it comes to looking after the clients, the 
clients that the SARCAN program was developed to protect and 
to aid and to provide employment for, that minister is not there 
to assist them. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 34 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Perhaps the Premier would wish us to wait a minute while the 
rest of his officials file in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
that's good, Mr. Premier, I'm glad to see that you've got a handle 
on it. 
 
You know it was nice for once to see the Liberals comes to the 
House today and bring something that was actually of some 
importance. And unfortunately they beat me to the punch 
because here I thought your estimates would be the perfect 
place to read back to you some of the quotes that you used to 
make when you were in opposition, about the evils of patronage 
and how awful those Tories were in practising that particular 
thing. And darn it all, the member from Shaunavon squeezed it 
into members' statements. And the Speaker didn't sit him down 
for doing what he did but . . . 
 
A couple of more New Democrats went to government heaven 
today, and it's really sad, Mr. Premier, when . . . And I happen 
to know Ms. Milenkovic; she's a very intelligent, well-spoken, 
articulate person. But it's really sad that people that have a long 
history of involvement with you and the New Democrat Party 
have to feed off of the public trough in a way that you said 
would never be possible under your administration. You said 
this simply wasn't possible to happen. 
 
(1430) 
 
And it's one reason, Mr. Premier, that we have so much 
difficulty for instance with your gambling policy, because we  

see the former treasurer of the NDP Party now the executive 
director of the Liquor and Gaming Commission. I mean if there 
was ever a place to start inserting people, it'll be that whole 
gambling culture, that gambling megalopolis being put in 
downtown Regina here called a casino. And there'll be all sorts 
of nifty little niches where you can put people into. 
 
So I'm wondering why you think, in the face of all of the 
pronouncements you made in opposition about this issue of 
patronage . . . that you now forge ahead in the dying days of this 
administration into an election campaign and you still are taking 
people with those strong associations and putting them over 
into prominent positions where they can draw down very large 
salaries and do very nice, thank you, when you know full well 
what the public wants is that type of thing to be brought before 
the Legislative Assembly in a proper manner and people put in 
positions because of merit. And if they're New Democrats and 
they've got merit, then just come to the House and say, these are 
New Democrats, they've got merit; what do you think, boys and 
girls? 
 
What do you think of that idea, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I frankly think your idea is 
lousy, if you want to know the truth about it all. The idea that a 
committee of the legislature is going to be able to go beyond the 
desk of the CEO of a Crown corporation — in this case, 
SaskTel, Mr. Fred Van Parys — and they will be in a better 
position to judge all the subordinates that should or should not 
be appointed and decide whether or not they're New Democrats 
or Liberals or Conservatives and should be appointed, that's 
ludicrous. 
 
What we do is we appoint the board of directors, the board of 
directors appoint the CEO, and the CEO runs the operation. 
And if he or she can't run the operation, there's a new CEO or a 
new board. But surely to goodness we don't put ourselves in the 
position of hiring the employees that are below. 
 
And the two individuals that you named were the long-time 
employees of SaskTel with experience in that area and have 
been recommended for the positions by the CEO of SaskTel. 
I'm not going to second-guess the CEO of SaskTel. I'm going to 
judge the CEO of SaskTel like I'm going to judge every other 
CEO, by the board's judgement of them and whether or not they 
fulfil the corporate functions of the Crown corporation. That's 
the only way to do it, surely. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Premier, you know that that's ridiculous. Come on, people in 
this province aren't stupid. You've got your friend Don Ching 
running CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) which runs the Crowns. 
 
I mean for you to even suggest that those Crowns are in any 
way independent from you is just simply foolishness, and the 
public in the province understand that. I mean if it wasn't the 
case you wouldn't have needed to take George Hill out and put 
your friend Ching in. Okay? 



May 18, 1995 

 
2427 

And I say there was just as much problem with the appointment 
of Mr. Hill as there is with Mr. Ching. But the simple fact is 
that that person and the board of CIC control the Crowns, and 
that's why the auditor says that that Crown business should be 
done in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Premier, so that those 
issues are depoliticized, that the running of the Crowns become 
strictly a commercial operation. Commercial — and then you 
can go out and hire the best people that the business has to offer 
in telecommunications or power generation or natural gas 
transmission. And you can know full well that those people are 
operating on a business climate, a business playing-field, with a 
business mentality, to serve the natural monopoly which they 
have. 
 
Now don't you agree, Mr. Premier, that if you're going to have a 
political appointment in charge of CIC, the master of the 
Crowns, removed from this Legislative Assembly, that you're 
probably going to have patronage all through the Crown 
system? Wouldn't that make some sense, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — It would make sense perhaps to the 
peculiar rationale and thought processes of Conservatives 
because the question realizes and reveals exactly the way in 
which you people would operate. But it does not make sense to 
me; it does not make sense to this form of the government. 
 
First of all, the question is factually wrong. CIC does not 
control and operate all the Crowns. It can't do so by law — it 
would be in an illegal position to do so by law. The boards of 
directors of each Crown, by law and by statute, is responsible 
for running each Crown corporation including the appointment 
of the CEO and including all the policies. 
 
The best that CIC can do is to make sure that such things like 
borrowing requirements are done in a coordinated fashion, that 
pay rates are roughly done in some sort of coordinated pay-rate 
schedule, that general objectives of government with respect to 
dividends paid to the shareholders are met. That's about all CIC 
can do and should do. 
 
On time from time CIC will deal with some of the very big 
megaprojects that your administration entered into — all the 
ones which I could enumerate but I won't do in the interests of 
time today — but it doesn't belong to Crown corporations and 
you know it doesn't, and if it did it would be breaking the law. 
Wouldn't do it. 
 
Now what do Crown corporations do with respect to the 
revelation of information — exactly what I told the Leader of 
the Liberal Party last night and which I'm telling you today. The 
Provincial Auditor said in his May 1995 report, they're filing 
reports. Now they have to file all kinds of prospectuses, he says. 
In fact the exact words are, intersessional tabling of annual 
reports. 
 
The order in council approved the tabling of an explanatory 
report with respect to acquiring of shares or the creation of a 
body corporate. There is the Crowns Corporation Committee of 
course, which is a standing committee of this legislature. 

There is much access to information and accountability, more 
so than any other province in Canada in this area. So quite 
obviously we have very competent people in place. They are 
independent, they are non-political, and they're accountable. 
They're accountable through this House, through the committee 
of the House, through the various reporting mechanisms, and 
accountable to the Provincial Auditor and other auditors. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Premier, I'm sorry to always be 
contradicting you, but you know full well that early on in your 
administration that the board members of a bunch of the 
Crowns were none other than your own cabinet ministers. They 
got rid of all the boards. The only people that were the board of 
directors were cabinet ministers, NDP cabinet ministers — your 
cabinet ministers taking your direction, okay? 
 
And they were busy doing their hiring and firing at that time 
and getting the Crowns the way they wanted them, which meant 
hiring people like Mr. Nystuen and Ms. Milenkovic and Mr. 
Ching — and need I go on? 
 
I mean you see this bunch of paper I have here, Mr. Premier, 
that's all of your patronage appointments over three and a half 
years. It's quite impressive really that so much work could be 
done by so few in such a little bit of time and with so much 
public money expended besides. It's quite a record. 
 
It's not something I think you'd be particularly proud of. And if 
people in Saskatchewan in 1991 had known during that leaders' 
debate that you were going to put together such an impressive 
record as this, I'm not sure they would have been quite so 
enthusiastic about your premiership. 
 
So I say to you once again, Premier, the fact that you had boards 
of directors made up entirely of ministers of the Crown for a 
while and the fact that they did a lot of hiring and they did a lot 
of firing and they made a lot of patronage appointments, 
wouldn't you think it would be more reasonable to help you 
keep your election promises if perhaps this Legislative 
Assembly dealt with those issues of the Crown corporations and 
their hiring and firing, rather than your political appointments 
or your political ministers? And please don't try and lay it off on 
some board of directors that everyone in Saskatchewan knows 
simply won't wash. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I've heard the argument a second 
time today, and frankly I think it's just as lousy the second time 
as I thought it was the first time. You can't have a political 
chamber like the legislative Chamber do those kinds of things 
that you advocate. You simply cannot do that. 
 
You will know that Mr. Fred Van Parys was engaged to be the 
president of SaskTel, not by our administration but by your 
administration. Mr. Van Parys did whatever he did with the two 
people that you identified today — Ms. Milenkovic and Mr. 
Simons — himself in his capacity of CEO and president. That is 
the way the system worked then; that's the way the system 
works now; that's the way the system should work. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2428 

Now should we have the corporations accountable in terms of 
their expenditures, their goals, objectives, commerciality? Of 
course we should. Should we try to build in more systems of 
accountability? Of course we should. I think we've made 
wonderful strides in this regard. We have less people on the 
patronage list, as you describe it, by a country mile than was 
existing before 1991. 
 
But we don't want to get into a system where this Chamber gets 
down below the CEO on the line chart, organizational chart, 
and starts to decide whether or not this person or that person 
should or shouldn't be appointed or what the pay rate should or 
shouldn't be because, believe me, if you want to get into 
politics, that's the one sure way of doing it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Premier, it perhaps doesn't have to 
be done on the floor of the Chamber. I understand in other 
jurisdictions that they now do use a committee structure. And 
during that time they are able to assess the needs of things like 
Crown corporations vis-a-vis the professional type of people 
that they require within their organizations in order to do the 
business of that corporation. 
 
But this province is unique, Premier, and you know it is. You 
can't talk about other premiers and other provinces in the same 
way because, for instance, the province of Alberta virtually has 
no Crown sector. The province of Manitoba has a small Crown 
sector. Some of the Maritime provinces virtually have no 
Crown sector at all. There isn't the opportunity that there is in 
this province to play around with that sector because it doesn't 
exist the same way. 
 
Here you have a very extensive Crown sector. As a matter of 
fact, you've been creating them at a fairly rapid rate. And I'll be 
incredibly amazed . . . because I go through this list here, and it 
is many, many pages of individuals, and I look at the various 
board appointments. I look at some of these positions that 
you've meted out in the last three and a half years. If this happy 
little operation down on Saskatchewan Drive, where the 
Economic Development minister is playing around with about 
20 million bucks of the folks' money, if there isn't going to be a 
whole bunch more people show up on this list . . . Because it's 
just prime, absolutely prime. 
 
And that's why, sir, I don't believe that the government should 
be doing that sort of business. You can control it, but you 
shouldn't play around . . . (inaudible) . . . like you're going to 
because you'll have it full of NDP appointments. Already got 
the executive director of the liquor and gaming corporation 
coming directly out of the executive of the NDP Party, directly 
out of the executive of the NDP Party. 
 
Now do you think, do you think for a minute, Mr. Premier, that 
he isn't going to go looking around for birds of a feather to fill 
up the positions in the new casino, fill up the positions as 
gambling expands across this province? 
 
Of course he is because you have set the pattern, sir. You said 
that patronage was evil. You said that before 1991, and now  

you've allowed it to happen. Don't you think that he's going to 
go out and look for birds of a feather to fill up all of those nice 
positions downtown in this new casino operation that your 
government is venturing into? Would you give the assurance 
today then, in the Assembly, that that will not happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the job of a CEO, by 
law, by law — forget about whether that CEO is Progressive 
Conservative, NDP or Liberal, male or female — by law, is to 
do the very best that he or she can do in order to maximize the 
performance, the efficiency, the returns, of the corporation or 
the agency to which he or she has been designated to head. If a 
CEO breaches that duty in law, hires people who are 
incompetent, hires people for political reasons alone, does other 
malfeasances, commits other acts of transgressions, he or she is 
in violation, not only of contractual obligation but of law. 
 
I do not believe that of Mr. Nystuen. I do not believe that any of 
our CEOs unless I have evidence to the contrary. So when you 
ask me the question — don't you think that he'll go out and hire 
a whole bunch of NDPers — the answer is no. I don't think he 
will. Will he hire NDPers? He might. Will he hire Liberals? He 
might. Will he hire PCers? He might. Will he hire people that 
have no political affiliation? He might. His obligation in law is 
to hire the people who can perform the job for which he is 
ultimately responsible to the minister in this House and for 
whom the minister is ultimately responsible to you in this 
House. And that's the way that system works. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well tell me this then, Premier, was his 
position publicly advertised and done through the Public 
Service Commission or some other agency in order to select? 
Was that a publicly advertised and sought-after position by 
many people, or was that individual selected just out of the 
blue? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'll get myself informed and provide 
the member some answer on that. I see that the Liberal member 
from Shaunavon has something that he wants to add to you. Do 
you want to . . . the two of you, do you have something you 
want to add further on this thing? 
 
I might add, Mr. Chairman, I shouldn't have said that because 
you know he had some information on so-called patronage lists 
 the Liberal member from Shaunavon, which he used in this 
House that blew up in his face. So make sure he's not doing the 
same thing to you, too. 
 
How's my cousin making out — cousin? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So I understand, Premier, then, you're going 
to tell me whether that position was publicly tendered for. Well 
I notice one, two, three — at least three former ministers of 
Gaming in the House here today out of the five or six that 
you've had. Surely to goodness one of them knows if that 
position was publicly advertised and went through a selection 
process of some public nature. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2429 

There's one there, there's one there, and there's one there. Surely 
one of them must know something about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that they all 
know about it. And since the member's asked the question, in 
the case of Mr. Nystuen there was no public competition and he 
was appointed by the cabinet in his position. And the reason for 
his appointment was obvious. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very obvious. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, very obvious. His academic 
background and his demonstrated competence and his abilities 
in this area — which, I might add, have been proven since he 
assumed the position. And I would say to the member opposite, 
give me an example of where you think that the administration 
of the Liquor and Gaming Authority has been handled 
incompetently or wrongly, as a matter of public policy, which 
would demonstrate that the person is filling this position by 
virtue of political title only. You can't find it. 
 
You may disagree with the policy of gaming. That's not his job 
to decide that. That's the job of the Chamber to decide. He's 
been a very competent and efficient person in this area. 
 
I might add, while you're at it, we asked Mr. John Wright to 
take on SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) without 
competition. 
 
And you might ask, why do you do that? Well Mr. John Wright 
was the deputy minister of Finance under your administration. 
He was deputy minister of Finance under our administration. 
You had confidence in him for the four or five years that he was 
deputy minister; we had confidence in him in the three or four 
years he was deputy minister. This is a proven, full-time 
professional civil servant with all the credentials in financial 
and business matters to take over and run a corporation like SGI 
immediately. That's why. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. But please don't 
compare those two individuals. Mr. Wright is an extremely 
competent public servant and always has been. Always has 
been. And I would have preferred . . . and I think knowing a 
little bit about Mr. Wright, I think he would have been able to 
compete with anybody — anybody in the private sector for that 
job because he is an extremely competent individual. 
 
But I'll give you the résumé of the other guy. And you said there 
was ample reasons why he was hired. MA (ministerial assistant) 
3, part-time, started May 4, 45 grand a year; MA 3, part-time, 
45 grand a year. We went from May 4, May 31, June 1, all in 
'92, then October 1, '92, and we kept going, MA, MA, MA — I 
guess he was moving around through ministers here, I'm not 
sure. Anyway, we kept getting a little bigger salary as we went 
along. 
 
And then poof, CEO, Sask Gaming Commission, 60 grand. 
When was that? October, '93. And then poof, Acting CEO, 
Liquor and Gaming Commission. We got another little bump  

here. And on and on it goes. That's the résumé, Mr. Premier. 
And then of course before that we had our time in service with 
the NDP Party as treasurer. 
 
Now this, according to the Finance minister, is about 100 
million buck a year potential for the Consolidated Fund. This is 
what we asked the Minister of Finance, Premier, about the 
process with the casino. We wanted to know if the planning and 
the spending and all of those things went through Treasury 
Board, because we wanted to know that Treasury Board 
practices were being followed by these folks that you've been 
hiring. And she wouldn't give us an answer. She said, that's 
none of your business, basically, of whether that happened or 
not. 
 
And that's why we ask these questions of you, sir. You were so 
dead set against patronage and now have an individual that's in 
patronage up to his neck, playing with — not tens of millions of 
dollars — hundreds of millions of dollars and the opportunity to 
hire all sorts of people. 
 
We've got a casino being built that has never gone through 
Treasury Board as far as we can determine. And you've got, 
you've got an NDP hack in charge of the whole operation. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, do you think that that's appropriate, or 
should we have a different process for handling hundreds of 
millions of dollars of people's money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it is impossible 
to answer the question because the facts leading up to the 
question, I say with respect to a member that I like, for 
whatever it's worth from his point of view, but I quite admire 
and like him, I say with respect his facts are so doggone garbled 
that it's impossible to make head nor tail out of the question. 
 
The résumé that you give of course ignores the fact that Mr. 
Nystuen is a Bachelor of Science in Agriculture, 1983, 
University of Saskatchewan, with great distinction. He 
completed two years College of Commerce department in 
accounting, University of Saskatchewan. He served, in addition 
to being an MA, a commercial accounts manager at the Bank of 
Montreal, '86; credit adviser at the Farm Credit Corporation; a 
managing partner in Golden Acres Seed Farm; senior adviser to 
the deputy minister to the Premier; and the chief of staff on 
Environment and Public Safety matters, and then moved into 
the question of the Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Now you left all of that out, either because you did not know or 
you wanted to leave it out in order to paint the worst-case 
scenario. 
 
Now look, do whatever you want about Mr. Nystuen or about 
our position, but for goodness' sake, at least put all the facts out 
there. And that's the facts about this person. 
 
I say this is a qualified person. This is an educated person. This 
is a person with experience in a variety of areas related to the 
question of his duties which he takes up. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2430 

Now the next thing you're talking about is the development of 
the Gaming Corporation. This is an entirely different body. The 
head of the Gaming Corporation charged with the renovation of 
the Via Rail station, if I may put it that way, I think is Mr. Ron 
Stengler, who has been around as a professional civil servant in 
a variety of functions in governments here and elsewhere. And 
that is an agency which is entirely different than the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority. 
 
The Liquor and Gaming Authority's job is to regulate the 
number of VLTs, regulate the liquor outlets, make sure they 
follow the rules of liquor service, and so forth. That's Mr. 
Nystuen — same traditional rules. Mr. Stengler's job and the 
corporation's job with their various contracts is to establish the 
casino which is being located for the Via Rail site. 
 
And you intermesh these into two and you build it up to a 
hundred million dollars. It's growing faster than my pension, 
this question of yours, by every minute. And then you say, is 
this an appropriate way in which to deal with public funds? 
 
Well if I accepted your facts, I'd have to say, of course it isn't. 
But your facts are in error. And I'm trying to rectify those facts 
by giving them to you and asking you to accept that that is the 
circumstance in this particular situation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Premier, you can try and dance around 
the problem all you want. And the man can have education till 
it's coming out his ears. But if he's got that kind of education 
and he's got the kind of ability that you claim, why wouldn't he 
be prepared and why wouldn't your government be prepared, 
when hiring an individual of a gambling operation which is 
province wide and is, sir, in the hundreds of millions of dollars 
range and your take is going to be a big chunk of that, when 
you're hiring a person who is going to manage an operation of 
that size, fraught with all of the dangers that gaming has — and 
I mean, sir, if you are saying to this Assembly that gambling has 
got no downside attached to it, please stand up and say so — 
that when you're hiring an individual that's going to manage all 
of those problems and all of that money, for goodness' sakes, 
what would be wrong with going to some kind of a public 
process so that the people are confident about the individual? 
 
And if this gentleman has all of the qualifications that you say, 
he should be able to compete with anyone out there, anyone at 
all — not have your cabinet ministers who know nothing about 
gambling, making the choice. 
 
Unless you're claiming that some of the five or six gaming 
ministers that you have all of a sudden became qualified 
enough. I mean, sir, don't you agree that if you've got the 
qualifications and you're a professional who is capable of 
dealing with those issues, you could probably compete with the 
best in the world? Wouldn't you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, as a general 
proposition, the notion of advertising and open competition is 
one that I subscribe to and my government subscribes to, and 
we try to follow it as much as we can. 

But there are occasions when it is reasonable for it not to be 
followed. I want to make the following points with respect to 
this particular individual and this particular agency. First of all 
the agency is regulatory. I don't mean to diminish your 
argument that this doesn't impact on lots of dollars. It does. But 
it is regulatory. It is not operational. It is a question of policing 
the circumstances. 
 
The second point I want to make is that Mr. Nystuen served for 
a considerable period of time as the Acting CEO. So there was 
a track record by which we could judge him to determine 
whether or not he could do the job. And clearly he could do the 
job, and was only after we saw in the acting period that he was 
doing such a good job, that we decided competition, 
advertising, only delays, and we're not likely to get anybody 
better than him in any event. He's proven competent at it, and 
let's appoint him, which we did. That was the process. 
 
And I invite you to take a look at his track record since that 
time. How's he done? Ask the hotels' association executive. I 
think they'll give you the answer. Ask anybody, and there is 
certainly no issue which has been raised in this House to the 
contrary. As a regulator, this person, this agency, has done a 
pretty good job. That's how the history of it applies, and that's 
how the explanation is given as to why in this case there is no 
public competition system that was applicable. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Premier, I'll tell you how well he's 
done. And this is according to Mayor Gabrush of the 
community of La Ronge, and I quote; this is how well he's 
done: 
 
 The 36 VLTs in the community are vicitimizing the 

poor, draining thousands of dollars out of the local 
economy, contributing to a sharp increase in crime. 
There were 493 property crimes reported in town last 
year, an increase of more than 50 per cent from the year 
before. 

 
This is Mayor Gabrush from . . . Morris Gabrush, mayor of La 
Ronge. You were asking me how well that your friend Nystuen 
had done, and I'm just telling you what Mayor Gabrush says 
that he's done . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, that's totally 
. . . we'll do that another estimate, okay? 
 
You see the problem is, Premier, that all across this province 
people are questioning that policy, they're questioning its 
implementation, they're questioning the way the communities 
are being treated. And that's why I thought maybe having gone 
to some kind of a public process when selecting the head 
honcho in the gaming business, except for the folks that you 
have circling around through your cabinet, it might have been 
good to have somebody that was a pro at it so at least the folks 
in the province would have some empathy with what's going on. 
 
You see, Premier, this stack of paper that was just brought in, 
these are all the folks around the province that have been 
writing in to us asking questions, and we haven't had  



May 18, 1995 

 
2431 

opportunity . . . and I don't think I'll bore you with all of them 
today, but a goodly number of these people question gaming. 
They question the way that you seem to want to use patronage 
and the way that you seem to want to use the heavy hand of 
your government to push gaming down the throats of 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
And I only ask these questions on their behalf and about your 
friend, Mr. Nystuen, and others that you have put in patronage 
positions who are now obviously interfering in the lives of a lot 
of people in this province. And if you wanted to do gambling, 
all I suggested to you was why not go through a public process 
of at least selecting the people that are going to implement your 
gambling policy, and then maybe people wouldn't be quite so 
upset with it. 
 
I'm giving you an out. And you're saying to me, I don't want the 
out; I'm just going to forge ahead and I'll put all of my NDP 
friends in there and we'll run this gambling corporation and 
we'll just ram it down the throats of Saskatchewan people. And 
we'll make a bunch of money, and I'll balance my budget. 
 
Well, sir, that's not how you make a society and you know it — 
not in this province. You're always telling us about cooperation 
— well I don't think Mr. Nystuen and the bunch over there are 
doing much cooperating with a lot of people these days, and 
they're upset about it. 
 
So why wouldn't you want to have those kinds of individuals 
selected in a public way? Especially given your commitment, 
your strong commitment, to Saskatchewan people in 1991 in 
that election campaign that patronage ought not play a role in 
the formation of government and government policy. You said 
it, sir. What is so different in the spring of 1995 when we're 
going into another election campaign? What's so different now 
than then? Or is it just the chair you sit in now instead of the 
chair that you sat in four years ago? What's the difference now? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — There's absolutely no difference. 
We've been doing exactly what we said we would be doing in 
1991. I want the member to write this down. In 1994-95 there 
were 1,168 appointments, of which 1,160 or 99.3 per cent — 
99.3 per cent — were hired by competition or under the terms 
of a collective agreement; .6 per cent  less than 1 per cent  
by order in council appointment; and 1.1 per cent under a 
special section 7.23 appointment. Ninety-nine point three per 
cent. That's the hiring record. 
 
Now if we want to get into the hiring record of your 
administration in a percentage way — there goes the Liberal 
member from Shaunavon again but be careful of those names 
that he gives you, I say to the hon. member from Thunder Creek 
— if you want to compare those percentages to yours, this is a 
fantastic improvement. 
 
So I guess we've got .7 of a way to go to make it 100 per cent. 
Well I don't think any government's going to make it 100 per  

cent. We're obviously going to have to hire some people who 
believe in our policies. We're not going to hire a deputy 
minister who believes in the hack and burn and slash policies of 
the Liberals and the Conservatives. 
 
Not going to hire a deputy minister of health care who believes 
in the Texas-style audit to attack the nurses in the health care 
system, as the Liberals do. I'm not going to hire a deputy 
minister of Finance who believes in the approaches of Alberta, 
like you do. I mean that would be foolish of me, surely. And 
that is the way government operates. 
 
But 99.3 per cent of the public service having been filled by this 
kind of competition, compared, sir, to your record — and I've 
got the clippings, but again in the interests of time I'm not going 
to use them — compared to your record. You ask me in the 
question  and I'm going to sit down by giving the same 
answer I did at the very beginning  what's changed? Nothing's 
changed. 
 
We started the approach to revising and strengthening and 
making independent the Public Service Commission. We've 
made tremendous strides. We've done the same with the ABCs, 
the agencies, boards, and commissions. We've made excellent 
progress there; we can continue more in that category. We've 
appointed good people who have done a good job for the 
province of Saskatchewan, regardless of political belief or 
ideology. 
 
And by any comparison, either to any other party in this 
province, or for that matter any other government in any other 
part of Canada, we're number one in leading the way for doing 
the right and correct thing with respect to appointments in 
government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, no one in this Assembly 
has ever said that the member from Riversdale was not crafty 
and good at what he does. He's been practising politics in this 
province for more years than most of us care to remember, and 
he's very good at it. But he would have the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan listening today believe that we're 
talking about Public Service Commission hiring. And you 
know, he'd slip that by a lot of people. And he's very good at 
that. 
 
But we're not talking about Public Service Commission hirings 
here. And the Premier knows it — knows it full well. I go 
through these pages and I don't think the board of the Western 
Development Museum or the Rates Appeal Board or the Crop 
Insurance board, or . . . it just goes on and on and on, Premier; 
none of that stuff's ever been done through Public Service 
Commission, and you know it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well why do you even try and confuse the issue, you know? 
You were misleading the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I mean all of these pages here haven't got 
anything to do with the Public Service Commission, and you 
well know it, you well know it. 
 
What you should talk about is the number that you've done by 
LG in C (Lieutenant Governor in Council), and the people that 
your friends that are already there have hired. I mean go 



May 18, 1995 

 
2432 

through most of these appointments, it wouldn't matter if you 
did pick '93-94, you had a lot of it done before then. 
 
It's amazing that you would say in 1991 that patronage ought 
not to be part of public policy in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and then so quickly the worm turned. And I guess, sir, we can't 
belabour it because obviously you've made that turn — the 
worm has turned — and now that you sit in the Premier's chair 
it's quite all right to do. 
 
So I just hope when the election rolls along — and I expect it 
shortly — that you will, in the next leaders' debate, say I got to 
apologize to the folks in the province Saskatchewan; I had a 
slip of the tongue in 1991 and I said that patronage ought not to 
occur. But times have changed in the province of Saskatchewan 
and there were all these loyal New Democrats out there that 
needed a job and I had a Gaming Commission to fill up and I 
had a casino corp to fill up, and I had all of these things to do 
and I had to have loyal and faithful followers helping me do it. 
 
And, sir, if you do that, I will give you all the credit in the 
world. I think it would be a tremendous stride in public life for 
you to stand up and tell the folks of this province the truth 
about your views on patronage. And if you did that, well people 
then could probably make their own judgement, couldn't they? 
 
Don't you think it's about time that we started to treat the people 
we expect to do the work of the people of this province a little 
bit differently, and we start looking for professional people? 
And as a Conservative, I know maybe I don't have the best 
record in the province of Saskatchewan, but you know what? I 
had to pay a terrible price, Premier, because people believed 
your broken promise, and as a Conservative I had to pay the 
price. And if you don't learn from your mistakes, then what's the 
point of going on in life? 
 
So don't you think, sir, it's time that we both learn from our 
mistakes and that we use a more public process of hiring in this 
province than the one that you currently have in place in your 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the member says he's 
coming to an end in this line. It's up to him if he is or isn't, but I 
think he is, because I want to say I made it very clear in my last 
answer — maybe not to him — but I'm going to take just a 
moment of the House to make it clear to him and to the House. 
 
Essentially there are three categories of civil service. There is 
what I call the regular public service employees. There is 
another category which I will call the immediate small people at 
the front end surrounding the cabinet who are advisers — 
political and policy advisers. And then there's the third 
category, what I call the ABCs — those are agencies, boards, 
and commissions. 
 
Let me tell you about each one of those. First is the Public 
Service Commission. Unlike your administration, 99.3 per cent  

of everybody who went under The Public Service Commission 
Act and Public Service Commission rules for appointment got 
appointed under an open-competition system — 99.3 per cent. 
That's near perfect. I've given you the breakdown as to how the 
.7 fell down. 
 
And now you have another category — our categories as 
ministerial assistants, deputy ministers, associate deputy 
ministers, cabinet secretariat, the small numbers in relative 
terms who advise . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Crown corporations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Fine, the members says throw Crown 
corporations in there. I will say throw in the Crown 
corporations. I don't totally agree with him, but even throw in 
the Crown corporations, you can have five or six of them, you 
can name them — the Power Corporation, CIC head, SaskTel, 
so forth. They had five or six of them; that's about all there is. 
Add another four or five if you want below them, as you started 
off. That's a second category, very small, both numerically and 
from a percentage point of view. 
 
Those people are selected on a different basis for one very good 
reason. To give you the example, if we are implementing a 
gaming policy, something that you're railing against, what 
should I do? Should I appoint you the head of the gaming 
policy? I don't mean this facetiously. No, of course. What you 
should do always is appoint a person who has got competence 
and ability and integrity, but generally supports the policy of the 
government. These are the career, professional civil servants. 
 
Now comes the ABCs. This is what you said I was trying to 
confuse the public with. ABCs is shorthand for agencies, 
boards, and commissions. I will tell you that there are 2,282 
appointees in the province of Saskatchewan on ABCs. 
 
But I'll tell you this, unlike '91, you now have to apply; you now 
have to have references and endorsements and screened. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh I'm sure they get the references. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Oh yes, sure. And the applications are 
made. And I'll tell you, of the 2,282 — 576 are civil servants or 
members of the Legislative Assembly; 1,700 are members of 
the public. Almost every one of those ABCs are represented in 
some form or another by direct nominees of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), College of 
Physicians and Surgeons — you name the particular agency 
which is involved. You've been in this game yourself. 
 
And at the end, what you might have is, quote, the patronage 
list — 76 or whatever the names were that you and the member 
from Shaunavon had. The patronage list, yes; 76 out of 2,282. 
You know, let's not be ridiculous about this; let's not be 
ridiculous about it. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2433 

It's only a province of a million people and you have to get the 
best qualified, most publicly oriented, publicly minded people 
wherever they come from. That's exactly what we've done. 
That's been a tremendous reform. That's what I will intend to 
tell the people whenever the next election takes place. And I'll 
tell the people of Saskatchewan and don't take a chance on 
going back to the old Liberal patronage game or the old PC 
(Progressive Conservative) patronage game . And I don't think 
they will go back. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 
have been contacted by a constituent of mine who owns a small 
trucking firm in Burstall, Saskatchewan — that's their base. 
Now they have been informed by the Interstate Commerce 
Commission (ICC) in the United States that SGI insurance is no 
longer recognized in many states. They believe it is because of 
the implementation of the no-fault insurance by SGI, but there 
may be some other problem as well. 
 
As a result, the state won't recognize the first $200,000 of 
coverage that people are buying under the SGI insurance 
program. Now obviously truckers are having to go to private 
insurance firms to be covered by what SGI claims to already 
have covered. Which means, of course, they are being 
double-billed, having to buy two insurance policies to 
accomplish the same coverage. 
 
What will you do, Mr. Premier, to address this problem of an 
international nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, what I 
want to do is I've asked one of the officials already to go out 
and see if they can contact officials at SGI to get us a complete 
story of the situation, and then proceed on that basis. 
 
I can hardly believe it's because of no-fault, but it might be. 
Because the United States preaches a lot of free trade but 
practises a lot of protectionism. You know this with respect to 
the export of durum. You know what their attitude is on the 
Canadian Wheat Board. Sometimes we as Canadians can't 
change our policy to suit them. I'm sure that you wouldn't want 
. . . well maybe you would want, but at least I don't want us to 
change, as Canadians, the policy in the Canadian Wheat Board 
just to satisfy the American . . . and American regulatory 
approaches. 
 
But whatever we can do to try to ease the situation for this 
trucker that you're referring to, and other truckers, we will do. 
In the meantime, I'm asking the people at SGI to come up with a 
brief description of the problem for me. Maybe before 5 o'clock 
is done, I can provide an answer. If I can't, I'll get something to 
you in writing very quickly thereafter. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, I appreciate that. 
And I want to say two things: first of all, I agree with most of 
what you just said. But we might have to change in order to 
accommodate our citizens and to allow them an opportunity to 
survive in the business world. We may not have that option or 
that luxury. 

Now the other thing that I want to say is that I'm quite sure that 
SGI will be able to get you this information because we've 
already been asking them for three days and haven't been able 
to get an answer from them. So they probably have had ample 
time to gather this information together for us. And so we look 
forward to you finding out for us because . . . and I'll elaborate 
just a little bit more. It's very important probably to quite a few 
people. And it's important to us that we have trucks that move 
north and south. We have to bring in some vegetables for our 
folks to eat and we have to take, as you've mentioned, some 
durum wheat and things like that down there. 
 
So I would appreciate it if you would look into this issue since 
the individuals that are in question have been informed by their 
private insurance companies that the cost, the additional cost to 
them to get the coverage that they now need, will be about 
$3,000 extra. And they would like to know what use it is to 
have the government insurance at all if the protection that 
they've paid for really isn't there when they get out of the 
country and get going down the road. 
 
My constituents have talked to the American representatives of 
the CCC in both Philadelphia and Washington. So your SGI 
people might want to take that into account and check with 
them. 
 
So will you commit of course to having your staff or agencies 
find out what's going on down there totally? And I think you 
have, but I'll just let you reiterate that. Because if it is the 
no-fault thing, we think we might be able to rectify the thing at 
home. If it's something else and we haven't been able to find out 
about it, maybe you can. And that too might be able to be 
rectified. 
 
And so for Allen and Elaine Job of Burstall, I will ask you to 
make a commitment for them. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I hereby repeat my commitment. 
And I hope to get it before 5 if I can. If not, we'll get something 
in writing to you. My officials have noted the commitment and 
will get the letter to you at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I certainly hope that 
we can resolve this problem for a good many of our truckers in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It is a very large business base 
for Saskatchewan people, ever more so since the diversification 
of agriculture has become essential. Many farmers of course, 
being of a mechanical nature, find it easy to get a rig and go to 
work because they know them, they understand them. They 
understand the machinery. They understand the principles of 
that kind of business, and so they fit in very naturally. 
 
So these are the people that we're basically going to be helping 
because they're the ones that haven't really studied all the rules 
and regulations like the big trucking firms that are already in 
business. They've probably got some of these answers. But we 
do need to share that around so that people can be helped. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2434 

I want to talk to you for a few minutes, Premier, about The 
Labour Standards Act. Now as you are aware, your 
government's changes to The Labour Standards Act were passed 
last session under some storm and controversy which we tried 
to bring to your attention. And it seems that no one liked the 
Bill, especially in the business community. The labour leaders 
obviously might have liked it, but the reality is that all of the 
business sector opposed these changes. 
 
My question I guess to you is: do you feel that it was 
appropriate to reintroduce this legislation, and this kind of 
legislation, given that these issues were not pressing 
emergencies to the province as a whole? And was it, do you 
think, worth the political strife to alienate all of the business 
community in our province at this time in our history? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think there are 
two sides to the coin on this issue. Clearly our businesses have 
to be competitive, and we want to make sure they are 
competitive. And your comments on trucking are an example of 
your shared goal that I have about making trucking competitive 
in the United States and elsewhere. So we have to have our 
business which is competitive. Let's take that for granted. 
 
The flip side of the coin however is this fact. The fact is that 
there is a growing phenomenon of people who are part-time 
employees. That's a growing phenomenon everywhere in North 
America and in Saskatchewan. Some of us don't like it. I don't 
think the part timers like it very much because of the job 
insecurity. 
 
And with the part-time phenomenon, you will note that such 
things as part-time benefits are very often not applicable or paid 
to these people for whatever economic or good, solid, 
competitive reasons there may be. The result is that in many 
cases there is little incentive for these workers to continue 
working as part-time workers. They're just on that boundary line 
between being productive employees and slipping down into a 
social safety net of some nature. 
 
And many people who have read this about this problem have 
simply said, you're either going to pay . . . we're either going to 
pay as a society now, or we're going to pay later. Sooner or later 
the system, the social safety net, through increased taxes, will 
be looking after people who are struggling hard on part-time but 
don't have any of the basic amenities and decencies associated 
with labour. That is going to be a cost. It'll be a cost to the 
business person, as sure as I'm standing here, now or later. 
 
Now the legislation which we introduced obviously had 
difficulties all around. We tried an approach which I thought 
was sensible, getting business and labour to sit down around a 
table and come up with a common, reasonable compromise 
approach to tackle two problems — keep business competitive 
and look after the part-time workers. It didn't work out that way, 
and in the net result we have whatever is left of Labour 
Standards Act. 
 

I think the problem remains unchanged. We've tried our 
solution. It is the best that we can proceed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That is it. The debate has been debated, and we 
proceed on. But I don't think the member should blithely 
somehow — I'm not saying that he does — assume that there 
isn't a problem both ways, both from the business side, but from 
the worker's side. It is a complex, at least two-sided concern. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Premier, I know how much you hate to 
hear the comparison between us and other jurisdictions. 
However it is a fact of life that Alberta doesn't have this kind of 
restrictive legislation, and it is a fact that they have a pretty 
happy group of people over there. In fact they're so happy that 
most of our children in this province end up going there to find 
work — meaningful employment with meaningful wages. 
 
Now I won't deny that we all have some concern about the 
problems of part-time employment and those kinds of 
ramifications that are going to visit us in the future if we 
continue along these lines. 
 
And obviously we have to worry because we see that example 
in the United States to the south of us. And for all of us who 
have looked at that whole area, it is a serious concern. Because 
when you find young people having to hold down three or four 
different jobs all at the same time, working two hours at one, 
three at the next, four at the next, and five at the next, and 
having to run all over town and all over every place to get from 
one job to the other and literally driving themselves crazy as 
well as working themselves to death, certainly nobody could be 
happy with the development of that kind of a society. 
 
But that's not what this legislation really is all about. You see 
what this legislation is really all about is the effects on the 
business base, the people who provide the jobs that can in fact 
be full time. If we destroy the competitiveness and the equal 
playing-field or the level playing-field of our businesses as 
compared to other jurisdictions closest to us, and most 
importantly Manitoba and Alberta in this context because we 
are not in a big competition with the United States so much as 
we are with Alberta right now, obviously that has to be our first 
goal is to equal that playing-field between those two areas. 
 
And we found while we had this process going on, we didn't 
seem to see any attempt really to consult with businesses. The 
results are already in, this has been in the process for two years. 
The results . . . it's no longer an experiment. The results are 
simply this: business community has collectively said that the 
rules that you are imposing with your tendering policies, the 
rules that you're imposing with your labour law changes, are 
unacceptable and make us uncompetitive with our neighbours 
in other provinces. 
 
We find our children having to leave this province to get work, 
not only just in Alberta and British Columbia and places like 
that, but now we are finding them having to go into the 
international stage of employment in order to find meaningful 
and rewarding employment. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2435 

And I recall some rhetoric of the past where people were told 
that we're looking for economic and social justice for the people 
of Saskatchewan. Well to me economic and social justice for 
people in Saskatchewan would be to provide them with an 
opportunity to be able to stay home in Saskatchewan to live. 
 
What good is a good economy or a good justice or social justice 
or anything else if you can't find a job and stay in the province 
where those things are at? I mean it's all self-defeating if we 
don't do something to provide a base for people to be able to 
stay here. 
 
We saw things, Mr. Premier, as you're well aware, but 
oftentimes I think you are so busy that you don't have a chance 
to really listen to us. And we heard your minister say things 
about the business community while this debate was going on, 
like calling the business community ruthless, greedy 
businessmen. 
 
Do you really think that that kind of an approach by your 
ministers while you're busy working at other matters is a proper 
approach for them to take in the province? Is that a proper 
approach for them to take, and is it a proper approach for your 
minister to introduce legislation that puts Saskatchewan out of 
synchronization with the rest of the world around us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, it is 
not proper for any minister of this government to say what the 
member alleges that the minister on this side said. And I accept 
the minister of Labour's explanation for those words and I do 
not believe that the sentiments were as echoed. 
 
He knows, then minister of Labour, as much as you do and as 
much as I do, in a province of a million people we must 
cooperate in economic endeavour. And that has been the policy 
and is the policy of the government, as is the introduction of 
legislation. 
 
There is some belief that a minister just gets up on his own 
behalf and says, here's a Bill; I've got a good idea. You know it 
doesn't work that way. It goes through the cabinet, it goes 
through the caucus, it becomes a matter of government policy. 
And that's why it's introduced. And we introduced it for the 
reasons that I explained in the previous question that you 
directed to me. 
 
But I want to say a word about labour climate before I take my 
place, because you're talking about labour climate. I think it's 
important for the member to understand the following: 
Saskatchewan's workforce is very stable. Employees remain at 
their job longer here than in any other province. Job tenure in 
Saskatchewan is approximately 40 per cent higher — 40 per 
cent higher  than it is in Alberta, and approximately 19 per 
cent higher than it is in Manitoba. 
 
We have the second highest high school completion rate in 
Canada, and our students are at the top of national and 
international testings. Our manufacturing labour productivity is 
rated second highest in Canada. It's equivalent to Alberta and  

50 per cent higher than Manitoba. Again, StatsCanada. 
 
Average wage costs are lower than in all other Canadian 
provinces, with the exception of P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), 
already. Average weekly wages are approximately 15 per cent 
lower than Alberta and approximately 4 per cent lower than in 
Manitoba. Average weekly construction wages are 
approximately 20 per cent lower than Alberta and 
approximately 11 per cent lower than Manitoba. 
 
Average rate for workers' compensation is one of the lowest in 
Canada, workers' compensation. It's 22 per cent lower than 
Alberta, 16 per cent lower than in Manitoba, and unlike any 
other province, our Workers' Compensation Board is absolutely 
fully funded. 
 
Now it doesn't give me much pleasure to recite some of these 
facts because it indicates that the workers are very capable and 
innovative but by comparison their wage rates are less. So when 
you talk about competitiveness and competition, please keep in 
mind these kinds of figures. 
 
Take a look at Manitoba. Manitoba has a payroll tax. We do not 
have a payroll tax. Take a look at Alberta. Alberta has health 
care premium charges which in effect amount to something like 
$780 for a family of four. We don't have health care premium 
charges. 
 
I know you folks over there, the Liberals and the Conservatives, 
say oh well, that's not a tax, that's . . . something — I don't 
know what it is. Comes out of heaven, I guess. But it's a tax. 
And it's a tax on business just as much as it is everybody else. 
 
And in the result I agree with you, the key is to have a good job 
and have a good quality of life. In the result, because we've 
been able to balance the budget and because we have put these 
sensible policies into play, we are now seeing the turnaround. 
Unemployment rate is the lowest in Canada and has been for 
some time. Our retail sales in '94 were up second best in all of 
Canada. 
 
Well I could go on and on. I'll spare you that speech because 
you know in almost every community of this province there is 
more optimism and more hope than there has been in one heck 
of a long time. I don't take all the credit for it, far from it; it 
belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I do take credit for a combination of sensible laws which 
relate to working people, relate to business people; tax laws 
which assist people in manufacturing and processing. I put that 
all together to indicate that there's a dawning of a new day. That 
there is a new day of opportunity for working men and women 
and for the business community. And I believe the business 
community senses it. At least that's what they're telling me 
whenever I attend the various chamber meetings. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you for your observations, Mr. 
Premier. I wonder if we could have a copy of the paper that you 
have referred to. Perhaps you would either table it or send a  



May 18, 1995 

 
2436 

copy across and likely the Liberal members would likely want a 
copy as well. So we'll await that. 
 
And I'd like to just discuss with you some of your opinions, 
because I think it's necessary in the process of debate to try to 
come up with some balance so that we can improve life for 
people. You talk about the figures of Alberta where people have 
to pay $700 for their medicare. So let's just talk about that for a 
second because the statistics you've got are nice, and I'm sure 
they're on paper, and everybody in the world is impressed by 
statistics and facts and figures and all the things that you can 
compile through computers and printed things like that. But the 
statistics that I believe more than anything in the world are the 
real people in the real world that I deal with. 
 
I've got family; four kids who've gone through the university 
process, not one of them in this province, not one of them able 
to find a job in this province that comes anywheres close to 
paying the kind of wages that they get for the same work in 
other jurisdictions. Four out of four. That's the kind of statistics 
I believe in. Four people out of four people that have had to 
leave this province, Mr. Premier. Under your kind of level 
playing-field, they've had to go out of this province to find 
gainful employment and even to finish their education. 
 
The truth of the matter is that that's the kind of statistics the 
people in Saskatchewan look at — they look at their own 
families. They're not looking at your pieces of paper. But we'll 
look at them and we'll study them because I think they'll be 
flawed like everything else about your government. You're 
flawed in your whole presumption that things are better. 
 
The reality is you started from nothing. You're down to zero. 
You got this province running aground almost to where it isn't 
existent any more in competition. And what do you got? What 
have you really got? You've got an improvement from zero. 
 
Well I don't think that's much to brag about. And my kids 
certainly aren't looking forward to bragging about the great 
province of Saskatchewan except to say that it was a nice place 
to leave. 
 
You talk about $700 worth of medicare costs over in Alberta, 
and it's true. And the kids tell me, yes, that's a bill they have to 
pay. And I say, well do you like paying it? Well of course not. 
We don't like paying any bills at all. 
 
But they said compared to what you guys have done in 
Saskatchewan where you're paying $4,800 a year more for taxes 
and utility rates per a family of four, I'm pretty well off yet 
because I've still got $4,100 more to the good, living in Alberta, 
to use on myself and my family. 
 
Now that's what they tell me when we talk about the political 
climate here and the reasons why they're there and whether or 
not they'd consider coming home again. Not a chance to come 
back to Saskatchewan — not a chance. 
 
(1530) 

Not just my family. I've talked to lots of young people over 
there, people that they've met that came from Saskatchewan that 
are also over in Alberta; in Japan where one of my other 
daughters is; in United States where another one of them is at 
right now. I talk to these young people and they all tell me, not 
a chance they'd ever come back to Saskatchewan under the 
conditions we've got here. Because, they say, the story isn't 
being told straight. First of all, you don't have a business base, 
you don't have a job base, you don't have a wage rate, and you 
don't have any opportunities. 
 
And when you say that over there they're going to pay more for 
something and that should be something that we should worry 
about? My friend, believe me, believe me, what they're paying 
for health care in Alberta is not a factor in those people's lives 
except on the general rule in principle — and it is that — that 
people do like to complain about what they pay for. Everybody 
will do that. But when you get them complaining about what 
they've got as problems and ask them to compare it to what 
we've got in Saskatchewan, they say, thank you, but we'll keep 
our problems and stay in Alberta. 
 
So your argument is not well taken that you're doing such a 
great job in Saskatchewan with the cost of medicare and 
providing things for people. People would be much better off 
paying a little bit for their medicare and be rid of the $4,800 per 
family in utility costs and taxes that you have piled on them 
since 1991. 
 
Now you brag about having brought the province out of a 
period of recession and depression. My friend, you did not do 
that. As great a man as you are — and I have the highest respect 
for you, and you're doing as best you can probably — but the 
truth is you had nothing to do with it. The recession wasn't 
caused by a government in Saskatchewan; the depression of the 
dirty '80s wasn't caused by a government in Saskatchewan. And 
you didn't bring that change about; it happened in spite of us. 
 
What is responsible to you though is the playing-field for 
business that could develop this province into a province like 
Alberta. You know very well the history of this province. At 
one point in history we had more population than Alberta. Why 
did the people continue to pass through Saskatchewan to 
Alberta? Not because they've got more resources or mountains. 
They went there because they had opportunities. And those 
opportunities were created by a political climate, not by nature. 
 
We've got as many resources in this province as Alberta has 
ever had. We've got more. When this exploration thing ever gets 
finished, I am going to challenge the people of this province to 
look back on this day when I'm going to say to you that I 
believe we've got more gas, oil, and uranium resources than 
Alberta's ever had. We've got them here and we just haven't had 
the level playing-field to allow business people to go out and 
explore them to the extent that's been done in Alberta. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, don't sit in your place and brag to me about 
how great a job you've done. With your ideology, it's just not  



May 18, 1995 

 
2437 

working. And the people, when we talk about these new Crown 
tendering laws in other jurisdictions, they laugh out loud. They 
just can't believe that we'd be so foolish as to put into place 
tendering laws that would force companies, force companies 
either to unionize or else try to circumvent the system. And 
that's exactly what you've got going on today: companies forced 
to circumvent the system and your own government having to 
help them. Your own government having to help them 
circumvent your own policy by — by what? By eliminating one 
of the areas that has to comply with your Crown tendering. You 
eliminate one area, the pipeline people, because you knew very 
well it could never work. And so you start with an exemption 
already. Here's one. 
 
Now you've got the Battlefords crying up north; they need an 
exemption. And they do, Premier; they very much do. And then 
pretty soon it will be somebody else that needs an exemption. 
And pretty soon you'll have so many holes in this policy that it'll 
look like a sieve. And I'm telling you now, you ought to 
reconsider your plan. 
 
Having seen this and observed all this, Mr. Premier, don't you 
think it would be better just to throw all of these tendering 
policies out and start over again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have to respond first 
of all by saying that I'm very sorry to hear the hon. member tell 
the House how his children feel about Saskatchewan. I guess 
they have to make their choice. I'm actually quite saddened to 
hear the vigour by which the hon. member opposite elevates 
Alberta over Saskatchewan while sitting in the Chamber of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm also interested in knowing when the children left exactly 
because your Progressive Conservative ideology had nine years 
to turn things around. Nine years your children . . . I don't know 
when they left. But for nine years the Conservatives had a 
chance to open her wide up, just like Alberta. And we know 
what the result was, 14, $15 billion debt, highest per capita 
deficit, Saskatchewan on the abyss. 
 
We've only been around three years and some several months, 
and your children are blaming it all on me? I don't think so. I 
haven't met them. I'm sure they're very decent people. I think 
you're taking a little bit of liberty, if I may say so, with their 
comments, to try to ignore the dismal nine years that went on. 
 
The other thing that I really want to say is that we're only 
beginning to recover. I'm not happy with where we're at. We're 
going to go higher, and we're going to succeed. 
 
And the third thing that I want to say is, sir, you have to get 
your facts right. And I'm going to take a moment of the House 
to tell the facts. I'm comparing Calgary and Saskatoon, just for 
the moment. Here's what I'm going to compare: provincial 
income tax, tax credits and rebates, health premiums, retail 
sales tax, gasoline tax. I'm going to compare rent, electricity, 
telephone, auto insurance, and household charges, and I'm 
going to do it for a family of four at $50,000 income. 

Here are the numbers. Provincial income tax: Calgary, 2,662; 
Saskatoon, 3,842; it's higher. Tax credits and rebates: zero, 
zero. Health premiums: Calgary, $780; Saskatoon, zero. Retail 
sales tax: Calgary, zero; Saskatoon, $920. Gasoline: Calgary, 
180; Saskatoon, 300. Mortgage costs: Calgary, 7,213; 
Saskatoon, 4,911. Property taxes: Alberta, 1,787; Saskatoon, 
1,910. Home heating: 711 for Calgary; 720 for Saskatoon. 
Electricity: 611 to 748. Telephone: 224 to 242. Auto insurance: 
in Calgary, 1,530; Saskatoon, 704. 
 
Total up those two columns and the cost of living for taxes and 
household charges for a family of $50,000 income: in 
Saskatoon, 14,297; Calgary, 15,698. 
 
By the way, to round the story out, if you're $25,000 income: 
Saskatoon, 8,563 versus 9,680 in Calgary. And if you're 
$75,000: Saskatoon, it's 18,232; and Calgary, 18,308. In each 
one of those categories — 25, 50, and 75,000 — taxes and 
household charges are cheaper by those numbers that I have 
identified. 
 
I find it astounding that members who are sworn to uphold the 
service of the people of the province of Saskatchewan in the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan get up like the member 
opposite does and lauds and sings the praises of another 
province and another jurisdiction when the facts don't even 
support the song that he's singing. The words don't fit the 
medley that is being sung. But how in the world can this be 
done with a credible appeal to the people of Saskatchewan to 
say, I really love Saskatchewan more? 
 
That's what the Liberals and the Conservatives do. And I just 
find this absolutely mind-blowing, to use that old cliché. And 
I'm saying to the people opposite, to the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, the Conservatives and the Liberals, that 
Texas-style cutters and the Klein-style cutters, the 
hack-and-slash people, the I-can-do-less, the no-I-can-do-even-
less-than-less. I can do lesser. No, I can do lesser than less than 
less than lesser. I can give you a bigger tax break. No, I can give 
you a bigger tax break. 
 
All of these people, all of these people, the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, they are so incredible in 1995 with that kind of a 
campaign where the people of Saskatchewan a short three years 
and some several months ago, having come through the crisis 
that we came through together, to see these people say, let's go 
back to the good old days of 1992. We're going to offer you all 
kinds of tax breaks all over again, and we're going to do it by 
doing away with all the MLA pensions; you've got them all. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, I'll be very lucky to see . . . well they'll 
be very lucky to see a handful together coming back after this 
next election is over — a handful on this because the people of 
Saskatchewan are not going to be fooled by that kind of Newt 
Gingrich, no-government, mean-spirited approach to the people 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2438 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Nobody in this province is going to 
buy that. And whether it's Newt trying to defeat Gingrich or 
Gingrich trying to defeat Newt, or Newt and Gingrich, the 
Bobbsey twins over there, the Liberals and the Conservatives, 
those days of the old style politics of pork barrel and 
name-calling and accusations which prove to be unfounded — 
long gone, my dear friend from Maple Creek. Long, long gone, 
about as long gone as you will be after the next provincial 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Premier, we almost started out agreeing, but of course now the 
agreement has to end because the truth of the matter is that I 
would like you to seriously table those figures. We need to have 
a record of that because it is very significant. And thank you, I 
note that that the Premier is tabling the figures, and that's great 
because people who fiddle with figures run the risk of having 
someone listen, and you run the risk, sir, of having somebody 
do a computation that will dispute and refute your arguments. 
 
You start off with the comparison between Saskatoon and 
Calgary, and that's a good one; it is excellent. Do it with 
Edmonton too, my friend, because again you fiddle with the 
figures on statistical data sheets. I deal with the reality of the 
statistics of the people that have gone there and told me the 
facts as it applies to their lives. 
 
Taxes in Saskatoon, my friend, are $3,842 compared to 2,662 in 
Calgary — one big difference, my friend, right there. Taxes are 
higher in Saskatchewan by a big bunch, and so are utility rate 
bills, the second item you went to — way into the sky compared 
to Alberta. 
 
And where do you find some item that you can pull out of the 
air that you can find that costs more money in Alberta in order 
to offset that? You have to go to the cost of the dirt, the cost of 
the property and the housing. And you have to go there 
knowing full well that there's more demand for the property in 
Alberta. And as a result the prices have escalated. More people 
want to live there, and therefore their property and their houses 
are far more expensive, and their mortgages are higher as a 
result of that. And it's as simple as that. When you go there, you 
pay the price because everybody wants to be there. 
 
They want to be there. Why? You don't dare talk about the 
wages that people get over there compared to Saskatchewan. 
They want to be there because they can afford these extra costs. 
They can afford it because they haven't paid the taxes, and they 
haven't paid the utility bills, and they've got jobs that pay them 
20 or 25 per cent more than anything you've got to offer them in 
Saskatchewan and anything more than our businesses can offer 
them in Saskatchewan. And why sir? Because of your policies 
and your unfair labour tendering policies, your unfair labour 
laws, your unfair package of complete package of government. 
It is totally unfair, and it is not conducive to allowing business 
to start up. 

So I'll tell you, my friend, when you start to fiddle with figures 
and go on the hustings in Saskatchewan, we'll meet you there. 
And we'll meet you in a debate in Maple Creek in the Town 
Hall any day you want, if the people there will allow you into 
town because the truth of the matter is they know what 9 per 
cent sales tax does to their businesses in Saskatchewan when 
they have to compete with Alberta that doesn't have one. 
 
(1545) 
 
And you tell me that people would rather be in Saskatchewan 
because of some figures that you've got on a piece of paper. My 
friend, your statistics are as phoney as your government because 
you don't compare apples to apples and oranges to oranges. You 
forgot all about that years ago. 
 
The truth of the matter is, my friend, the truth of the matter is 
that all of these problems did not start yesterday. But then 
you're not a young man. They started back in the '60s and '70s 
when your governments were in power and destroyed this 
province right from the basic roots going back 30 years. It has 
got nothing to do with you personally. But you've added to the 
problem, and you've magnified it and made it so much worse. 
 
That's what the reality of life is here. The reality of life is that 
all you can do is try to buy votes from your union buddies with 
legislation that is driving business out and making it impossible 
for people like my family to be able to stay in this province in 
the future. And that is a fact of life. And they're not as old as 
you think they are . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — When did they leave? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — They've only left. 
 
An Hon. Member: — When? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — In the last three years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In the last three years. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, one by one. 
 
Now let's talk about what we could do to attract them back. And 
let's talk a little bit about what we could do, sir, about 
cancelling out the long litany of problems that your ideology 
has caused in this province from the '60s and the '70s. That's 
where the root problems began. While Alberta was 
sky-rocketing ahead with the development of their resources, 
we had guys like Tommy Douglas sitting around saying: well 
oil will never rot in the ground, so we'll leave it there. Great 
philosophy that was. Of course, it didn't rot in the ground; it's 
still there . . . Never got a job, never had any development, 
didn't have to build an oil well. 
 
Well, my friend, that's where your problems start. That's where 
they start, and now you make them worse. You make them 
worse because you put us out of competition in this province, 
and the example is The Battlefords today. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2439 

You've got a tendering policy out there that even the mayor of 
the town says cannot work. You're driving the jobs away from 
those local people to your union halls to try to buy a little 
support for this election — that you have to call a year early 
because you're scared frightless that you can't wait another year 
and have people wake up to the reality of what you're doing to 
this province because you're going to go down in flames if you 
wait any longer. 
 
You know very well that the people on the west side of this 
province are looking at Alberta, and they're seeing the 
difference. They're seeing the difference on how much better it 
can be, just with a few fundamental differences. And the first 
fundamental difference has to be an end to your 
Crown-tendering policy and your union-preference policies. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I know well. I know well that you are a fair 
person. Now not many people know this, but I remember you 
well when you were in university; I was there too. I happened to 
have watched you and admired you. I don't admire the political 
direction that you've taken, but I admired you as an individual 
because I know that you're a fair-minded person. But I believe 
you're being dragged down by your comrades around you. 
 
And so having given you the opportunity to respond before my 
rebuttal of your remarks, I'd like you to reconsider that list that 
you put towards us. I'd like you to take out the mortgage values 
on your list and then tell Saskatchewan people what you're 
going to do to equalize the things in the areas of taxation, utility 
bills, and those kinds of things that come directly out of 
families' pockets in Saskatoon, as compared to people in 
Calgary. 
 
What are you going to do to level that base? What are you 
going to do to level the business people's base in The 
Battlefords and in the rest of Saskatchewan so that they can get 
back to tendering with Saskatchewan employees instead of 
having to bring in Alberta workers or union workers from 
Regina or Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
Crown tendering practice as it's called, I think the Minister of 
Labour today in question period put the argument the best. He 
said, for goodness' sake, give this thing a chance. 
 
You accuse me of ideology. I think, sir, I've tried to exhibit 
some pragmatism none the less, by the statement that says give 
it a chance. You don't even want to give it a chance. Your 
ideology is so locked in that you want it out right now. And I'm 
sorry we have a disagreement there; we have to see how it 
operates. 
 
It has been the policy, the union-tendering policy in Crowns for 
the federal government since, I think 1967 anyway. It's been 
part of the United States Government of America since about 
1947-48. It's in operation in six other provinces, 31 states, and 
these people opposite would have us believe that this is 
something which is pulled off from Mars to destroy the  

business people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean look, you know, the sky isn't falling down. It might be 
on your political heads, but people will survive without Tories 
or Liberals. The sky is not falling down economically; things 
are looking up very, very well. 
 
Now when I answer the question, question says, what do we 
intend to do? We intend to do, Mr. Member, what we have been 
doing as best as we can, given the strait-jacket that we were in 
on November 1, 1991, occasioned by the huge deficit and debt. 
 
We are targeting our tax reductions to those areas where we 
think we can get the biggest bang for our buck, the most 
employment. Manufacturing and processing reduction, the 9 per 
cent for new construction that brought in Cargill. If you do all 
your manufacturing and processing in Saskatchewan, for 
example, you'll have the lowest corporate income tax rate in all 
of western Canada. 
 
We now have the second lowest small business corporate tax. I 
want the member from Regina North West to listen to this — 
second lowest west of Quebec, the small business corporate 
income tax. The member from Shaunavon probably hasn't told 
you that, but that is a fact. Because what we're trying to do is in 
fact buttress up the small-business community. 
 
I could continue on with a whole variety of other initiatives. 
And what we intend to do is, as we achieve two or three 
objectives, lowering the debt, thereby lowering the interest 
payments to continue tax relief for individuals and for business 
people in a very targeted way. That's responsible. And the 
remaining one-third we're going to give to health care and to 
education. That's responsible. 
 
Now the Texas-style cutters over there, their approach is totally 
different. The Texas-style cutters will simply cut $250 million 
like that. And they say that they will cut the $250 million by 
finding efficiencies. Well, this is going to be a nice trick if you 
can do it, since this is the most efficient government in all of 
Canada today on a per capita operating expenses basis. 
 
I would ask the hon. member from Regina North West to really 
listen to this. You can measure, you know, the services of 
government — highways, roads, hospitals, education, that kind 
of thing. You can say how much it cost you to deliver it, and 
then you can compute on a per capita basis. And you know 
what? We come out the lowest in Canada -- lower than Alberta, 
lower than Manitoba. 
 
And you people think that you can even reduce it more. And 
you're going to reduce it by $250 million more. That's what 
you're going to do. And the member from Shaunavon says, 
hear, hear. And the member from Regina North West shakes 
her head in dispute to this thing. And that is what they're going 
to find. 
 
I tell you teachers and I tell the health care workers and I tell the 
small-business people . . . Oh you're going to do away with  



May 18, 1995 

 
2440 

the Department of Economic Development too, aren't you? Yes, 
you're going to do away with the Department of Economic 
Development. The member laughs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well go on with your story because then 
I can . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well let me . . . I have the Liberal 
platform document. Well that was last week's; maybe it's 
changed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'll give you an updated version. Which 
one do you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I have it here. Here's a headline of 
what a prominent Saskatchewan Canadian businessman says: 
"Liberal economic development proposal flawed,” Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, May 12, 1995. The following is a personal 
viewpoint of the writer, president of PIC Investment Group, Mr. 
James Yuel, president of the Saskatoon Economic Development 
Authority. Do you know what Mr. Yuel says? 
 
 As history and common sense dictate, those who fund 

the band call the tune. Therefore, those businesses 
funding the authority will determine what industries are 
pursued, to the exclusion of all other opportunities. 

 
 Corporations looking for site locations want to know 

that the people they are dealing with have the ability to 
follow through on their statements. 

 
 They generally accept the credibility of senior 

departmental staff but would view with some doubt 
statements coming from a non-governmental body. 

 
That's your proposal. That's what the business community is 
saying about your proposal. That's what the Texas-style cutters 
are going to do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think that we're going to have you in so 
much trouble in a few days on . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I tell you. The hon. member says 
he's going to have me in so much trouble. I tell you I might be 
in trouble, but not in as much trouble, my friend, as you will be 
the moment you step out of this legislature and repeat your 
statements in the legislature, of yesterday, pertaining to the 
contract north of Regina and basing by innuendo that the 
contract was based on favouritism. 
 
An Hon. Member: — With your relative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, with my relatives. You say it out 
there, and we'll see what kind of trouble you, sir, are going to be 
in. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let's go do it. I'll do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Go ahead. Go ahead and do it. And go  

ahead and do it and start off the campaign. I tell you the 
happiest day of my life in this caucus was the day when this 
member left this caucus and expunged it, expunged it, 
expunged it . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — . . . expunged it, expunged it of the 
lack of honesty and principle to the whole operation. Oh how 
he pleaded otherwise. But anyway, I'm off that case. 
 
I say to the hon. member from Maple Creek: member from 
Maple Creek, give it a chance. We'll monitor it. We said we'd 
look at it. Give it a chance. I think the business people in this 
community are prepared to give it a chance. Don't be a doom 
and gloomer. 
 
Come on, the sun is shining, it's a brand-new day dawning in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We're pulling together. A new 
day. Join the wrecking . . . not the wrecking crew; the building 
crew. You're on the wrecking side. Join the guys that want to 
build. Join in getting Saskatchewan into the 21st century. Come 
on now, everybody wants you to be onside. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for that oration. I 
knew very well that my arguments were winning in this debate 
when I asked the Premier a question and he gets up and answers 
it by attacking the Liberals. I must have got something right 
because he couldn't even bother with the line of the debate any 
longer. 
 
But I do have to get back to this line of debate, Mr. Premier, 
because quite frankly I thought you had more class than to send 
over your own budget book as evidence of some kind of reality. 
An unauthenticated, phoney piece of paper that was contrived 
with figures that are pulled out of the air with absolutely 
nothing to substantiate them. It's your own book that you wrote 
yourself, and who knows where these figures ever came from. 
 
But even using these figures -- and we'll give you one for just a 
minute here -- even if you did use these figures, I'll make my 
point once again. If you take out the mortgage part of the whole 
process, comparing Saskatoon to Calgary, it costs a lot more 
money to live in Saskatchewan than it does in Calgary. 
 
And because your mortgage is higher and your property is 
worth more, when those young people sell that piece of 
property, they're going to get more for it and they'll still be 
ahead. So that's what I think of your proof. 
 
Now let's talk about something that is documented. And I just 
got handed a piece of paper here that shows me that in 1985 the 
tax-free days of our province, back then — June 14 for 
Saskatchewan and June 23 for Alberta -- it took longer to pay 
your taxes in Alberta back in 1985 than it did in Saskatchewan. 
Alberta was behind us. In effect they weren't as well off as us. 
 
But let's take a look at the time period now that comes into your 
administration — 1994. Now we feel the full effects of a New  



May 18, 1995 

 
2441 

Democratic government and their kind of approach to financing 
a province. And the figures change here to June 30 for 
Saskatchewan and June 17 for Alberta. And we have had just 
about a complete reversal in the trend. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, this comes from the Fraser Institute, June 
1994. Now I know you don't like them, but at least they are 
somebody else other than the government and other than me. 
And they've got more chance of being right because they have 
to authenticate what they say, and I don't, and I won't pretend to 
try. But I will bring that to your attention that there has been a 
reversal. 
 
And the reason for that reversal is the high cost of taxation and 
the high cost of utilities. And you have a good argument for 
why you did that. And we say that we've got a better argument 
for how you didn't have to do it that way, wouldn't have had to 
do it that way. We say you could have cut from the top the way 
that Alberta did. We say that you could have taken it easier on 
the people. And we say to you that it's unfair. 
 
A little while ago you commented about how great you were 
because you balanced your budget. Well even Newfoundland's 
budget is balanced, and they don't even have any fish any more. 
Because budgets, you see, are only a plan for what you intend 
on doing. And the plan doesn't necessarily have to be right, or 
the plan can be as phoney as a three-dollar bill . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I'm not going to get into a discussion with 
the member from Swift Current because he's already done like 
dinner as well. 
 
The reality is though, Mr. Premier, that the budget is only 
balanced on the backs of the people. You balance this budget 
by taking away the money that the farmers in this province were 
entitled to have. Alberta farmers got their money. Ralph Klein 
didn't take it away from them. 
 
(1600) 
 
In Manitoba, my colleague says, they got the money as well. 
That Premier didn't take the money away from them in order to 
balance the budget. He didn't put that dividing line between 
rural and urban the way you're doing. You are the one who has 
pitted rural against urban in this province more than anyone in 
the history of this province. 
 
With that single act alone, you magnified it by hundreds of 
times. But there are many more examples of what's going on 
here. Health care, I don't even have to start with that. You've 
already heard all about that. But the people in Maple Creek will 
tell you again if you want to come out and listen. 
 
The truth of the matter is, Premier, you've had choices. You've 
had choices to bring statistical material to us that was factual, 
and you chose to clutter it up with all kinds of fiddling of the 
figures. And the people won't buy that. They're not going to 
believe you any more when you do that. 
 
So, Minister, and Premier, we want you to take a hard look at  

this province and see what you've done to it, because 
realistically if we do have an election and the polls happen to be 
right, as they may be, you might be the Premier for a while 
longer. And recognizing that great potential, we're not going to 
stand here and try to make you our most bitter enemy. We want 
to try to guide your thinking into a different direction — into 
the direction of developing prosperity for this province and 
putting it on a level playing-field with Alberta. 
 
We can be as good as Alberta. We can be better than Alberta. 
There is a solution to the problems we have in this province, 
and the solution can be to provide opportunities for people to 
stay here and to build the base. We can create instead of 
destroy. We can build instead of tax. 
 
We can have more people sharing the cost, instead of dumping 
it all onto a few. We can have urban and rural working together 
instead of being pitted against one another for election 
purposes. That's what your union policies are all about, is to 
give control to the union bosses in the big cities. Because you 
know full well that the rural people won't support you any 
more, and they certainly would never join a union, not 
voluntarily. 
 
So rethink what you're doing, Premier, and take a look at these 
figures and the way the balance has worked out and how the 
shift is swinging. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, in fairness, will you take a hard look here at 
what you've done to the province, pull these labour Bills, go 
back to work on the regulations. 
 
I mean after all, when you've got a piece of legislation that 
affects the entire province and the well-being of all of the 
people in the province, like your legislation, your labour 
legislation that requires regulations to be more important than 
the law itself, and it takes you two years and you still haven't 
got those regulations ironed out, doesn't that tell you that there's 
something fundamentally flawed in your thinking or the way 
that you've gone about it? If you can't get the regulations 
straight after two years . . . 
 
And you've still got the business community totally upset. You 
now even got the union people getting totally upset. Because 
now it's starting to figure out that people are already 
circumventing the whole process and looking for loopholes and 
ways around it so that nobody's happy any more. Surely that's 
got to tell you that the thing is flawed. 
 
Would you not think it might be better to put this whole mess 
on hold until after the next election? And if you do come back 
as the Premier, then let's start with a new law and do it right this 
time, instead of pitting rural against urban, instead of pitting 
union against worker, instead of pitting unions against the 
business people, and the employers against employees — 
anyone you want to take, whatever comparison you want to 
make. 
 
We're too much into this adversarial approach in Saskatchewan  



May 18, 1995 

 
2442 

for political partisan gain. I believe you can get elected without 
this. I think if you were honest with the folks, cut taxes, allowed 
people more opportunities, and said the unions are going to do 
what's fair and not have power and control over the workers and 
the employers, I'll bet you could still get elected. 
 
So why not do it right, Mr. Premier? What do you think? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
talks about cooperation. I'm certainly prepared to cooperate 
with him. And I believe that as a general way to operate in 
Saskatchewan, that is the way to go. I've said it many times 
today and I've said it many times in my political life, I think 
cooperation is the key. 
 
I'll just make a few quick responses and then take my place. 
First of all, the member cited Fraser Institute figures on tax 
freedom day, and then alleges that they have been extended, the 
tax freedom days in Saskatchewan, post-1991. I'd want to be 
absolutely careful that I did an analysis of Fraser Institute 
figures before I adopted them. But on the assumption that I do 
adopt them, there's a very simple answer. And the simple 
answer is that in 1991 we had the highest per capita deficit of 
any government, province in Canada. Highest per capita deficit. 
 
These aren't some theoretical numbers, you know. This deficit 
was $900 million. We have a cumulative debt of 14 billion, $15 
billion now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We'll check it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well you don't have to check it. It's in 
every . . . every official document in this province and outside 
this province tell you those are the numbers. 
 
You talked about dividing rural and urban. We're not. Farmers' 
portion of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) payments 
they've received back. That's our policy. 
 
I think I'm going to close by simply saying — these aren't my 
words. Ian Russell, vice-president, Investment Dealers 
Association of Canada, May 20, 1994, a direct quote: 
 
 The deficit attack by Saskatchewan's NDP government 

is the most advanced in the country. They cut program 
spending by 3 per cent over the last two years, which 
compares to 6 per cent increases on average in the three 
years that preceded that (that was your administration). 

 
Pardon the language, Mr. Chairman, but it's a direct quote — 
Mr. Russell says: 
 
 That's a hell of a turnaround. (It's actually, if I may add 

my own words, it's a 9 per cent turnaround). That's more 
than any other government has done in that period. 

 
Mr. Ian Russell, Investment Dealers Association of Canada, 
says. 
 

And my last quote comes from Wood Gundy, February 21, 
1995, reviewing the Minister of Finance's budget, they wrote 
the following: 
 
 Saskatchewan took some tough steps in 1993 to dig 

itself out of a deep fiscal hole, and its success in moving 
from large deficits to surpluses. It is noteworthy that 
Saskatchewan will still have no nominal spending 
growth this year and that the province is able still to 
ease up slightly on its tax load. 

 
That's Wood Gundy. And that is a tremendous accomplishment. 
Can't deny it. You can't deny it. And that's why both of you 
know what's waiting for you in the next few weeks. You can't 
deny it because the people of Saskatchewan know it too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 
have a few short questions to ask but they actually belong in 
Justice estimates. And I got an agenda handed to me when I 
came in at noon and I just need to ask the question. If you could 
find out from one of the . . . whoever would know, whether 
estimates from Justice were coming back on tonight or not. 
Otherwise I won't ask you my questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the estimates for 
Justice will be called very shortly today, the moment that I 
finish. And I don't know what time that is. It could be 5 o'clock, 
Mr. Acting House Leader, for Justice? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, or 6. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Could be early as 5 or 6, but they're 
coming on after me. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you very much. I won't be asking you 
any questions. I'll leave it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just a 
couple more questions while my colleague has gone to get some 
statistical information so that we can bump heads with the 
Premier on a level playing-field here on statistical sheet. 
Anyway for the note that was passed, we will get the names that 
you asked for and we'll get them right away. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, you say that you've had a turnaround, and we 
went through this part of the debate earlier, but I guess I'll have 
to rebut what you say because you seem to want to conclude 
somehow on a note of optimism which is hollow and rings 
hollow. Because I'm simply going to say that yes, there was a 
turnaround here on paper; and yes, on paper you've done what 
some people call a good job. 
 
I will tell you this though, that the common man on the street, 
the ordinary farmer out in his fields, school teacher walking to 
his classroom, doesn't care what Wood Gundy or anybody else 
thinks about your record. What they want to know is how are 
they doing themselves. And they're saying they say see  



May 18, 1995 

 
2443 

precious little difference this year from last year — higher 
taxes, more utility bills, and no better prosperity for them as a 
person. 
 
Now you may have made the province look better on paper, but 
you did it at the cost of every individual person in this province. 
You taxed them right to the bottom hole of their trousers in 
order to make yourself look good. In order to make the paper 
look good for the province as a whole, you've decided to break 
the people. And that's what they know when we go to the 
hustings this next month, if that's what you want to do. And 
that's the story that they know. And that's the truth they live 
with. They know what you've done to this province. You've 
created a turnaround on paper so that you could brag in the 
newspapers and try to get a momentum for your election. You 
did it for partisan political purposes to try to win an election. 
You didn't help people at all. 
 
And you sure didn't help this province to grow. You only 
changed some numbers on some paper that are as phoney as 
this list of figures on this particular book which happens to be 
your budget, which has no credibility whatsoever for any of the 
people in this province. 
 
You, sir, have nothing to brag about. You have nothing to boast 
about in this province. And if you think the people are going to 
swallow this in the election, then you will probably win. But I 
don't believe they are. Because the truth of the matter is, they 
don't care about your statistics on paper. They don't care about 
your long lists of numbers. They care about the reality of what 
their lives are. 
 
Talk to the person in downtown Regina who's trying to live on 
welfare. Ask them if they're very happy about the prosperity of 
the province. Talk to the people in Saskatoon who are standing 
in line at the welfare office and the unemployment office 
looking for jobs. Ask them how much they think it's great that 
the province's economy has turned around so that the Premier 
will look better. 
 
Ask them if they really give a care about your numbers on your 
paper. Or ask them if they care about what is happening in their 
lives, their opportunity to get health care without having to fly 
to Calgary to get it — and in many cases that's what's 
happening, we are told. Ask the people how they feel about you 
making yourself and your government look good at their 
expense. 
 
Now that's the question that needs to be answered. Not the 
question of whether you've had a 9 per cent turnaround 
estimated by some banker from New York or California or 
perhaps Bay Street. Because the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to vote on the basis of the prosperity that you did not give 
them as individuals. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, don't you think it's time we quit playing 
games here. Why don't you stand up and tell the people of this 
province that if you're elected, you'll do something to change 
this province around from the direction we're presently going? 

Why don't you tell them that you will take these labour 
legislations and start over with them? Why don't you give them 
that kind of hope as an election campaign promise? Give them 
something that they really could look forward to that would be 
meaningful. 
 
How could you square with your conscience that you are 
winning an election on partisan propaganda of a past record that 
really doesn't mean anything to anybody, rather than a view for 
a hope for the future. 
 
Isn't that what we're really supposed to be about here? I mean 
you took a crack at me awhile ago about saying it would be 
nicer to be in Alberta than Saskatchewan, standing in this 
Assembly being paid by the people. I don't apologize for that 
statement because it is better over there right now — tax-wise, 
utility bill-wise, job opportunity-wise. But I'm not saying it has 
to stay that way. 
 
I'm not saying that you couldn't put this province in the same 
category that they're in. That's why I'm here, is because I think 
there is hope for this province. I believe even you could deliver 
that hope. If I didn't think that I wouldn't run in the next 
election. I'd sell out and go to Alberta. I mean it's not that hard 
to move. People do it every day. 
 
(1615) 
 
They tell me that the average family moves seven times, or 
something like that, in their lifetime. I've still got two or three to 
go at least. So I really don't have to stay here, sir. But I choose 
to stay here to fight for this province because we have the 
ability, the potential, and I know that even you could 
accomplish it if you set your mind to it. 
 
So knowing full well that the opportunities for people to come 
back are not yet here, why not take a look at the future? The 
futuristic approach, a dynamic approach to campaigning, a 
dynamic approach to government. Tell the people how you're 
going to change things so that we can not only catch up to 
Alberta, but scoot right on by it. I think we could leave them in 
the dust. What do you think? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not in a particular 
competition with other provinces and wanting to leave them in 
the dust, but I will say to the hon. member opposite, that 
Saskatchewan has great opportunities. It has natural riches and 
resources and we've got the hardest working, most innovative 
people in the world and we're going to do very well — we're 
going to do very, very well indeed. 
 
The member, however, is fixed on his ticket for doing very, 
very, very well that somehow that we should repeal a whole 
slate of imagined or real labour legislation — that is his ticket 
for scooting past Alberta and leaving them, quote, in the dust, 
end quote. 
 
I don't happen to agree with that. I think that it's going to take a 
little more hard work than that and I think the average person in  



May 18, 1995 

 
2444 

Saskatchewan knows that it can't be done that simply either. 
 
You know, the hon. member, as I take my place, talks a lot 
about taxes. He wasn't in the legislature and I don't know if he 
was in the political process or not prior to 1991 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Never. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No, he never was. That probably 
explains why he . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, well 
maybe. Then you obviously didn't hear the former premier, the 
former leader, your former leader, the member from Estevan, 
say over and over and over again, one thing. Deficits are 
deferred taxes, deficits are deferred taxes, he said. And you 
shake your head, not right. 
 
And you know what happened from 1982? And you know, I say 
this to the member from Regina North West — I say this to 
both the members opposite, both the Liberal and Conservatives 
— do you know what happened from 1982 to 1991? There was 
a deficit on average of a billion dollars a year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Doesn't make it right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No, the member said it doesn't make it 
right, they're deferred taxes. And now he has the audacity of 
getting up and criticizing us that the party is over, and the rest 
of the people of Saskatchewan have to pay for the profligacy 
and the waste, that somehow this is a matter which is 
resounding to our detriment? And he says it doesn't make it 
right. 
 
Where was your voice from 1982 to 1991? Got laryngitis? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nobody listened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Nobody listens. No, I know how it is. 
A prophet in his own land in his own time, the member from 
Maple Creek, and nobody listened. I know the feeling well. 
 
But that's the answer; deficits are deferred taxes. And that's our 
problem here that we have. We're working our way out of it. 
People in Saskatchewan are working their way out of it. 
 
I do not say we've reached nirvana — far from it. We have 
many miles yet to go. And we're going to be as competitive and 
as aggressive in getting business and take as many good ideas 
from your side and anybody else that we can get. All I can say 
is after three, four years, we've come one heck of a long way. 
And that's a source of joy, rejoicing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, 
and officials, I'm glad that we were talking about deferred taxes 
and how the previous administration had run up the bills of a 
billion dollars a year for every year they were in power because 
the figures do indeed show that. There's no denying the 
statistics because those facts are there. 

But what seems to be your faux pas or your inability to admit, 
Mr. Minister, that there was some debt there previously. You're 
always saying, you left $14 billion in debt. Well you're right; 
$14 billion in debt was about the number that was left at the 
end of the member from Estevan's term as premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But when we look at those numbers, Mr. Premier, not all of that 
debt had been generated by the member from Estevan. If we're 
at $14 billion and he was in power for nine years, nine from 
fourteen leaves five. So that means when you were in 
government previously, you had left $5 billion in debt — 
deferred taxes to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I hear a bunch of groans from the back benches. Well I 
guess that's their only opportunity to speak in this Assembly is 
the groans that they get to provide once in awhile. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, they still wish to deny that those facts are 
true. If the $14 billion is correct, and if what you said that the 
$9 billion is correct — a billion dollars a year — if that's the 
truth, then that you left $5 billion in debt for the member from 
Estevan when he took over as premier, then that has to be the 
truth also; that you left it. If your figures are correct, then you 
left $5 billion in debt. 
 
And in fact, even the Provincial Secretary, the highest paid 
secretary in the land, admits that. In his addresses this session, 
he has admitted in estimates, in questions, that indeed that debt 
was there. 
 
Let's look at the debt that is in position today. The Provincial 
Auditor estimates that there is over $20 billion in debt today, 
Mr. Premier, over $20 billion. Well if it was $14 billion in 1991 
and this is 1995 and there's 20-plus billion in there today, that 
means, Mr. Premier, you personally as Premier of the province 
of Saskatchewan have added another $6 billion. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, you've been Premier for three and a half 
years. If it was $14 billion that your figures that you were using 
in 1991, and the Provincial Auditor is correct that we have over 
$20 billion today — that's $6 billion in three and a half years — 
that's almost $2 billion a year that you have added to the 
provincial debt, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier. 
 
So when it comes to pointing fingers at the volume of debt 
added every year to the provincial coffers, then you have racked 
up the record for individual yearly record. You, Mr. Minister, 
Mr. Premier, not someone else. 
 
So when we add these numbers together, $5 billion prior to 
1982, 5 to 6 billion since you've been in power in the three and 
a half years, we're reached a position of over half of the debt is 
attributable to you, Mr. Premier, you and your colleagues, 
including each and every one of them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, you can stand there and try and 
fudge the facts if you want to, but the numbers are clearly there. 
Now some of your colleagues would like to add in the  



May 18, 1995 

 
2445 

provincial . . . the Crown corporation debt for the years 1982 to 
1991. They would like to add into that the teachers' pension 
plan, and then all of a sudden that's not part of the realistic debt. 
We can't include that from 1991 to 1995. Oh no, we can only 
count the consolidated debt so it looks like you've dropped it. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor says we have to look 
at the total picture of the province of Saskatchewan. The total 
picture, not 60 per cent of the picture that you would like to 
look at today even though you wanted to look at the whole 
picture in 1991. We have to look at the whole picture today, 
Mr. Premier, not 60 per cent of it. 
 
And the whole picture shows that you have added on more than 
half of the debt of this province — more than half, Mr. Premier. 
And what have you done? You've increased the taxation of the 
people of this province to pay off all of the debt, the 50 per 
cent-plus that you've added on and the 49 per cent or so that the 
premier from the previous administration had included into that. 
 
And when we look at the economic climates of the 1980s, 
compare that to the 1990s. Grain prices . . . the bottom fell out 
of it. And you yourself have said when it comes to balanced 
budget legislation in here, well you know we can't have it too 
iron-bound because what if we have a drought? What are we 
going to do if we have a drought? We might have to run a debt. 
What are we doing to do if we have grasshoppers? We might 
have to run a debt. What happens if oil prices drop and we can't 
meet our commitment to balance the budget in any one year? 
We might have to run a debt. What happens if the other 
resource sectors drop? We might have to run a debt. What 
happens if the Liberals in Ottawa cut the transfer payments? We 
might have to run a debt. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, throughout the '80s, what happened? Grain 
prices dropped. Oil prices dropped. Potash prices dropped. We 
had droughts. We had grasshoppers. We had all of those things, 
Mr. Premier. And yes, even the Minister of Economic 
Development will now admit that the member from Estevan 
faced tough times throughout the '80s. 
 
And his comment is, nobody ever said politics was fair. Nobody 
ever said politics was fair. But you have certainly benefited in 
your three and a half years with rising grain prices, bonuses for 
land sales in the oil patch, high prices for potash. All of those 
areas, resource areas, of our economy are prospering, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Premier — not because of your efforts, but simply 
because of the world economy, simply because of the world 
economy, not because of any special efforts on your part. 
 
Indeed the oil patch is doing quite well. Why? Because you left 
it alone, that's why. Thanks to inattention and the rules set in 
place by the previous administration, the oil patch is doing well. 
 
And I hear scoffing from the back row again, Mr. Premier, from 
the areas that don't have oil but do have flooding this year. And 
I've seen the Minister of Agriculture up here browbeating the 
Minister of Finance, begging for something to be done about  

the drought up in the north-east . . . not the drought, sorry, the 
flooding up in the north-east corner of the province. 
 
Because he knows there's an election coming up and wants to 
see something happen in his area before he gets blown right out 
of the water. And they certainly have a lot of water to get him 
blown out of, because seeding isn't happening out there. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, when it comes to the debts of this province, 
you're responsible for half of it and your solution is not to bring 
more jobs into this province, not to provide employment for our 
youth, but rather to simply tax those that are captives of this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, if I could figure out 
how the hon. member arrived at the $6 billion that he attaches 
to us, I'd at least be able to answer it somehow. I don't want to 
drag my officials into this, but nobody around the front benches 
can figure out how the 6 billion was coming at, so I don't know 
how to respond. 
 
Other than to say that it would be nice for him to understand 
that the '91 election is long gone now and we're looking at a 
new election. If you want to try to refight '91 to see if a different 
result would take place, good luck to you. But I don't think it 
will. 
 
And all that I know is that we have a debt management plan. 
We're going to reduce the debt by 1.2 billion by March 31, 
1999. On average today we're reducing the debt at the rate of 
$661,000 a day. That's a marvellous turnaround — $660,000 a 
day. We're reducing the debt — not the deficit — the debt, in a 
balanced way. 
 
And what more can I say? I think the people of Saskatchewan 
think it's the correct approach because it's a plan. It's the 
Saskatchewan way. It's a good plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well it seems the Premier isn't sure 
where the debt comes from. Well let me ask him a question: 
how much debt is there today in the Consolidated Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of 
Finance officials are not here. We're going to have to get the 
documentation. 
 
Let me . . . What the member is trying to say  but is not quite 
able to say it  is the following. He's trying to say . . . I'll back 
up. There are two kinds of debts. There is a debt which is 
known as a self-liquidating debt, example being a debt which is 
attached to, say, a commercial Crown corporation whereby the 
commercial Crown corporation, through its procedures, will be 
able to pay down the debt through the profits and the financing 
arrangements of the Crown. 
 
(1630) 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2446 

Then there is, in addition to that, another kind of debt which is 
not self-liquidating debt, sometimes referred to . . . I don't, but 
others refer to it as dead-weight debt. That is the debt which is 
used to run the government: highways, roads, municipal 
transfers, schools, and so forth. You can't charge people to 
make a profit on it unless you put up a toll on a highway which, 
by the way, was one of your former administration's ideas. 
 
This is the debt we're talking about. When I compare operating 
expenses of Saskatchewan to operating expenses elsewhere, 
that's what I'm doing, this latter part. I'm saying that you people 
spent a billion dollars a year on the latter part more than you 
took in. Every year you take in taxes, and you spend the taxes 
on operating expenditures of government to provide services of 
government. You took in less, by a billion dollars than what you 
spend every year. 
 
Just as these quotations I gave you — Nesbitt, Burns, and the 
Investment Dealers Association of Canada . . . you put the 
province right on the abyss of bankruptcy. That's what you did. 
That is what we're paying off; deficits equal deferred taxes. You 
put the province in this jackpot, and I'm saying to you that our 
situation is one where we are working our way out of this, 
logically and sensibly. 
 
Now the member can use all kinds of other figures. And, as I 
say, if he can ever figure the 6 billion on his own enough to 
explain it to me and the rest of us, we might be able to have a 
sensible discourse in this area. But I don't think the member's 
got a very solid grasp on this issue. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Premier, when you can't even 
come up with the numbers of the debt, I don't think you have a 
grasp on the situation. I asked you a very simple question. You 
were saying how much debt had been left on this province by 
the previous administration. And then when I ask you for a very 
simple question, a very simple number, dealing with the debt of 
the province that it stands today, you can't even answer the 
question. 
 
Don't you pay attention to what the Minister of Finance is 
doing, or do you just simply go wandering off to New York and 
have a good time when she's out there asking the bankers in 
New York for more money? Is that what you do? 
 
Obviously you should know a little bit about the numbers of 
this province. If you're talking about self-liquidating debt, in 
1991 there was about 7 billion. And there was about 13 billion 
of non-self-liquidating, and then there was the teachers' 
pensions plans, the unfunded pensions over and above that. 
 
And if you look at the numbers today, it's significantly bigger, 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier. So I think when it comes to the 
numbers, you were certainly more than ready to pump out some 
numbers about Saskatoon and Calgary when it suited your 
purpose, but you're sure not willing to talk about numbers when 
all of a sudden your figures don't quite add up with your 
rhetoric. That seems to be a major problem. 
 

You can hang your head all you want, Mr. Premier, but those 
are the facts. Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, let's talk about some 
other facts. We asked you for some globals back in the 
beginning of February, some global questions related to your 
department. We asked the same things of every other minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, we've got the globals for almost every other 
one of your ministers, but for some reason it just seems to take 
your officials a lot longer to do their work. And I guess the 
problem is they're too busy running around the province playing 
politics to look after the issues of the day in this province. And 
I guess that's why you don't know what the numbers are . . . 
because you haven't got time to spend looking after the 
province. You have to run around and go and play politics. 
 
So Mr. Premier, let me ask you a very simple question relating 
to your running around playing politics. How much money did 
you and your department spend on travel in the past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I've indicated to the 
other Conservative members who were asking these questions 
about the globals so-called that we would have these either by 
later today or tomorrow. I've given to the House, publicly and 
privately, the explanation for that, and that is the situation that 
we adopt. We will provide them as soon as we have them 
available to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Premier, it seems that as soon 
as possible means when we're no longer available to ask 
questions related to your running around the province and your 
travel, when we're no longer available to ask questions 
concerning the employees in your office, when we're no longer 
available to question the politics and the political appointments 
within your office. That seems to be the time that you're 
prepared to give the answers. 
 
You can't give answers about the debt, and you can't give 
answers about what's going on in your office. You can't seem to 
give answers about anything other than rhetoric, Mr. Premier. 
And that is a very sorry state of affairs for the people in this 
province. When the Premier of the province can't even answer a 
few simple, direct questions about his own office and about his 
own financing, I think that's a very, very sad state of affairs and 
a very poor comment on the Premier of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, there are a number of other issues 
that we should deal with before you're allowed to proceed with 
the spending for your office. I'd like to read you a quote from a 
document from which you like to quote very, very often. It's 
your little baseball card, your platform from 1991. And it says 
here that . . . on the back of it, it says a better quality of life. 
And this is what you were going to do. You were going to 
introduce an environmental bill of rights to guarantee the public 
access to information and participation regarding environmental 
impacts. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, you kept your word on that. You did indeed 
introduce an environmental bill of rights. So I guess you could  



May 18, 1995 

 
2447 

say, as you go around the province campaigning this time . . . 
you see this? I kept my promise. I did indeed introduce an 
environmental bill of rights. And what happened? You kept the 
letter of your words, but you did not keep the spirit of it, Mr. 
Premier, because here's what happened to your environmental 
bill of rights. 
 
And this is the first report of the Standing Committee on the 
Environment, a standing committee of this legislature on which 
the majority of members are members of your own government, 
your own party. And the summary recommendation of this 
particular report reads: 
 
 It is recommended that the minister should use this 

report as the foundation for further consultation and 
preparation of new environmental rights and 
responsibilities legislation. The committee recommends 
that existing government structures be used wherever 
possible to implement the recommendations of this 
report. 

 
Bill 48, 1992, should not be reintroduced. That particular Bill, 
by the recommendation of this committee, threw it out. And 
your government never did reintroduce an environmental Bill of 
rights. 
 
So while you're always bragging about how your little baseball 
card . . . you've kept all the promises of that, Mr. Premier. And 
indeed on this one particular issue you did indeed keep your 
promise, but you certainly never kept the spirit of that promise, 
just like the rest of these, Mr. Premier. You have not kept the 
spirit of them. 
 
Remember 4.5 billion is enough? Well what are we at now — 
5.2, $5.3 billion in spending in this province? That's certainly 
not keeping the spirit of your promise, Mr. Premier. And it goes 
on and on, Mr. Premier, like that. 
 
You have failed to keep your promises to the people of this 
province, and they will judge you accordingly. They will judge 
you accordingly. You’re failure in the environmental fields. 
You have failed in dealing with taxation. You have failed in 
delivering jobs in this province. It's very difficult, Mr. Premier, 
to come up with successes — very difficult indeed. 
 
You can say that you've balanced the budget. Yes, that's one of 
those things that you can claim until you look at the GRIP 
program that the member from Rosetown destroyed. And there 
is nothing left for protection for farmers in place today, nothing 
left if there's a crop failure this year because of flooding in 
some areas and drought in others. No protection, thanks to you 
and your government. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, when it comes to keeping your promises, are 
there going to be any promises in the upcoming election 
campaign that you will be keeping the spirit of? Because you 
certainly have failed in doing so in the past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'd say to the hon. member, stay tuned  

when we call the election. We'll let him know what promises 
we make. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. As we're 
into probably the dying days of the legislative session, we have 
a number of things that we want to speak with you about. 
 
In the '91 election campaign, sir, you made a number of 
commitments to people across this province about what you 
would do as the Premier of Saskatchewan and what your 
government would do. And you gave them essentially the 
guarantee that during your term as Premier of this province you 
would make no promises we cannot keep. That was the 
statement that you made September 20, 1991, just at the 
beginning of the election campaign; we will make no promises 
we cannot keep. 
 
And then you set out to break a number of those commitments, 
sir. And there are a lot of people in this province . . . I think the 
vast majority of people in this province would like to know the 
reasons why you broke those promises to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We'll ease the tax burden for ordinary families . . 
. was one of the promises you made, and yet we haven't seen 
that fulfilled. 
 
The Associate Minister of Finance said on May 21, 1991: the 
NDP won't raise any personal taxes for four years. That was his 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. It's promises like 
those, Mr. Premier, that you made in the '91 election campaign 
that people of this province want to hold you accountable for. 
What is your answer to those folks today when you made those 
kinds of commitments? 
 
And I know you're probably going to get up and say something 
to the effect that you didn't know how much the debt of the 
province was and things of that nature. But the fact of the 
matter is, sir, you had sat in this legislature for nearly three 
decades, two and a half decades prior to that time frame, and 
everyone I think believed that you are a competent MLA and a 
competent minister in the Blakeney government and all of those 
kinds of things, wouldn't believe for a moment that the Premier 
of this province didn't have his finger on all aspects of 
government. And I don't think they would believe that you 
didn't know the case, the finances of this province at that time. 
 
And that's why I think a lot of people don't believe you any 
more when you get up and stand up . . . when you stand in your 
place, with that inflamed rhetoric in your eye, and give that 
speech about opening the books and how we didn't know. I 
think that just kind of flies in the face of what a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan believe that you would have believed, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
So I would ask the very simple question: how does your 
performance rate with the commitment that you gave to the 
people of Saskatchewan, the very simple promise, we will make 
no promises we cannot keep? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the people will judge  



May 18, 1995 

 
2448 

this in due course. I don't think it's worthwhile for you and I . . . 
although you're welcome of course to continue on, to have 
differing opinions on this — but I will tell you that this is what 
we promised the people to do. It's called "Let's do it . . . The 
Saskatchewan Way". The Conservatives mockingly call it as the 
baseball card. 
 
Baseball card — call it what you will — it's our platform card. 
And it is very straightforward. And as I look down the list, I can 
almost say that most if not all of these have been accomplished. 
"First Things First — Common Sense Financial Management" 
— that's the first platform plank. 
 
 Open the books. A public, independent audit of the 

province's financial affairs to cut government waste and 
mismanagement. 

 
 A comprehensive review of all PC privatizations and 

business deals, to determine if they are in the public 
interest. 

 
 A balanced budget in our first term of office . . . 
 
By the way, we've achieved that. 
 
Then we say: "New Directions, New Priorities". "Jobs, Fair 
Taxes, and Wealth Creation". We say under that: 
 
 A commitment to save 7,500 jobs threatened by the 

expanded 7% PST. We will repeal this unfair tax. 
 
(1645) 
 
We've done that. 
 
 Work with local manufacturers and businesses to 

increase the value-added processing of our resources 
and commodities for . . . domestic and export markets. 

 
I think the spate of announcements as a result of the Minister of 
Finance's tax changes verify we've done that. 
 
 Jobs and savings through a comprehensive energy 

conservation strategy and the development of a new 
technology to improve the application of renewable 
resources. 

 
The Minister of Energy has tabled a comprehensive energy 
strategy. 
 
Under "A Better Quality of Life" we say: 
 
 Work with students, families, and educators to develop 

a world class, accessible education system. 
 
I can't say that's complete, but I say it's ongoing and we're 
working toward it. 
 
 Commitment to a new, community-based health care  

 system based on the "wellness" model. 
 
I can say it's not complete but we've started it as promised. 
 
 A commitment to Saskatchewan's Aboriginal people to 

honour land entitlements and promote self-government. 
 
Not complete but it's well under way. 
 
 Introduce an Environmental Bill of Rights to guarantee 

the public access to information and participation 
regarding environmental impacts. 

 
Your colleague criticized that because the legislative committee 
set up decided to shelve it. All right, we have to come back to 
that. 
 
 Fair labour laws, developed in consultation with 

working people and employers to promote harmony in 
the workplace. 

 
We've moved in this area as well. 
 
And I could go down the line. I won't because of the interest of 
time. 
 
Money for agriculture and rural communities; open, honest, and 
accountable government — all of these are set out. The member 
from Shaunavon campaigned on this platform and he got 
elected on this campaign. 
 
How are we doing it? We're doing it exactly the way we 
promised it and I think we did a very good job in doing so. 
 
Now I want to say one word about the member's anticipating 
that I would say that I should not have believed the Minister of 
Finance. Well he can tell me this now. I have in front of me the 
letter directed to myself: 
 
 Hon. Roy Romanow, Leader of the Opposition, (by the 

Minister of Finance). I'm writing in reply to your letter 
of September 22, 1991, in which you request an 
independent verification of the provincial government's 
current revenue and expenditure statements and current 
year's deficit forecast. 

 
And it goes on and on; page 5, Mr. Hepworth said this: 
 
 As you can see, there are numerous factors at play that 

must be taken into consideration. On balance, however, 
I see no reason to alter our target of a $265 million 
deficit. The mid-year update will detail our projections 
for you and for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Two hundred and sixty-five million dollars — that's what the 
minister of Finance wrote to the public. 
 
Now the Leader of the Conservative Opposition says I should 
not have believed the minister of Finance. I should have relied  



May 18, 1995 

 
2449 

on my own knowledge, my own experience, my own expertise. 
I should have said that the minister of Finance of the day was 
not being forthcoming, if I can use a diplomatic word, to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That's what the minister of Finance of your administration 
wrote. That letter was publicly tabled. It was on that basis upon 
which our promises were made and which we've accomplished 
so much thereof. 
 
I don't know how the people will view what we've done, but I 
think they'll view it favourably because what we said we would 
do, we did do. 
 
We opened the books and we've balanced the budget for the 
first time in over 12 years — for the first time in over five years 
of any government in Canada. We've lowered taxes in this 
budget for individuals and for business people. We have 
renewed the health care system — necessary to save the health 
care. We have seen a spate of economic jobs which are 
unprecedented in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we're turning this province around. We've set out a 
four-year plan which is going to lead this province to making 
sure that we have the 21st century in our grasp, that the debt 
will be reduced, the taxes will be reduced the more, and that the 
quality of health care and education is going to be maintained. 
That's a solid, credible plan. 
 
Those are the promises that we have made and we have kept; 
that is the direction that we are basing. Let the electorate decide. 
But I'll tell you one thing that I'm confident about. They will 
never go back in the foreseeable future to your party, a party 
which you tell me now yourself you're rejecting, that I should 
have been smart enough not to have accepted this $265 million 
deficit which turned out to be a billion dollars deficit. Typical 
Tory. 
 
They'll never go back. We have accomplished great things in 
this province of Saskatchewan, working together. Instead of not 
acknowledging that . . . instead of acknowledging that, instead 
of trying to attack it, what you should be trying to do is build a 
forward-looking platform for your own direction rather than 
trying to refight the election of 1991 all over again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. Well it's 
a great speech, a great election-type speech, but there isn't 
anybody believes it any more, Mr. Premier. Because you made 
the promises in 1991 to the people of Saskatchewan and they 
don't believe that you kept those promises. Things like success 
should be measured by adding a total of 30,000 new jobs for 
the economy. That was one of the promises you made to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Have you completed that? Have you completed that? It simply 
hasn't happened, simply hasn't happened. “Roy Romanow 
capped off the NDP annual convention pledging to eliminate  

poverty.” And has that happened, Mr. Premier? Eighty thousand 
new people on welfare in this province and you say that you are 
going to eliminate poverty in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, that is why we have this stack of letters from 
people across this province. This is the kind of thing that the 
people in this province believe about you and your government. 
These are the kinds of questions that they'd like to ask you 
about your completion of the agenda that you laid out for the 
people in 1991. They didn't believe you then and they don't 
believe you now. 
 
Mr. Premier, the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is, is 
the people bought some of your arguments in 1991. And, Mr. 
Premier, they didn't believe you, they don't believe you any 
longer, because you've broken most of those commitments. 
 
I'd like to table all of these letters that we've received from 
people across the province about you and your government, sir, 
and the promises that you have not kept, that you made in the 
1991 election. We will be into an election, I'm sure, very, very 
soon. I'm sure we will be into an election very soon. And we are 
going to hold you accountable for the people of this province 
on each and every one of those promises; we're going to bring 
them up time and time and time again. 
 
We will make no promises we cannot keep — that is the kind of 
commitment you gave the people of this province. We're going 
to eliminate the PST — that is what you gave the people of this 
province in the terms of promises. We won't raise taxes for four 
years — that's what you said to the people of this province, Mr. 
Premier. And you've broken each and every one of those 
commitments. 
 
Personal taxes have gone up by 10 per cent. The PST has been 
raised from 7 to 9 per cent. Families have been squeezed an 
extra $4,500 on a per-family basis in Saskatchewan, each and 
every one of them, when you take into account taxes, fees, and 
utilities. 
 
And the Madam Minister of Finance is shaking her head, but 
she knows that that is true; $225 million net taxes have gone up 
in this province since 1991, and she admitted it herself in this 
legislature in her own estimates. She made that commitment. 
She made that view known to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, those are the kinds of things that people in this 
province want to hold you accountable. And that's why I think 
if the election call is soon — and I expect it will — you might 
be in for a surprise about the outcome of it. I think people are 
going to want to know whether you've kept those promises. 
 
You were going to spend more on agriculture, you were going 
to spend more on education, you were going to spend more on 
health care, you were going to do everything for everyone and 
at the same time lower taxes. And what have you done? Exactly 
the opposite. 
 
And the only defence that you have is to stand up and say that  



May 18, 1995 

 
2450 

the former minister of Finance sent you a letter that has a 
budget figure, a deficit figure of $265 million, when everybody 
in this province knows that budget figure was predicated on the 
fact that there was a harmonized taxation system and a whole 
number of other assumptions, all of which you did away with. 
 
In terms of Crown corporations, the amount of dividend that the 
Crown corporations were going to be paying to government, 
and the write-offs that you made subsequent to the last election, 
there's been all kinds of editorials that have explained the debt 
situation then and the $700 or $800 million figure that you use 
after the election campaign. 
 
The debt of this province has actually gone up under your 
administration, sir. There were over $20 billion of debt when 
you take into . . . all aspects of debt. So you've added about $5 
billion, if you want to use your figure of $15 billion debt. We 
now have a $20 billion debt in this province, not a $15 billion 
debt as you would have everyone in this province believe, that 
you somehow or another magically put the brakes on the debt 
situation in this province. 
 
It isn't so, is it, sir? The debt is $20 billion today. Crown 
corporation debt, accumulated debt, pension liability, all of 
those things were rolled in after your administration took over 
in 1991. And now those figures, I think, in the election 
campaign will come back to haunt you, sir. 
 
As we have travelled the province — and we certainly have 
extensively in the last few months — talking about your record, 
people are becoming more and more cynical about you and your 
promises, the promises you made to the people in the last 
election campaign. 
 
Farmers are saying to us things like, where is this more money 
for agriculture? Where was this Premier that was going to fly 
off to Ottawa and get more money out of them down there and 
come home to Saskatchewan and spread it around for the 
farmers of this province? 
 
And what did you do? You propped up the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose and he ripped up the GRIP contracts of each 
and every one of the farmers of this province. And that's why 
that member will never sit in this legislature again after the next 
election campaign. He will lose in spades, I will predict. He 
won't be around after the election campaign. 
 
The member from Rosetown-Elrose simply doesn't have a 
prayer in the next election campaign . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . well the member from Rosetown-Elrose chirps from his seat 
that we'll see about that. Well we've been doing some polling in 
your constituency, sir. We've been doing some polling in your 
constituency and you're in deep trouble — deep, deep trouble in 
the Rosetown-Elrose; deep, deep trouble in that constituency. 
That member, for that one single thing of ripping up the 
contracts with farm families, he will be defeated in the election 
campaign upcoming, I predict. 
 
And there'll be a number of others as well. The minister from  

Melfort, she will lose in the election campaign, I predict. And I 
think a number of other members on the opposite side . . . I 
suspect in Meadow Lake he's in a little bit in trouble up there 
right now. Maybe not from the Conservatives, but I suspect he's 
in trouble up there. 
 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster's in trouble. And the 
latest member to walk into the room is in trouble as well. I think 
that that member is in trouble as well, Mr. Premier. 
 
And it's all because, sir, you made the commitments to the 
people of this province to do a whole range of things and you 
haven't done them. You made the promise, the solemn 
commitment to people in this province, that it was going to be 
better under your administration — taxes were going to go 
down, services were going to be better, more services to the 
people of this province, not less services. 
 
That's what you promised, sir. And that's why people don't 
believe you any longer. In the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, 
November 9, you promised to restore the prescription drug plan 
and the school-based dental plan. And the only commitments 
now that the Premier wants to say that he made to the people of 
this province are to hold up the baseball card and say, these are 
what our commitments were. But you made a whole lot of other 
promises, didn't you, sir, besides the baseball card promises? 
You made a number of other promises. The elimination of 
poverty, that's what you said. 
 
Another NDP MLA, back in December 8, said: constituents 
told me that they cannot take any more of these heavy tax and 
utility rate increases. Indeed they'd like to see some of these 
increases rolled back. How many have you rolled back lately? 
Did a little bit in terms of SaskEnergy. But have you done 
anything with SaskPower or SaskTel or SGI? Oh yes, the 
average family in this province has seen their telephone rates 
and their average amount of charges go up, not down. That's the 
truth of the matter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, wrong 
again, the member from Swift Current says. 
 
I'd like to see you go out on the campaign trail in Swift Current 
and tell the people of Swift Current that taxes have gone down. 
There's a good reason why that member isn't running again . . . 
because in his constituency the sales tax issue alone would 
defeat him, boarded up stores all downtown Swift Current. And 
that member says the economy's better in Swift Current than it 
is today . . . simply isn't true, and he knows it. 
 
Mr. Premier, the election . . . I'm sure you're going to call it. 
Everyone understands that you feel the polls are probably right 
for you. You said in the last few weeks that you're going to wait 
and see what the mood of Saskatchewan people is. And that's 
why you've been polling as extensively as you have been 
polling. You think the time is right. Even though your promise 
to the people of Saskatchewan was for things like set election 
dates, a four-year mandate, not a three and a half year mandate. 
 
But nevertheless I think you will find the same thing that a 
David Peterson in Ontario found out. You're going to the polls,  



May 18, 1995 

 
2451 

and you're going to go early, and the people of this province are 
going to hold you accountable for the promises you made. The 
farm families, the business people, the ordinary working people 
of this province are going to say no to you in the election 
campaign. 
 
(1700) 
 
I think they're going to say no because of the commitment you 
gave to this province that you broke on each and every one of 
the occasions that you made those promises. And that's why, sir, 
I think you and your government are in a lot of trouble in the 
next election campaign. And I think the people of this province 
are going to want to know the answers to those questions, those 
concerns that they have, the hundreds of letters that we receive 
from people across this province. 
 
I wish you the very best, but I think you're in a great deal . . . I 
think you're in a great deal of problems, have a great deal of 
explaining to do to the people of Saskatchewan, primarily to 
taxpayers of this province who you've raised taxes when you 
promised you wouldn't. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the Leader of 
the Opposition for granting me just a few minutes, and I'll not 
indulge him or the members of the House beyond a few minutes 
of response to his rather passionate, if not eloquent, address  
as he sees it. 
 
And my response, Mr. Chairman, will be as follows. I'm reading 
here from an article, an editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 
 
 Saskatchewan taxpayers can only come to the 

conclusion that the provincial Tories are unable to tell 
right from wrong. They appear to operate without a 
conscience or moral guideposts. Otherwise, how could 
deputy Conservative leader Rick Swenson and Tory 
House Leader Bill Neudorf accuse the NDP of lying 
about the deficit during the election campaign. 

 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. Order, 
order. Order, order. Some words are not permitted, and we 
cannot use those words directly, and we cannot use quotations 
to do indirectly what we cannot do directly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I accept your rule. I 
will simply say not . . . to the Chair. But generally in my 28 
years in legislature, the rule always was you could read, but I'll 
accept your rule. That's fair enough. 
 
I'll start: 
 
 Bill Neudorf accused the NDP of (blank) . . . about the 

deficit during the election campaign. During the past 
few months, the Gass Commission and the Provincial 
Auditor's report have unveiled a litany of Tory  

 extravagances and ill-conceived expenditures, all of 
which contributed to the province's staggering debt load. 

 
Here's my conclusion to the new leader of the new Progressive 
Conservatives, quote: 
 
 Despite the report's overwhelming indictment of the 

Tories' fiscal mismanagement, Neudorf and Swenson 
had the audacity to claim that during the election 
campaign Premier Roy Romanow pretended not to 
know the Tories were (blank) about the provincial 
deficit. 

 
Remember these words: 
 
 The absurdity of this situation and the complete moral 

bankruptcy of the Tories is not lost on Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. That's obviously why they're in opposition. 

 
That, Mr. Chairman, was written in 1992. If there is anything to 
rebut the thesis of the Leader of the Opposition's attack on this 
government, which attack was along these lines, it was this 
editorial, valid three years later as it was in 1992. 
 
I wish you good luck too. I just wish you hadn't gone to 
forecasting in the election business because I don't think you'll 
be any better there than you were in finance matters. 
 
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thanks, members of the committee. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 
Electoral Expenses 

Vote 34 
 
The Chair: — This is all authorized by law. Are there any 
questions? No questions. That concludes then estimates for the 
Department of the Executive Council. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, with leave, Mr. Chairman, I 
move: 
 
 That, notwithstanding the rules and proceedings of this 

legislature, the House recess until 6 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Chair: — The rules of the Assembly and committees is 
such that a motion at this point would not be appropriate 
because it pre-empts the authority of the House. But if there is  



May 18, 1995 

 
2452 

agreement on the members of the committee to recess until 6 
p.m., then we shall recess until 6 p.m. 
 
Now is there agreement to recess until 6. I see there is 
agreement, so therefore we will recess until 6 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 6 p.m. 
 
 
 


