




















































Hansard: February 06, 1995


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2863 

 February 6, 1995 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

PROROGATION 
 

At 10:03 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the 

Throne. 

 

His Honour was then pleased to deliver the following 

speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at this 

Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to thank you 

for the work which you have done. 

 

During this session, Saskatchewan has turned the 

corner, in terms of both its financial stability and 

economic recovery. 

 

I wish to express my confidence that the approval of 

the legislative initiatives presented to you will 

contribute to the long-term growth and prosperity of 

our province. 

 

You have demonstrated your commitment to 

democratic reform by adopting The Representation 

Act, which implemented the final report of the 

Constituency Boundaries Commission. This legislation 

will provide fair representation for all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

In keeping with the high priority my government 

places upon stimulating economic development and 

creating jobs for Saskatchewan people, you have 

approved legislation to establish the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation. This legislation will ensure 

greater public accountability, while providing the 

corporation with a clearly defined mandate. 

 

You have recognized the important role that tourism 

plays in economic development by approving 

legislation to establish the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Authority. 

 

You have also approved legislation which provides for 

better protection for several 

important natural areas, including the designation of 

the Clarence Steepbank Lakes Recreation Reserve as a 

provincial wilderness park and the creation of a new 

protected area in the Grasslands National Park. 

 

You have passed amendments to The Department of 

Economic Development Act to provide authority for 

the establishment of a trade development organization 

to manage provincial export marketing services. 

 

You have enhanced the ability of regional economic 

development authorities to promote local community 

development by approving amendments to The 

Community Bonds Act. 

 

In responding to the recommendations of the task force 

on child and youth advocacy, you have placed a higher 

priority on prevention services to help children and 

families avoid problems, and support services to assist 

families and children in crisis. 

 

You have approved legislation to establish a Children's 

Advocate. You have also responded to the needs of 

those trapped in abusive relationships with The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Act. 

 

To ensure that the justice system deals with family 

breakdown in a more responsive, supportive manner 

you have approved measures to accommodate the 

expansion of the Unified Family Court. 

 

You have recognized the stress that balancing work 

and family responsibilities places on working parents. 

You have approved amendments to The Labour 

Standards Act and to The Trade Union Act to improve 

the working conditions faced by Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

You have made an important contribution to the 

advancement of the health renewal process by 

approving The Health Services Utilization and 

Research Commission Act. This legislation establishes 

the commission as an independent, autonomous 

research group mandated to examine how health 

services are provided. 

 

You also approved legislation which will enhance the 

ability of district health boards to deal with matters of 

public health. The Public 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard February 6, 1995 

Health Act allows for the appointment of community 

health authorities to bring decision making and service 

delivery to the community level. 

 

You have also amended The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act to establish the personal injury 

protection plan. This plan ensures that all accident 

victims are treated fairly by guaranteeing access to 

improved medical and rehabilitation benefits. 

 

Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for 

the diligent manner in which you have devoted your 

energies to the activities of the session, and wish you 

the full blessing of Providence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker and members 

of the Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure 

of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this 

Legislative Assembly be prorogued until later today, 

the 6th day of February, 1995, at 2:30 p.m., and this 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:06 

a.m. 

 

 


