













































March 6, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 6, 1995 

 

 

631 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of a number of my 

constituents who come from the communities of Langenburg, 

Marchwell, Churchbridge, Esterhazy, Gerald, Yarbo, and Spy 

Hill. And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I'm pleased to lay these on the Table. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to present 

petitions for people from my constituency today. I'll read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 

than allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projections in the province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the town of Gull Lake and district. And I'd like to thank 

Caroline Selles for sending these today. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have gun 

petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray 

.

These petitions come from the Alida, Carievale, Weyburn, 

Carlyle area. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 

ownership. 

 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next move: 

 

 That an order of the Assembly do issue for return 

showing the total amount spent on construction projects 

by Saskatchewan Crown corporations for the last fiscal 

year with the information for each Crown listed 

separately. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This member from 

Regina Albert North is indeed honoured to be recognized. It is 

my pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, Jack Samuelson who is a 

constituent and a friend. Jack has been a long-time active in the 

Argyle Park area, and Jack and his wife Margaret have helped a 

great many people along the way. And I know that Jack has 

provided me with some good advice on an ongoing basis. I ask 

all members to join me in welcoming Jack Samuelson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 

to you, and through you to the legislature, a friend of mine and 

a constituent, Teresa Joki. She is sitting in the west gallery. And 

she is in Regina for meetings today. Teresa is a community-

minded person, has been a teacher, works in a small business, 

and is a great friend. So I want you to welcome her to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Recognition of Performance of Saskatchewan Athletes at 

Canada Winter Games 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

recognize all the Saskatchewan athletes for their fine showing 

at the Canada Winter Games in Grande Prairie, Alberta. 

 

The games came to a close during the weekend, but not before 



March 6, 1995 

 

632 

Saskatchewan won 32 medals, including 13 gold, 11 silver, and 

8 bronze. That was good enough for Team Saskatchewan to end 

up with fifth place finish in total points, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

remarkable accomplishment when you consider the population 

base we have to draw on, compared to some of the other 

provinces in the competition. 

 

Five Team Saskatchewan boxers did exceptionally well on 

Friday, winning three gold medals and two silver. On Saturday, 

the Saskatchewan women's hockey team was awarded the silver 

medal. 

 

I'm sure we'll be hearing the names of many of the Team 

Saskatchewan athletes in the future, as they pursue their goals, 

and perhaps there may be some future Olympians who 

developed their skills from experience in Grande Prairie. 

 

The next winter games will be in Corner Brook, Newfoundland, 

in 1999, and I know Saskatchewan will be a force to be 

reckoned with. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another miracle 

took place in Saskatchewan yesterday. I'm referring to the 

Kinsmen Telemiracle telethon, which has raised approximately 

$2.5 million in pledges. When the telethon went off the air 

yesterday at 5 o'clock, $2,451,783 was pledged. That figure 

represents the highest total ever in the 19-year history of 

Telemiracle. 

 

Raising $2.5 million in Saskatchewan through a telethon is 

quite a remarkable feat. It represents $2.50 for every man, 

woman, and child in Saskatchewan. The people of 

Saskatchewan are to be congratulated for their generosity and 

imagination in helping to raise this money which will benefit 

Saskatchewan children and adults with physical and mental 

disabilities. 

 

Whether it is an ultra-light wheelchair for a child or a new and 

innovative renal unit to help people with their own dialysis, 

Telemiracle funds are being put to good use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Kinsmen and 

Kinette clubs of Saskatchewan, all of the organizers of 

Telemiracle 19, and the 2,000 volunteers who made sure the 20-

hour telethon went smoothly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Formation of Touchwood Hills Regional Economic 

Development Authority 

 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

economic development in my riding has been given a boost 

with the formation of the Touchwood Hills Regional Economic 

Development Authority. 

 

I had the pleasure of attending a ceremony last Wednesday 

which announced the formation of this Authority. Its founding 

members include nine rural municipalities, the towns of Cupar, 

Ituna, Southey, and the villages of Dysart, Hubbard, Kelliher, 

and Leross. Associate members include the Crossroads Rural 

Development Corporation and Carlton Trail Regional College. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the 10th REDA (regional economic 

development authority) to be formed in Saskatchewan, and all 

of them are helping rural areas reap the benefit of the economic 

recovery which is taking place across Saskatchewan. 

 

The members of this Touchwood Hills REDA will be pooling 

their resources in the spirit of cooperation to encourage new 

jobs and new investment. This collaboration will mean more 

opportunities for these communities and an enhanced quality of 

life. 

 

I would like to congratulate all the partners involved in forming 

this economic development authority and offer my best wishes 

to the officials and the board members who will promote the 

economy of this region. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

South Central Regional Winter Games 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The South Central 

Regional Winter Games were hosted by the town of Herbert 

this past weekend. And they included some interesting activities 

like hockey, curling, table tennis, floor shuffle-board, table 

shuffle-board, Boston billiards, the volleyball, cribbage, whist, 

and they concluded yesterday with an ice show. 

 

And they had some special demonstrations that included 

painting by a local artist, Joyce Cornelson. She's a water-colour 

painter, demonstrated that. There was ostrich egg art 

demonstrated by Kathy Seamans, painting ostrich eggs and 

displaying them for purchase. Quilting by Katherine Janke. And 

then Ruth Bakus from Morse was good enough to put together a 

wool and other fibre guild show where they demonstrated how 

they took the product from the raw wool and made garments out 

of it. 

 

This whole community effort was coordinated by the chairman, 

Jake Dyck; co-chairman, Rhonda Ens; secretary, Cynthia Firus; 

and treasurer, Sandra MacArthur. Committee members were 

Krista Rutledge and Dennis Kehler. 

 

I want to say that the people in that community are to be 

complimented for hosting the winter games. And I think they're 

to be complimented for the way they did it and the kindness and 

the consideration they showed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 6, 1995 

 

633 

RCMP First Nations Community Policing Service 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I've spoken many 

times in this legislature of the Meadow Lake Provincial Park. 

On the eastern border of the park is the Waterhen First nation 

Reserve. And recently an important milestone was reached 

which affects both the park and the people of Waterhen. 

 

After years of planning and negotiations with the federal 

government, our provincial government and the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Waterhen First Nation has 

established a policing unit. This unit is part of the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) first nations community 

policing service and is also a part of the Meadow Lake RCMP 

detachment. This is the third of such policing units in the 

province. The others are in File Hills and at Little Pine and 

Poundmaker. There is no doubt that more will follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this two-officer unit has its own facility on the 

Waterhen First Nation and one officer is already on duty. The 

second will join the unit in the spring. The unit will spend 80 

per cent of its time in the Waterhen community and the 

remainder of its time in the park. 

 

The constable on duty was raised in La Ronge and speaks Cree. 

His initial duty is to re-establish communication between 

aboriginal people and the police. To assist in this endeavour the 

police management board as well as the officers will consult 

with elders who will provide spiritual and cultural advice. The 

official opening will take place this spring but the unit is 

already active, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I congratulate Chief Richard Fiddler, his councillors, the board, 

the RCMP, and Constable Mirasty for their innovative efforts in 

creating effective and appropriate community policing. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning is for the minister responsible for CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). And I'd 

like to start this morning, Mr. Speaker, by noting that I made a 

mistake on Friday, and unlike the Minister of Social Services, I 

am willing to admit that I do make mistakes. 

 

On Friday, Mr. Speaker, I said that I had a list of 260 

Saskatchewan companies opposed to the union-preference 

tendering. That figure, sir, was wrong. There are actually 337 

companies on that list and I expect that list will continue to 

grow in the days ahead. 

 

Mr. Minister, way in the back of the agreement is a new entity 

called the Construction Opportunities Development Council 

Inc.. 

 

Now none of the industry people we have spoken to seem to 

know what this is. So, Mr. Minister, who is on this council and 

what is its purpose? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 

respond to the member opposite asking about the Crown 

corporation Construction Tendering Agreement today because 

I'm always pleased to respond to questions dealing with a policy 

that will maximize a number of Saskatchewans working on 

Saskatchewan construction sites. 

 

But in order to make this agreement work effectively, Mr. 

Speaker; in order to be able to review the agreement and its 

implementation; and at the end of this season — as I indicated 

in my statement to the press and to the House — it will be 

reviewed again to see if there are any things that need to be 

amended; there is the council which will be playing this role. It 

will have representation on it from the construction industry. It 

will have representation on it from the trade union sector. And 

it will have representation on it from the Crown sector, in order 

that we are able to review this adequately. 

 

And in some cases there will be the need to provide some 

arbitration where there is . . . or mediation where there are some 

disagreements on the application of the agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, first 

of all when you hire through a union hall in Regina, that doesn't 

necessarily mean that those are Saskatchewan jobs. In fact the 

reality is that a lot of those workers will come in from Manitoba 

and Alberta and they'll apply for jobs through the union hall 

here and they will get the employment. 

 

Mr. Minister, the purpose of this council that we've been talking 

about is to collect and administer a 21-cent-an-hour payroll tax 

from all companies working on Crown contracts. According to 

the contract, this money is to create, support, and promote 

programs to continually enhance the unionized construction 

product. 

 

Now that's pretty vague, Mr. Minister. What exactly does that 

mean? More union organizing; contributions to the NDP (New 

Democratic Party)? Mr. Minister, you can call this fund 

whatever you want. But in Saturday's paper, the editorial from 

the Leader-Post hit the nail right on the head, and they called it 

a union slush fund. Now that's what it is, Mr. Minister, isn't it? 

Now why did you negotiate a union slush fund into your new 

union patronage tendering policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

member opposite would like to put his own titles and 



March 6, 1995 

 

634 

definitions on these things. But I want to say to him that that is 

not the purpose of the fund. I think he knows that. 

 

Clearly the construction labour relations association is going to 

have to incur some expense in providing information to the 

non-unionized contractors on the contracts that are there, the 

terms of the agreements that are there between management and 

the workers, and therefore some of this fund is designated to be 

able to defray some of that cost. I see nothing wrong with that. 

 

I think it's a positive and important contribution to defraying 

those costs because it will help everybody. It will help this 

agreement work effectively. It will help the construction 

industry know what the terms are so that they can meet them in 

preparing the tendering proposals. And I think in the end 

everybody will benefit. 

 

But most of all, Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan workers and 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are going to benefit because we are 

going to have for the first time a clearly defined tendering 

process in which the lowest bidder is going to qualify without 

any question at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Minister, your new 

tendering policy is the ultimate in political patronage. First, 

unionized workers are guaranteed a majority of the jobs even 

though they make up a minority of the workers. In fact non-

union workers will be prohibited from even applying for 75 per 

cent of the jobs on government construction sites. Then you 

force employers to pay a payroll tax of 21 cents an hour. 

 

Now you put that money into the union slush fund, obviously. 

This is nothing more than an elaborate kickback scheme and a 

political pay-off for your union leaders and your friends. As one 

contractor said in Sunday's paper — or Saturday's paper rather 

— it's really fraud. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you admit that's exactly what this union 

patronage policy is — an elaborate fraud on the people of 

Saskatchewan? Or will you rescind this disgraceful policy, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know, I know 

that the Conservative members opposite — and the Liberals are 

very rapidly catching up — are the experts on patronage. If you 

look at the history of the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, with the George 

Hills and the Guy Montpetits and the door company and 

Supercart company, where people could come and visit with the 

former premier with an empty briefcase and leave his office 

with a full briefcase of money, they would know a great deal 

about patronage. 

 

That is not the way this government operates, Mr. Speaker. We 

operate on the basis of lowest qualified bidder. That's what this 

policy does. It's going to be the lowest qualified bidder. It's 

going to maximize Saskatchewan employees on the workplace 

in Saskatchewan, something which has never been before, 

because many contractors in the past brought the workers in 

from places like Alberta and Manitoba. Nothing wrong with 

that, but in my personal opinion Saskatchewan workers should 

have first preference whenever possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 

is to the Premier. My colleague from Maple Creek has 

identified the world's largest pork barrel with room enough in it 

for the Premier, his cabinet, his MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), and all the union leaders in the 

province. It's blatant and it's shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to address another sad example of 

NDP political indulgence, and that is the organized patronage 

that has been rampant in the NDP administration. 

 

My question is to the Premier: Mr. Premier, can you tell me 

what the criteria was for hiring individuals to the position of 

returning officers? More specifically, what was your quota for 

hiring people with connections to the NDP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to tell 

the member for Morse that there are no quotas. The people who 

are hired as returning officers are hired in the same way as they 

have been. They are hired on the basis of their ability to 

perform in that particular function. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that in order for the democratic 

process to operate effectively, the people who do the work as 

clerks and as deputy returning officers and as returning officers 

have to be qualified and capable. 

 

I can assure the members opposite and you, Mr. Speaker, that 

the people who have been appointed as chief electoral officers 

in the constituencies are qualified and will serve the candidates 

and the public and the voters very well when the election 

campaign comes forward. And it may be any time between now 

and the spring of 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, your pay-offs to the unions are 

an insult and your pay-offs to the NDP supporters is equally 

obscene. 

 

Mr. Minister, the list of individuals hired as returning officers 

reads like the guest list at Tommy Douglas House. With just a 

cursory glance, we have identified 22 NDP supporters 

appointed by the Premier. I'm sure that the final tally will equal 

58 out of 58. 



March 6, 1995 

 

635 

Mr. Minister, whether it's pay-offs to unions or jobs to the 

NDP, you haven't changed your tune. Mr. Minister, is it not 

time for you to recognize that this kind of patronage must be 

taken out of the hands of politicians? Would you agree to 

passing our Bill which will see patronage and partisan 

patronage brought under control? Will you do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I am not an expert on the 

Bible, but I do remember something terrible about getting 

struck by lightning on the way to Damascus and I suppose, Mr. 

Speaker, that that could adequately apply to the member 

opposite. 

 

Having sat on this side of the House for a number of years on 

the part of a government that probably discredited the process 

of government more than any I have every known as long as I 

have been alive and old enough to understand what the political 

process is all about, Mr. Speaker, I think it does not say much 

for having him the spokesman for that group get up and say 

somehow they have the answer to reducing patronage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has introduced more democratic 

reform in this legislature than any other government before it. 

I'm not going to repeat the list but if the member wants me, I 

can. And I think that stands well for the interest of this 

government to make sure that the democratic system is working 

and people who are qualified are appointed to positions of 

responsibility in the administration of government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, your blatant 

patronage is obvious to everybody but you. You may talk about 

the past, but you are in government now, you can do something 

about it. And as the Deputy Premier . . . as the Premier 

promised from time to time again, that's what he said he would 

do. 

 

Instead of starting up to throw blame at everybody else you are 

caught with your hand in the cookie jar or the pork barrel. You 

don't recognize the problem or do you act on it. Let's start with 

hiring your buddy, David Dombowsky, to head the new 

division of SaskPower. Then appointing the former 

administrator for the New Democratic Party at the former T.C. 

Douglas House, a woman by the name of Debbie Kajati, to 

work with Mr. Dombowsky. Was there competition for that 

position, Mr. Minister? 

 

So let's start with the baby steps. Why don't you start by 

initiating some response in this Legislative Assembly where all 

the people of this Assembly can be a part of that discussion? 

Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want the member 

opposite to know — and I repeat again because there really is 

no other answer — that people who are appointed under this 

administration will sometimes be New Democrats. 

 

And that's not because there is some hidden motive to appoint 

people because they're New Democrats, as is obviously the 

policy of the Liberal Party in their pronouncements and 

statements, even by the Leader of the Liberal Party; or as has 

been the policy of the Conservative Party, because their recent 

record shows very clearly what approach they would use. 

 

The approach of this government is to appoint people to boards 

and commissions, to hire people in places of administration, on 

the basis of quality, expertise, ability to do the job. That's the 

way that this government operates and that's the way it's going 

to operate because that's the most effective way to run 

administration of government in the interests of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Spending 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government claims to be reformers of the health care system. 

The fact remains that they are spending more on health care 

today to deliver fewer and poorer quality services than they did 

in 1992 before they supposedly starting fixing the system. 

 

Can the minister please explain how his government spent $1.5 

billion on health care in 1992 — $1.5 billion that was operating 

52 hospitals that are now closed; $1.5 billion that was paying 

hundreds of front-line workers who no longer have jobs; $1.5 

billion that was providing services to people in communities 

who have no services today? Can you, Mr. Minister, explain 

how all of those changes could possibly result in your 

government spending more money in health care today than you 

did in 1992? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I'm very happy to try and 

explain to the Leader of the Third Party how health is financed 

in the province, as I tried to explain to some of the opposition 

colleagues in the official opposition the other night. Had health 

care spending, Mr. Speaker, continued on the track it was on 

through the 1980s, the track that we inherited in 1991, we 

would be spending today in the province of Saskatchewan not 

1.5 but $1.9 billion dollars — $400 million more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think even the high-spending Leader of the 

Liberal Party would know that that, in the Saskatchewan 

context, is not sustainable. We simply could not sustain it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Greystone is concerned 

about the financing of health care, I hope that she has addressed 

this concern to her cousins in Ottawa, as they talk about 

slashing health care spending across the country and, going 

further than that, adopting the Reform Party platform of doing 

block funding. 



March 6, 1995 

 

636 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I've just been meeting with surgeons, with nurses, and 

with people who have been recipients of health care in this 

province. And it's most interesting, Mr. Speaker, that there's a 

consistent message that people have been giving. I'm wondering 

why it is the Minister of Health has not been talking to these 

same people. 

 

In fact what we find out is there are very, very unhappy health 

care providers, there are disgusted surgeons and physicians, and 

there are very frightened people, sick people, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. A mother in Carlyle had to go back to work just 

for one purpose, and that was because of the increased cost to 

her family for diabetic care of one of her children. 

 

To the minister: can you explain how more people's income is 

going to pay for necessities like insulin and yet more of their tax 

dollars are going to pay for a diminished health care system? 

Please explain that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what we have been doing 

in Saskatchewan and pioneering across Canada, if not across 

the world, is taking what are arguably more limited resources 

for health care and directing them to where the need is greatest, 

Mr. Speaker. And we've come a long way in that regard. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the member of the third party, 

the Leader of the Third Party, will she tell us today what 

communication she has had with the federal government as they 

talk about . . . her federal leader talks about taking seven and a 

half billion dollars out of health care funding across Canada — 

seven and one-half billion dollars — so that they will threaten, 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party of Canada will threaten the very 

cores of medicare. 

 

I wonder if she has communicated with her federal leader on 

this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

usual, Mr. Speaker, we have ministers who are either unwilling 

or not capable of answering a question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, I spent Friday and much of this 

weekend yet again speaking to the surgeons of this province, 

speaking to doctors in this province, family physicians, 

speaking to health care providers in this province, and speaking 

to individuals receiving health care. The bottom line, in the 

view of all of these people, Mr. Speaker, is offloading onto the 

people of Saskatchewan and doing nothing but having a health 

care system that increases the number of bureaucrats and 

administrators. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you table before the members of this House 

the cost of administering the Department of Health and the 

health boards before your government's reforms and what the 

costs are now to the Department of Health, including the costs 

of all the district health boards? 

 

It's very curious, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, that no one 

seems to be able to find this information in anything that you're 

providing. Will you table it, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I invite the member 

. . . we will be involved in the process of estimates later this 

day. I invite the member to attend once in a while to estimates, 

and we can have these discussions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share with the 

House a number of comments that have been made by leading 

health care professionals in our province and outside of our 

province, regarding the federal Liberal government plan to not 

only cut health care spending across Canada dramatically but to 

move us into a process of block funding. 

 

Professor Allen Backman, University of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatoon. He says, and I quote: I think the federal government 

has sold our legacy down the river. 

 

The president of the Canadian Hospitals Association, the 

president of the Canadian Hospitals Association says that block 

funding, the Liberal plan, signals the end of a federal role in 

medicare. 

 

Dr. Léo-Paul Landry, secretary-general, Canadian Medical 

Association, in her own home town Star-Phoenix says: 

medicare was thrown out the door as a Canadian value when 

the budget (the Liberal budget, I say) was presented on 

Monday. 

 

And the Caledon Institute of Social Policy, again quoted in her 

home town paper, the Star-Phoenix, says: the declining cash 

transfers spell the end of medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that member . . . now we know the Liberal 

Party . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I've given the minister enough time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture Funding 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this afternoon is for the Premier or his designate. Mr. 

Speaker, a recent tradition in Saskatchewan has seen the 

premier of Saskatchewan going to bat in Ottawa for farm 

families. Whether it's been drought or frost or low commodity 

prices resulting from international tariffs, the premier went to 

the Prime Minister in Ottawa and came back with billions of 

dollars in aid to help producers through tough times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears the current Premier has reversed that 



March 6, 1995 

 

637 

trend. Whenever he goes to Ottawa, the billions of dollars now 

flow the other way. I can understand why he tried to keep that 

secret. My question is to the Premier or the Deputy Premier. 

Your lobbying efforts on behalf of Saskatchewan farm families 

have been disastrous. You led the way in federal cuts in 

agriculture. Now you've feigned outrage about the changes in 

the Crow payment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, what exactly did your government 

accomplish in Ottawa, or should we be afraid that you've 

cooked up another deal to take more money away from 

Saskatchewan farm families? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this seems to be a 

question from a member, the Leader of the Official Opposition, 

who sometime last week made it very clear that the former 

Conservative government in Ottawa, Mr. Mayer had offered $7 

billion for the Crow rate when that government was in power; 

only two days later to have Mr. Mayer clearly indicate that he 

had never offered such an offer officially. 

 

I know that the member from Saskatoon the other day indicated 

to the Leader of the Opposition to at least apologize for that 

error, as the member behind him has indicated on his other 

question. I want to say to him that we have stood four square 

behind the farmers of Saskatchewan on the Crow rate question, 

Mr. Speaker, and we continue to do that. 

 

And the Premier went to Ottawa to speak to the Prime Minister 

about it  different than the Leader of the Liberal Party who 

has, on one day said, it's fair, on another day said it's not fair, 

and then voted for a resolution condemning because it wasn't 

fair, and on the weekend says it's fair again. 

 

And the Conservatives have always opposed the Crow rate, 

have proposed its demise, its arbitrary killing. Now that it's 

dead, somehow are pretending that they are supporters of the 

Crow rate and the benefit to farmers, even in the absence of a 

transportation policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, 

like your Premier, you are responsible for the demise of the 

GRIP (gross revenue income program) program and the 

pilfering of $188 million from farm families in this province. 

 

And like the Premier, Mr. Minister, you and your Liberal 

counterparts, you met with the counterparts over the weekend. 

Given your track record, I'm wondering how much more money 

you'll be taking from farm families across this province as a 

result of your meeting over the weekend. Can you tell the farm 

families in this province how much more they can expect to 

have taken from them and their GRIP program and directed 

towards the federal government or towards general revenue in 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me remind, Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Kindersley, the Leader of the Official Opposition, 

that it was under Conservative administrations when the process 

of cutting the Crow 10 per cent a year originated with the full 

support of that gentleman who was then premier, and all of the 

members on that side of the House when they were over here — 

10 cent a year which was a slow, painful . . . 10 per cent a year, 

Mr. Speaker, which was a slow, painful death to the Crow. 

 

The only thing that has changed under a Liberal administration 

is that there has been an arbitrary killing of the Crow without 

any thought about the need to replace it for a transportation 

policy or even the thought of an idea of what a new 

transportation policy might be. 

 

That is one of the things that's wrong here, Mr. Speaker — two 

old-line parties determined to kill the Crow without any policy 

direction behind it, only to the detriment of western Canadian 

agriculture and western farmers. And both of them should be 

ashamed of themselves for betraying the Saskatchewan farmer 

in that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, if 

you want to see where the destruction of agriculture took place 

in this province, just look two seats to your left, sir. That's 

where it started; that's where it started in 1991 with the 

destruction of the GRIP program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Every farmer in this province knows exactly 

where that started. 

 

On the weekend you met with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture. We'd like to know what the discussions were, Mr. 

Deputy Premier. Did you talk about the overall package and the 

inadequacy of that package? Did you talk about where that 

money was being directed at? Did you also talk about now we 

see Ontario and Quebec farmers looking for part of this 

payment? Did you discuss any of those things with the federal 

Minister of Agriculture? Try and give the farm families of this 

province some comfort in knowing that you people are at least 

trying to do something on their behalf. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the farm 

families of this province know very clearly who has been from 

day one over the years standing up on their behalf when it 

comes to the question of an adequate transportation policy. It 

hasn't been Conservatives, and it hasn't been Liberals because 

the Conservatives started the destruction of it, and the Liberals 

finished it. That's the only difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before the Crow was killed, it was this New Democratic Party 

government who led the battle while the members opposite 



March 6, 1995 

 

638 

were totally silent. And now that the Crow is killed, Mr. 

Speaker, it is only this New Democratic Party government who 

is carrying that battle on the farmers' behalf to Ottawa with the 

Prime Minster and with the Minister of Agriculture, while 

Liberals say it's fair that western farmers get cut a hundred per 

cent while eastern farmers get cut 30 per cent on dairy 

subsidies. And the Conservatives follow suit in trying to make 

up the ground that they've lost in the question period here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Premier, what farm families know in 1996 is that you're going 

to take another $115 million out of their pockets. You pilfered 

188. You're demanding back another 115 on GRIP repayments. 

That's 303. That's close to the 317 that the Liberals took 

because you let them take it, sir. 

 

Now in light of what's happened in the Crow, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are you going to now say to those farm families that 

we're not going to take that $115 million out of their pockets in 

1996 after you and the federal Liberals have been raping their 

pockets? Will you do that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

member from Thunder Creek, the former leader of the Official 

Opposition, that it is only in Saskatchewan where the highest 

percentage of the overall budget goes for agriculture; I believe 

it's about 10 per cent. 

 

That is far, far less by a long shot than the federal budget, far, 

far less than any other province in Canada. And to the means 

that are available to us and with policies which we have 

instituted with the changes to things like the GRIP . . . and I say 

that that was important because it is now made possible for 

Saskatchewan farmers to be able to farm the farm. And 

therefore we have had more diversification in the production in 

agriculture than ever in the history of Saskatchewan. And that's 

one of the reasons why this year farmers have record net farm 

incomes over any other year in the last decade or so, and 

therefore they are better off, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the gloom 

and doom of the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Cargill Canola Crushing Plant 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure this 

morning to be in Saskatoon to take part in an announcement 

that will have a very positive impact on the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Cargill has chosen to build its new $53 million 

canola crushing plant in the province. The plant will be located 

just outside of Saskatoon in the RM (rural municipality) of 

Blucher near Clavet. Construction is to begin this spring, and 

the plant will be completed and ready for processing after the 

1996 crop year. 

 

The plant will operate around the clock and have an initial 

capacity to crush 2,000 metric tons of canola a day. Mr. 

Speaker, that will make this canola crushing plant the largest of 

its kind in Canada. I am pleased also to point out that this plant 

will be the first of its kind in North America for Cargill which 

is the largest oil-seed crushing company in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this plant will be a big boost to our agricultural 

industry and to our local economy in general. It supports one of 

the goals of Ag 2000 strategy which is to encourage farmers to 

diversify. Canola has quickly become one of our most 

important crops, and we think this plant will enhance that even 

more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more farmers will be encouraged to grow canola 

because they'll have an assured market close to home. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I hate to interrupt the minister 

when he gives a ministerial statement, but the tradition in this 

House is that when a minister gives a ministerial statement, we 

at least have the courtesy to listen to that minister. You'll have 

an opportunity to respond later, and I ask members to quit 

interrupting and let the minister make his statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know there will be 

many people who haven't been able to hear because of the noise 

in the Assembly, but I won't start over; I'll try to carry on. 

 

This plant also supports one of the main goals under the 

Partnership for Renewal provincial economic strategy to add 

value to our agricultural products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has always been well known as an 

exporter of raw materials. But, Mr. Speaker, there are so many 

more benefits we can reap if we process more of those products 

here in Saskatchewan before we export them. Not only do we 

add to our dollar value of the product, but we also build up our 

manufacturing and processing base, and we create jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our recent budget we talked about the 

importance of encouraging projects like this canola crushing 

plant, so we can stop exporting processing jobs. We want to 

keep these valuable jobs in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Cargill plant will certainly do that. There will 

be 50 full-time jobs created at the plant, and about one hundred 

new trucking jobs created in the process. We expect 436 

person-years of employment during construction and another 

435 person-years in construction spin-offs. As well the plant 

could generate up to 400 other permanent spin-off jobs in the 

province. Cargill has promised to maximize Saskatchewan 

content wherever possible. 

 

(1415) 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Cargill's commitment to Saskatchewan 



March 6, 1995 

 

639 

doesn't end with this plant. In three to five years they intend to 

increase the plant's crushing capacity and then hopes to build a 

multimillion dollar refinery at that site. The refinery is expected 

to create another 75 jobs. It will also add even more value to the 

canola that has been brought and bought for processing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're very pleased about the job numbers because 

our main priority is to encourage and support job creation in 

and by the private sector. Our government's long-term ideal is 

to increase employment in the province. If we're to get there, it's 

going to take initiative on the part of companies like Cargill to 

invest in major projects like this one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're confident that Cargill's new canola crushing 

plant will be a success. We also look forward to seeing the 

company build the refinery in a few years. The projects are 

good news for Saskatchewan and we welcome Cargill to our 

growing business community here in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to take this opportunity to respond a little bit to the 

minister's announcement. And first of all to chastise him quite 

roundly for the bush-league operation you're running, sir. 

 

It has been the long tradition in this legislature for ministerial 

statements to be sent across so that the opposition has an 

opportunity to peruse them; and not three-quarters of the way 

through so we have no idea what you're talking about. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would chastise you for that and you 

smarten up a little bit with your operation, quite frankly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Having done that, Mr. Speaker, my reaction 

to the announcement: first of all, the actual practical 

announcement on behalf of the people in Corman Park, on 

behalf of the people in Blucher municipality, on behalf of the 

people who were at one time my constituents before the 

boundaries were changed, Mr. Speaker, these people are 

obviously extremely excited about this, as are we. 

 

And I think I would be remiss, I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, 

at the outset if I did not compliment Cargill and the citizens of 

this province for having the faith in the citizens of this province 

to establish such a business as this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2,000 tonnes of canola crushed per day on a 24-

hour basis is nothing to sneeze at — that is a substantial amount 

— with the potential for an additional refinery to be established, 

Mr. Speaker. Again, that is very positive for our area. 

 

The thing that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is the hypocrisy 

of that government over on the other side — absolute, abject 

hypocrisy. When we take a look at what the former government 

did with one of the bright Crown jewels in this government's 

pocket right now, is none other than Saferco, just west of 

Regina, the Cargill plant, Mr. Speaker, that has not cost the 

citizens of this province one penny, that has earned them 

money, Mr. Speaker, has earned them money, in the guarantee 

which they are paying percentages on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — That is the kind of precedent and that is the 

kind of forerunner that the previous government instituted to 

allow such things as this to happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are giving Cargill 3.9 millions of dollars — 

3.9 million. You shake your head . . . and it says the provincial 

government will provide Cargill with $3.9 million to help with 

capital cost — in your news release, in your news release, sir. 

So you are giving Cargill 3.9 to help them to diversify. 

 

My question to you is: does this mean UGG (United Grain 

Growers Limited), does this mean Pioneer, does this mean the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool will also be given that opportunity? 

Is this going to be expanded? That is the question that I ask you, 

sir. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. When the . . . order, order. 

When the Government House Leader was giving his ministerial 

statement, I asked members not to interrupt; I ask the 

Government House Leader now not to interrupt, and let the 

opposition make their statement. 

 

Order. I will warn the Government House Leader once more. 

Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the government over there is very, very sensitive 

because they know my words are the truth — that's the 

fundamental truth of the factor. One thing that we did is made 

sure that this province would never revert back to socialism — 

not even the socialists, sir, are able to do that, and your project 

today is welcome. 

 

Your announcement is welcome. This is exactly what this 

province needs — this type of investment. But for you to get up 

and the irony — and I'll close with these words, Mr. Speaker — 

the irony in your announcement is in your own press release 

that I just had a chance to look at while Mr. Speaker was 

chastising you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I'll take the 

next speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Regarding the minister's statement today, I would like to say 

that the Liberal caucus is absolutely delighted to see this value 

added industry in our province. 

 

It has been made very clear, Mr. Speaker, that this plant would 

not have taken place, would not be locating in the province of 

Saskatchewan, without the changes to in fact the Crow last 

week that were announced. 



March 6, 1995 

 

640 

It's interesting as well to note that Prairie Malt in Biggar today 

said precisely the same thing, that their $20 million expansion 

today is a direct result of the changes that were brought about as 

far as WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) is concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it most interesting, the response of the 

members opposite. Perhaps they would like to call the people in 

charge and ask them directly in fact what their points of view 

are. 

 

We are most interested in looking at the specific details of this 

agreement. In general, we could not be more pleased that a 

canola crushing plant is locating here. 

 

And we are most interested in the conversion of the NDP's 

views regarding Cargill, since in the past, Mr. Speaker, they 

insulted this company by calling them corporate welfare bums. 

 

So we find it most interesting that the members opposite have 

come to a very different conclusion, perhaps with some concern 

about their abysmal record, knowing that the private sector is 

most needed in this province, and perhaps they would stop 

insulting them in order to get them here. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, we would just like to reiterate that we're 

most pleased that Cargill is coming to Saskatchewan and that 

the canola crushing plant will be here for the benefit of our 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. With 

leave, I would like to make a brief statement on the passing of 

Bishop Mahoney. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is with great sadness that I rise regarding the passing 

of James Mahoney, Catholic Bishop of Saskatoon for the past 

27 years. 

 

Having said that, I know that Bishop Mahoney would have 

asked that this be an occasion to celebrate his life, and his 

contributions are worthy of celebration. And I think that today 

as we make our comments, we should think of that sentiment of 

Bishop Mahoney and the way he looked upon his life and the 

life of anybody who is put on this earth by God. 

 

Bishop Mahoney was a lifelong resident of Saskatoon, and he 

served not only his faith, but all citizens. He was known as a 

community builder whose humour and compassion touched all 

of us. 

Born in Saskatoon, Bishop Mahoney first served his faith as an 

altar boy and was present at the installation of Saskatoon's first 

bishop, Bishop Murray, in 1934. He was ordained in 1952 and 

received an education degree in 1953. He taught at St. Paul's 

Elementary and E.D. Feehan High School and was also the first 

principal of Holy Cross High School. 

 

In 1967 he was named bishop of the Saskatoon diocese and at 

that time was the youngest member of the Canadian Catholic 

hierarchy. 

 

Beyond his role as a priest and as a teacher and leader, Bishop 

Mahoney was active in foreign missions, in education, health 

care, and church ministry to the disadvantaged. 

 

He also dearly loved children and greatly enjoyed officiating at 

the sacrament of confirmation, sharing the conviction of his 

faith and his great sense of humour with young adults. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prayer services and vigils will be held today and 

tomorrow at St. Paul's Cathedral. The funeral liturgy will be 

held at St. Patrick's Church at 10 a.m. tomorrow with interment 

to follow at Woodlawn Cemetery. 

 

Bishop Mahoney taught well. He laughed heartily, and he was 

loved by all of those lives that he touched. And I know that you 

will join with me and other members today to offer our 

condolences to the citizens of Saskatoon and Catholics 

everywhere. Their loss is the hereafter's gain. His life with us 

has made all of us the richer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Deputy Premier in saying a few words with respect to 

the passing of Bishop James Patrick Mahoney. 

 

My wife Chantal and I had the opportunity to share several 

moments and very good times with Bishop Mahoney, and 

particularly enjoyed his sense of humour. He could give a very 

entertaining speech and always had a message with it. And I've 

never heard him speak in the past without telling a story and 

converting a parable into a particular message and adding his 

own certain Irish wit to the situation. 

 

As was mentioned, he was an excellent teacher, involved in 

schools, with children, with educators. He was on the executive 

of the church and a leading member of the executive in the 

Roman Catholic Church. He was a builder. 

 

And I have a great deal of respect for the two people that 

commented about Bishop Mahoney in the newspaper today, and 

that's the former mayor of Saskatoon, Cliff Wright, and Walter 

Podiluk, former deputy minister of Health in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And both these people are respected for their 

own careers. And then those two people describing the sense of 

excitement, the sense of the size of the man who contributed to 

not only to Saskatoon but to the province and indeed to the 

country, and his missionary activities world-wide, speaks 

highly, very highly of an individual that we'll all miss. 



March 6, 1995 

 

641 

I couldn't help but think that Bishop Mahoney might in some 

ways represent the perfect Santa Claus because of his stature 

and because of his jolly nature. He was a huge man and enjoyed 

life, enjoyed entertaining people, was not afraid to challenge 

life and to build, but he was so compassionate. We will miss 

him very much. The city of Saskatoon will dearly miss him, and 

those in the Catholic Church will feel the loss probably more 

than many. 

 

So to all of those who knew him and to those involved in the 

church that will miss him, our sincerest condolences. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join the Deputy Premier and the member from Estevan, the 

former premier, this afternoon in paying tribute to the life and 

work of the Most Rev. James Patrick Mahoney, Roman 

Catholic Bishop of Saskatoon, who passed away on March 2. 

 

Those of us who knew Bishop Mahoney knew him as a devoted 

and compassionate man whose faith went far beyond his 

religion. He was well known for his keen sense of humour 

which he used very effectively to communicate his ideas and 

opinions. He was an entertaining orator whom I admired very 

much for his ability to convey his strong beliefs. 

 

Slightly less than one year ago I was greatly impressed by 

Bishop Mahoney's eulogy to his good friend, Most Rev. Charles 

Halpin, Bishop of Regina, who passed away last April. Through 

his words in celebration of the life of Bishop Halpin, Bishop 

Mahoney gave us true insight into the side of this man that 

might not otherwise have been known to most of us. And now 

only 10 months later we are paying homage to another great 

religious and community leader. 

 

Bishop Mahoney's loss will leave a great void in Saskatoon as 

well as in our province. His dedication to so many worthy and 

noble causes, such as St. Paul's Hospital, to Sherbrooke 

Community Centre, and the United Way, was one of his 

trademarks and one of the areas where his absence will be 

deeply missed. 

 

I extend my sympathies to Bishop Mahoney's religious family 

as well as to his surviving relatives: his sister Margaret of 

Vancouver; his sister-in-law Jean of Regina; his nephews, Ron, 

Ross, and James and their families of Regina; and his niece, 

Maureen Stinnen, and her family of Regina. The loss of this 

great man and leader is one that will be felt deeply by all. 

 

(1430) 

 

The Speaker: — I wonder if members would permit me to say 

a few words. 

 

I've known Bishop Mahoney probably longer than anybody in 

this House and worked with him for many, many years. I first 

got to know Bishop Mahoney back in 1956 when I attended 

teacher's college in Saskatoon — that's almost 38 years ago. 

And as has been mentioned, Bishop Mahoney was a man who 

enjoyed life. He enjoyed people; he particularly enjoyed 

children. 

 

I think I along with many Catholics throughout Saskatchewan 

and throughout Canada have lost a very dear friend. We have 

also lost a shepherd of our church. Bishop Mahoney was always 

there to help you, to help the underprivileged, and to make sure 

that his priests and his sisters always felt at home in the church. 

 

But I think the greatest attribute of Bishop Mahoney probably 

was his outreach to other churches, to other people. Everybody 

felt at home when they were around Bishop Mahoney. He didn't 

limit himself to the Catholic Church, although he was our 

shepherd. 

 

I got to know Bishop Mahoney very well when he was the 

principal of Holy Cross High School and I was principal of St. 

Phillip School, and I always looked forward to our principals' 

meetings when Bishop Mahoney could attend because if there 

was ever a serious subject and we got too serious about it, 

Bishop Mahoney was always there to break things up, to make 

us laugh at ourselves and our mistakes. And I appreciated that 

of Bishop Mahoney. 

 

I think Bishop Mahoney took it very hard when his brother John 

passed away about a month ago. Brother John came to visit him 

in Saskatoon when James was very ill and his brother suffered a 

heart attack and died. And his sister, Margaret, certainly must 

receive our condolences and our sincere prayers at losing two 

brothers within a month's time. 

 

Certainly Bishop James will be missed not only by myself and 

my family, but by the people of Saskatoon and, I think, the 

people of Saskatchewan. To Margaret and his personal family 

and his extended family of all people who believe in the 

Christian faith and otherwise, we extend our condolences and 

wish him well. I know his prayers will be with us. And he 

doesn't want us to be too serious about this, and I'm sure that 

Bishop Mahoney right now will be smiling down at us as we 

look upon his death and as he goes on to his eternal life. 

 

Thank you. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question 56, I hereby table the responses. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 9 — An Act to 

amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act



March 6, 1995 

 

642 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well when 

you look at the name of this initially, Mr. Speaker, you get a 

warm and fuzzy feeling out of it — Environmental 

Management and Protection Act. You know and you think, well 

gee, this is great, the government's doing something to protect 

our environment. 

 

Everybody throughout the '80s was always saying, we need 

more environmental protection. Well, Mr. Speaker, this does go 

some way to provide that, but it also has some downsides 

involved in it too, which I think need to be explained a little 

more, which the government needs some questioning on. 

 

This Bill deals mainly, according to the government, with the 

collection and recycling of used oils — motor oils, etc., Mr. 

Speaker. And since this is mainly an agricultural province, also 

because we have 25 per cent of the roads in Canada, we use a 

lot of motor oils in this province, Mr. Speaker. We use a lot of 

hydrocarbons. And it has been a problem over the years, what 

to do with these used motor oils when we're through with them. 

 

Now up until the last few years, it has generally been acceptable 

to dispose of them by perhaps dumping them on the road or 

using them as methods for treating animals and various other 

methods — people used them to burn their garbage with even, 

Mr. Speaker. And the result has been that we have increased the 

pollution in this province by our various methods of disposal. 

 

So the government has come along and said that they will put in 

place a form of collection and a recycling process, but it will be 

left up to business to carry out this whole procedure. What the 

government has done in this, in setting this up, has given 

someone the power, and we're not entirely sure exactly who this 

power has been given to, whether it will be left into the hands 

of industry which is being mandated to do this, or whether the 

government themselves will keep control of it, and having 

viewed the various things that this government has done in the 

last three and a half years, I suspect very greatly, Mr. Speaker, 

that the power that I'm talking about will be retained firmly in 

the hands of the Minister of the Environment and the 

government opposite. 

 

And that power that I speak of, Mr. Speaker, is the power to 

prescribe to provide the definitions of products which will be 

subjected to this industry-run disposal and recycling program. 

Whomever it might be, the government will say this particular 

product, Mr. Speaker, is deemed to be covered under this Act 

and will be treated accordingly. And it will not necessarily be 

done in consultation, it will be done by the body that is put in 

place by the government to do so, and may or may not be 

relevant to the demands of the day, Mr. Speaker. So that is one 

of the areas in which there is some serious concerns on how this 

particular Act will deal with those. 

 

It makes the manufacturer of the product responsible from its 

inception to its disposal. And how does that work, Mr. 

Speaker? How do you make the manufacturer responsible all 

the way along the line for it? 

 

In the Leader-Post of February 14 this year, they comment in 

here, and I quote: 

 

 The network, which will ensure manufacturers of oil 

and oil-related products are responsible for their product 

through its entire life cycle, will be entirely industry-run 

and managed. 

 

Well it's good that it's industry run and managed, Mr. Speaker, 

but how is that particular manufacturer to be responsible for the 

product from the time it comes out of the ground — in the case 

of oil — goes through the refinery process, is sold to a retailer, 

is sold out of the garage to the homeowner who puts it in his 

car, and the homeowner then turns around and does something 

with it. Well under this legislation the homeowner is supposed 

to turn around and turn it back in to have it recycled. 

 

But the person who originally manufactured it — I'm assuming 

it's manufactured into the final oil product, the quart of oil that 

you buy to put into your car — is going to be responsible for it 

from the point on that it comes out of his refining facility, goes 

on transportation, goes to the retailer, goes to the consumer, and 

comes back again. According to what the minister is saying, the 

manufacturer is going to be responsible all along the way. 

 

So does that mean if I, as Joe Consumer, decide that it's easier 

for me to pull the plug out of my oil pan and let it drain on the 

ground, that the person whose oil I'm using, the company name 

that was on that oil, is responsible for it? 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it should be the consumer 

that's responsible if they are the ones who cause the problem 

with it, not the original manufacturer. And as the minister has 

this laid out, he's making the manufacturer of it responsible. 

 

I guess it's a lot easier to point fingers at the big, bad oil 

companies than it is at the consumers. Because when you have 

a million consumers in this province, that's a lot of people to go 

after. But when you have only one oil refinery in Saskatchewan 

that's making oil, that's pretty easy to go after. 

 

And I'm not too sure that the Co-op refinery in Regina wants to 

assume the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, of every consumer in 

this province that buys oil. I'm sure that the other companies 

that are selling oil, such as Turbo or Esso or whomever it might 

be, are no more interested in assuming all of that responsibility 

for the consumers than the Co-op would be. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that's another area where this particular piece of legislation 

definitely needs to be tightened up. 

 

We're wondering, Mr. Speaker, just how industry will be . . . 

how loosely industry will be allowed to regulate and operate 

this program. The minister says that it will be industry 

sponsored and initiated. But how loosely or how tightly will the 

regulations be on it? How loose or how tight will the minister 

make the designation of products that will be influenced by 



March 6, 1995 

 

643 

this? Will this include antifreezes? Will it include cleaning 

solvents that are used in auto body shops? All of these are a 

problem also, Mr. Speaker. And will they also be included? 

And who will decide? 

 

The program gives general regulatory supervision to the 

government. But again you have to ask: how loose or how tight 

will those regulations be? And when the government adds on 

new costs to the program, which happens whenever the 

government is building an empire, Mr. Speaker — there's 

always more costs in either for the consumer or the taxpayer — 

where is the limit to it? 

 

The government is going to require that industry submit reports 

on the progress that they've made or how much they're selling, 

perhaps. No one knows for sure what these reports are going to 

entail. Is the industry going to have to outline that we've sold in 

the past month a million litres of motor oil and antifreeze and 

solvents, Varsol, whatever else they might be selling? And how 

much have you taken in to dispose of? I mean there is a lot of 

room left here, Mr. Speaker, for a lot of unfortunate 

occurrences to be happening. 

 

There's also the very important issue, Mr. Speaker, of how do 

the consumers use this. How do the farmers deal with this used 

motor oil? I know a good many farmers that have barrels of 

used motor oil sitting around on their farms right now, because 

they are environmentally aware and they're conscious that to 

simply dispose of this oil in an irresponsible manner will do 

harm to their environment. 

 

And the farmers, Mr. Speaker, are very concerned with the 

environment, although some people would suggest that they are 

perhaps somewhat lacking in that area. The farmers are the 

people that have to make their living off the land. They know 

that they have to maintain it for a long period of time, not just 

for the next year, the next five years, ten years, but they have to 

maintain it for generations. 

 

And so those farmers have indeed kept their used motor oil, 

have stored it. But what do they do with it now? Is the company 

that they originally bought it from going to be responsible? 

Who pays to have it picked up at their farm? Are they going to 

be paid for that oil or are they going to have to pay somebody 

else for it to dispose of it? Again, all these questions. 

 

Small gas station owners are in the same boat. Somebody 

comes in for an oil change. Now they can charge the consumer 

for it, but that just drives up the costs again, Mr. Speaker, and 

the cost in Saskatchewan to live and to operate a business are 

already too high. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, who pays? And how soon will this program 

get up and running? How many impediments and roadblocks 

will be put in the way for the industry that the minister is 

speaking of to get this up and rolling? 

 

I know of a number of companies that are already doing it, a 

number of companies that already want to get into the business, 

and yet they have been hampered by the Department of the 

Environment for doing so. People that have tried to go out and 

set up recycling and collection centres have been impeded. 

 

And just how soon will this whole program get going? Because 

as I said earlier, a number of people, including farmers, are 

already storing a large amount of this oil on their premises. 

 

It's generally welcome, though, that the government has let 

industry hopefully do the regulation, rather than creating an 

intrusive bureaucracy. If the government is going to come in 

and tell them each and every little dot on the i's and crosses on 

the t's, Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a very high cost and 

bureaucratic process and will not, in the long run, benefit the 

environment. Because the more rules you put in place, the more 

roadblocks you put in place, the less people are prepared to 

accept it and to work with it, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. Allan Rock 

is going to find that out. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the government should be commended — 

commended. I know that the minister is listening, only half-

listening on this, but I will say it again, that the government 

should be commended for consulting with industry. They have 

gone out and consulted with some of the stakeholders in this, 

Mr. Speaker. And that's all very good. But when you consult, 

Mr. Speaker, you also have to listen. 

 

(1445) 

 

It's just a matter of . . . not a matter of going out and talking; it's 

a matter of listening also. And we'll be paying very close 

attention to whether or not the minister has indeed listened to 

those consultations. 

 

It's very unclear, Mr. Speaker, how this program will be funded; 

whether industry will have to pay, whether consumers will have 

to pay, or whether the government is providing any funding for 

this. Those were some more of the questions that we'll be 

asking the minister when the time comes. 

 

One of the things that has to be watched very carefully on this 

though, is if it's going to be a program and a process where 

everything gets passed on down to the consumer, that the 

consumer is receiving fair protection and fair service for the 

prices that they have to pay. 

 

If the consumer has to pay an environmental tax upfront when 

he purchases his motor oil, if the consumer has to pay again for 

the disposal, somebody in the process here, Mr. Speaker, is 

taking too much. If the consumer has to pay an environmental 

disposal tax, that should be it. They shouldn't have to pay for 

the disposal twice. So that's another area, Mr. Speaker, that we 

will be watching very closely. 

 

Once this oil has been all collected, either on the farms or at the 

service stations or in the consumer's back yard, Mr. Speaker, 

wherever it might be, what will be the method of collection? 

Will trucks go around to pick this oil up? Because when you 

have vehicles on the road collecting this substance, you have 



March 6, 1995 

 

644 

the potential for a spill. And likewise, if everybody's going to 

have to bring it into a central location, you also have the 

potential for a spill. So the question is, is what will be the most 

efficient and cost-effective way of doing this? 

 

In all likelihood, the safest way for the environment would be 

for a truck to go around and pick these commodities up because 

that truck can have the proper facilities on it — proper storage 

containers, proper valving, etc. — to prevent spills. Whereas if 

everybody loads up their 45 gallon drums or their 4 litre plastic 

containers in the back of their car, you have a much greater 

potential hazard there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you talk about the manufacturer of the oil being 

responsible, does that mean that the manufacturer bears the 

entire responsibility from the time that it comes into their plant, 

goes back out to the consumers and returns? Does the transport 

system, Mr. Speaker, bear any responsibility for the 

commodities they carry? Does the consumer bear any 

responsibilities for the products they use and for their disposal? 

Mr. Speaker, that's not answered in this. 

 

When all of these used motor oils are collected, it's not the oil 

itself, Mr. Speaker, that is the real problem. The oil is an 

organic compound, which if treated properly can be disposed of 

in a fairly simple and easy manner. Mr. Speaker, where the real 

problem lies in this is the heavy metals that are contained within 

the used motor oil, that have come out of the engines and other 

implements that it's been in. That's where the real concern lies. 

 

And the question has to be to the minister, how will those heavy 

metals and the waste products from the used motor oil, how 

will they be disposed of? Who will bear the costs of that; who 

will look after the transportation; who will be responsible? And 

again that's not outlined, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill. 

 

There's been a number of various companies across the 

province who have already done work with this, that have tried 

to provide some form of recycling of used motor oils, 

companies such as Envirotech Waste Management, McGill's 

Liquid Waste Removal and so forth. A company that has been 

trying to move into my own area, Mr. Speaker, is Canadian 

Crude Separators that have talked about recycling used oils. 

 

How are these companies that are already in place going to 

interact with this new program? Will they be frozen out? Will 

they be part of the process, Mr. Speaker? Again, the minister in 

his Bill has not dealt with any of that. 

 

It's not just the companies that are going to be affected. I have a 

news article here from 1993, the Star-Phoenix, in which a 

consumer is complaining about the changes that were made to 

motor oil. Prior to 1992 this consumer was taking his used 

motor oil, returning it back to his dealer, and getting paid for it. 

There was a value in that used motor oil which could be 

recovered by the consumer who had originally purchased. 

 

But after the environmental changes in 1992 and carrying on till 

today, the rules and regulations have become so much tighter, 

so much more restrictive, Mr. Speaker, that now this consumer 

has to pay someone to take his used motor oil away. Whereas 

before he had an asset, now he has a liability. 

 

And again within this new Bill that the minister has presented, 

nothing seems to have changed there. It looks very much like 

the consumer will be paying either up front or at the tail end to 

dispose of the product. The consumer pays in the end even 

though the used motor oil can be recycled and the oil used 

again. It just needs the heavy metals withdrawn from the system 

to make it valuable again. It needs to be cleaned and then it can 

go back into the engines again, Mr. Speaker. And so we have a 

resource here that can be used over and over again, and yet the 

consumer is expected to pay the whole cost of it. 

 

The minister talked in his speech that one of the main reasons 

for this Bill was to extend the oil collection into the rural areas. 

And as I mentioned earlier, a large number of the farmers have 

already been saving their oil. But it doesn't describe how that 

kind of a service will be supplied to rural Saskatchewan. The 

minister has left that out. I gather he expects someone else to 

define how it's going to be done in rural Saskatchewan while he 

sets the rules and the regulations. 

 

It's disappointing that this Bill is not more specific. In fact it 

would have been nice, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill had been a little 

bit specific about the definitions of the products that would be 

included in the program. The minister has talked about motor 

oils but he hasn't talked about anything else because they're 

going to allow that to be prescribed in regulation. So that the 

minister behind closed doors can say, I don't like this product so 

it's going to be prescribed and you, whomever might be 

manufacturing it, are going to be responsible for the entire life 

cycle of that commodity. 

 

These are some of the questions, Mr. Speaker, that we intend to 

ask the minister during Committee of the Whole. We will be 

bringing forward the whole system that the minister wants to 

bring forward — what commodities will be prescribed, who 

will do the prescribing, what the cost will be, what the whole 

cycle of recycling will deal with in context of this Bill of 

environmental management protection. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have also consulted with the stakeholders 

that might be interested in this particular issue. We've received 

a number of responses back from them already. In fact I have a 

response here from one, and I'll just read a little bit from this 

letter, and I quote: 

 

 Behind the flimsy veil of environmental protection, the 

government would grant themselves total and complete 

jurisdiction, nay, mastery over all, seen and unseen. 

Witness one item under (w.11) prescribing these 

products. In effect, this gives the bureaucrats sole 

authority to decide which products should be managed 

and how they should be managed and who can control 

them. 



March 6, 1995 

 

645 

Mr. Speaker, that's the concerns of one organization that 

has written in. I'll quote another couple of sentences 

from them. Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

 We need less government, not more. Our association 

would rather see a loosely struck committee of private 

representatives from several stakeholder groups manage 

and control all products which come within the aegis of 

the environmental management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the stakeholder groups out there do have 

a great deal of concern with this particular piece of legislation 

and the amount of control that the government will exercise in 

this particular case. Their responses continue to come in, Mr. 

Speaker; we're expecting more of them to come in. They've 

indicated they will be studying this Bill and responding to it. 

 

So at this time, I would like to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 23 — An 

Act to establish The Agri-Food Innovation Fund be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be making a 

few comments on the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and at the end of my 

comments I will be moving to adjourn debate on this and I will 

give my reasons for that in my remarks. 

 

This fund was set up originally with $18 million that was taken 

out of the GRIP surplus fund. And I think given what we've 

seen transpire in the last couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, farmers 

in the province of Saskatchewan would have hardly applauded 

if this is all that were done with the surplus funds in GRIP; that 

18 million of it would have been put toward advancing 

agricultural technology and value adding in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the fact that 9 million more were added in 

the '95-96 budget, I think, also would have been applauded if 

that had been the only amounts taken. 

 

However when you see what happened when the federal Liberal 

government in Ottawa clawed back 317 million — the 

provincial government used 188 million of it to balance their 

budget and now is expecting a further $115 million in GRIP 

repayments to be taken out of farmers pockets in 1996 — you 

can understand why farmers look at this particular initiative as 

almost a slap in the face in the broader context of what's 

happened to the agricultural community in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Bill tells us that we're going to have a 12-person board to 

administer this fund. The fund is generally aimed at supporting 

innovation and diversification to the agri-food industry. 

However the wording of the object and purposes of the Bill is 

sufficiently broad that I think this money could be given out for 

just about anything at all. 

 

And it will be with great interest when we look and see where 

Cargill gets their $3.9 million in upfront money for the crushing 

plant from; is that coming out of this particular entity or is the 

government going to find this money somewhere else. But it is 

sufficiently broad that this type of measure, as I understand the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, could be applied to a payment like that. 

 

This particular initiative, Mr. Speaker, fits very nicely if applied 

properly with what farmers in this province have been doing, 

particularly for the last 10 years or so. As we know, the climatic 

conditions of the 1980s, the world price situation of the 1980s, 

the early 1990s, forced a lot of people to rethink what had been 

traditional agriculture in this province. People looked at 

government support programs and understood very clearly that 

you would not have sustainable, large infusions of cash on a 

yearly basis coming out of government. 

 

Farmers, Mr. Speaker, in the 1990s are neither ignorant of the 

world market-place nor ignorant of their own role as taxpayers. 

There isn't a farmer out there today who isn't handling large 

volumes of money on very thin margins and understands the 

need to balance the books. 

 

One only has to look around your own community and see the 

devastation that's taken place in rural agriculture to know that 

that message has really struck home with people. There isn't a 

person who farms, in this Legislative Assembly, or who is 

involved in agriculture in any way, who hasn't lost relatives, 

friends, and neighbours who have disappeared from agriculture 

over the last 10 years. We all have seen it. And many times that 

transition has been done with a great deal of sadness and 

difficulty, because those are the fabrics that make up rural 

Saskatchewan. And every time that one of them leaves or is 

gone, we all feel the hurt and we all know that there's a piece 

missing to that social fabric. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now with the federal Liberal announcement on the Crow, we 

know that that pressure will be even greater. Farmers, because 

of their resilience, have managed that change. And I believe 

even with the Crow change, as devastating as it is, a lot of 

people will be able to sufficiently change the way that they 

operate to keep themselves viable. 

 

It's very hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, as I read the words in 

Hansard of the Minister of Agriculture, this NDP government, 

you know, the people that broke legally binding contracts in 

1992 with 54,000 farm families, to say all of this change that 

has occurred in agriculture is because of that government. And 

that simply doesn't wash in rural Saskatchewan and it doesn't, it 

shouldn't, wash in this Legislative Assembly. Those types of 

claims in the face of what has transpired, particularly in the last 

few weeks, are hypocritical at best, Mr. Speaker, and outright 

foolishness at the worst. 

 

The wide variety of crops that we grow in this province, the 



March 6, 1995 

 

646 

changes that we've made in our livestock operations, the move 

into exotic breeds of animals, has been necessitated by the hard, 

cold reality of economics, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that our 

universities, our ag extension people, and the better educations 

which are available to farm families today, have allowed people 

access to the world. 

 

Most farm homes today are either computerized or are in the 

process of acquiring the proper software to make themselves 

computer literate. And they're doing that for one specific 

reason, Mr. Speaker, and that is to be viable in the 1990s and 

into the next century. 

 

There is nothing that I have been able to see in the last three and 

a half years that this government has done that has enhanced 

that in any way at all. In fact that process has been slowed 

down, not speeded up, because of things that this NDP 

government has done in the way of agriculture. 

 

Today's announcement that Cargill was coming to the province 

of Saskatchewan in the crushing business, in the canola 

crushing business, is the very first announcement in three and a 

half years of this government, where such things as pasta and 

wild rice and berry products, oil crushing, and so forth, which 

have been talked about for years and years and were well on 

their way to being established prior to 1991, has actually 

happened. 

 

All this government has been able to do in the agri-food sector 

is piggyback on initiatives which occurred before them coming 

to power, trying to claim credit for their successes, or simply 

doing nothing because of their ideological idiosyncrasies which 

existed in the minds of some of the senior players over there. 

 

And it must have been a real galling experience to sit around 

the cabinet table and discuss that awful multinational giant, 

Cargill, coming to the province of Saskatchewan and getting 

$3.9 million of upfront money, which basically means that they 

aren't paying provincial sales tax on the inputs that they're going 

to use to build their plant, and have to accept the fact that this 

company and others like them have something to add to the 

province of Saskatchewan, and they aren't necessarily bad. 

 

And it must be really galling to some of the members, and 

particularly the NDP ag caucus — and I believe they have 

something called that — who sat around for this last three and a 

half years and have seen rural Saskatchewan absolutely 

devastated, both socially and economically, by their own 

government, and now that creature which they all despised for 

generations now welcomed to the province with open arms, 

with upfront money to boot, so that we can have a crushing 

industry with 50 more jobs added to our province's fabric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will have to be more of that done. And this 

little bone that the government has thrown to farmers in this 

province with Bill 23 isn't going to achieve that. There's going 

to have to be some real pragmatic decisions made, and some of 

the ideology that has kept these people captive for so long is 

going to have to go by the wayside. 

You know it's really sad, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about 

money in agriculture . . . and today we speak about a Bill that 

has a total value here of $27 million over two budget years. 

When we've just had the Crow benefit changed and 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan losing billions of dollars because 

for so long these people who are now the government of the 

province opposed any change to the method of payment, 

insisted that the two railway monopolies in this country receive 

all of the money, that ways to ship our products to port could 

not be changed because the NDP and Sask Wheat Pool and 

others opposed it to the hilt. 

 

They even called an election on it in this province in 1982. You 

know Gordon MacMurchy's famous words, go in April and go 

on the Crow. That they were so hidebound that when the deed 

is finally done, this province, when the deed is finally done, Mr. 

Speaker, this province ends up on the short end of the stick, on 

the short end of the stick. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we applaud the effort if it means anything. 

And I would say to the minister, and I'm going to reinforce this 

with him, if the minister in this particular entity is going to have 

a board of 12 individuals in this province who are going to have 

the best interests of agriculture at heart, that we truly are 

looking at ag diversification here, that we're looking at value 

added industry, and that this little fund is going to mean a 

difference, then I challenge the minister to bring the names 

before the House here. 

 

And there's a lot of farmers and people involved in agriculture 

who sit as MLAs in this House. And I think they're people that 

understand the industry, probably better than the bureaucrats 

do. And I'm saying to the minister, if you're going to bring this 

forward, then why not bring the names in here. Because all of 

us are quite conversant with the people at the universities, with 

the people that are doing the private industrial technologies out 

of Innovation Place and others in Saskatoon. Bring those names 

and have the members of the House discuss who would be the 

best 12 to sit on that board so that this money is spent properly 

on projects that will truly enhance agriculture. 

 

And I think there would be some credibility, Mr. Speaker, 

because this government's past record with boards and 

commissions is absolutely dismal. What they do is they appoint 

a bunch of their friends that no one has recourse to challenge. I 

mean we've got health boards all over this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that are a prime example of top-down management. 

 

And I suspect the way this Bill is written, Mr. Speaker, why it is 

so terribly vague, is because the minister wants to implement 

more top-down management; i.e., sit on the board, do as you're 

told, and we'll spend the money where we see fit; i.e., perhaps 

the Minister of Economic Development can go out and pony up 

another $3.9 million to bring in somebody else. So that's the 

problem we see in this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With what has happened to the Crow in the last week, I think 

it's absolutely imperative that this House, before it passes 

legislation like this, that all members take the opportunity to 



March 6, 1995 

 

647 

converse with people in agriculture. Because the parameters 

have changed, Mr. Speaker — the parameters have vastly 

changed. 

 

And if this entity is going to make any kind of a difference at all 

to the survival of my family farm or any other family farm in 

this province, then these resources, which are going to be even 

scarcer after the changes that the federal Liberals made to the 

Crow, then we had better spend them properly. 

 

And as Agriculture critic for the official opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to be conversing with agricultural groups 

around this province, get their views on this particular piece of 

legislation, who they want to see sit on the board, and would 

they like to see this entity free and clear of political 

manipulation by the NDP government. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I think it behoves all of us to take 

the time that is necessary, before this money is put out there and 

spent, to do our consultation properly. And I would hope that 

members of the government, particularly those back-benchers 

who are involved in agriculture, would take an interest in who 

is going to be on this board, the parameters that it's going to 

work under, so that this 9 million in the coming budget year and 

the money that was taken from our GRIP contracts previously, 

is put to the best use possible. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn 

debate on Bill 23. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

officials who've joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right I 

have Bill Reader who is the deputy minister of Municipal 

Government. To my left I have Ron Styles, associate deputy 

minister responsible for housing. On my far right I have Ken 

Alecxe, associate deputy minister of sport, culture and heritage. 

Behind me I have Larry Chaykowski, director of finance and 

administration, and behind me on my right is Ron Davis, 

assistant deputy minister of municipal services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 

the minister and her officials today as we get into the estimates 

of Municipal Government. I hope that we have a fruitful 

discussion, Madam Minister. There's a number of issues that 

have become quite urgent to areas of municipal government, in 

the last week particularly, and we'll touch on some of those. 

Before we begin those questions, I wonder if you have had the 

opportunity to prepare the omnibus set of questions that have 

been asked of you every year, provided by the official 

opposition, and if you have those prepared and are ready to 

send them across. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you for that question. As you 

know, the fiscal year has not yet been completed, and the 

officials in the department are just compiling all the 

documentation. And as soon as we have all that for the fiscal 

year ending March 31, we'll send it over to you. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 

that. It has been a very useful process, I think, for all of us to 

have those questions done that way, and it saves a lot of House 

time for both myself and yourself and your officials by doing 

that. So I would encourage you to get those over as quickly as 

possible. 

 

I'm going to start today with some of the questions that have 

come in from citizens around the province of Saskatchewan. As 

you know, last year we instigated the program of, “Mr. Premier, 

I want to know” and I believe you answered a number of these 

in your estimates last year. 

 

I have a series of them here and I would like you to make a 

brief comment on them. These are from individuals pretty well 

across the piece and the province. They're aren't my questions; 

I'm simply giving you the verbatim that was provided to us. 

Some of them may be questions that have more or less passed 

us by, but I think it's my duty as critic to pass them on to you as 

the minister responsible. 

 

This question comes . . . the first one comes from Shannon 

Metzger from Moosomin. And she says: I want to know why 

we don't have daylight savings time in Saskatchewan. We are 

the only province in the country that doesn't change. It's time we 

get in sync with the rest of the country. Who needs daylight at 

3:30 a.m.? I'd rather an extra hour of daylight at night to enjoy 

the summer. The positive far outweighs the negative. 

 

I know, Madam Minister, you've had occasion to discuss this 

recently and I wonder if you'd reply to Shannon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you. The issue of daylight 

savings time has been brought up quite a bit in the recent years, 

and I know it's an opinion that is very strongly held, both on the 

east side of the province and on the west side of the province. 

 

As you know, the province is cut in half by the time line. And 

back in the 1960s we had The Time Act that made all the 

province of Saskatchewan fall in one time zone. That has 

worked reasonably well over the last 37 years or so, and it's 

only recently the controversy has heated up again. 

 

We have said quite consistently that when there is a consensus 

amongst the local government associations and amongst the 



March 6, 1995 

 

648 

people of Saskatchewan, we're ready to look at it. But we 

haven't seen that consensus developing. In fact SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) recently 

voted down an appeal of The Time Act. So I think it'll be some 

time before we do change The Time Act, simply because there 

is no consensus between the people of Saskatchewan and 

mainly between the local government associations. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The next 

question comes from Beatrice Houben from Lucky Lake, 

Saskatchewan. And it's an issue that has come up at almost 

every SUMA and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) convention that I've ever attended, and it deals 

with education taxes. This one is very specific. Beatrice says: I 

want to know why senior citizens should have to pay school 

taxes. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well the issue of school taxes on 

properties have been part of governance in Saskatchewan since 

the province was incorporated. I think probably the first taxes 

that were applied to property were those to raise for educational 

purposes. And at this point in time we continue to abide by that 

legislation. In fact I think it may be even in the constitution that 

the boards of education have a right to appeal to the property 

tax to raise funds. 

 

The issue of senior citizens who own property having to pay a 

portion of their tax to education is consistent with that 

legislation. It is very difficult to start differentiating in age 

categories between people who own property who are senior 

citizens and people who own property and are not senior 

citizens. 

 

So I know it is an issue that senior citizens feel sometimes they 

are being discriminated against, but what we have in 

Saskatchewan is ability to educate our people, our young 

people, which is critically important for the development of 

Saskatchewan. And to that end, the senior citizens are asked 

also to make that contribution. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — The next question, Madam Minister, comes 

from E. Kelborli from Canora, Saskatchewan. And Mr. Kelborli 

wants to know why the RMs, municipalities, hamlets, and 

villages do not handle welfare cases like they used to do as 

there would be less crooked work going on if they did. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well first of all the jurisdiction to deal 

with people on social assistance is not applied to local 

governments. I know a few years ago or many years ago it 

might have been. But now the provision of services to people 

who are in need of assistance is provided through the 

Department of Social Services. 

 

That's the way we have done it in Saskatchewan for quite some 

time and I haven't heard any local government at any time say 

they want to take on that responsibility. I think they would be 

reluctant to take it on. I think we have checks and balances 

within the system as it is, and I don't think it can be delivered 

any better by putting it in the hands of local government. 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The next one 

comes from James M. Bowers of Regina. And once again this is 

a senior citizen and these are not my questions. This is very 

similar to one you had before. 

 

Mr. Bowers says: I want to know why senior citizens are still 

paying school taxes which they have paid all their life. These 

school taxes are now being paid by their children. These school 

taxes should be adjusted and retroactive back to when the 

senior citizen became 65 years of age. 

 

Obviously a lot of seniors feel very strongly about the issue. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, I understand that. And once again I 

say that property taxes go for two purposes: one to municipal 

services and one to education purposes. That's the way it's been 

in Saskatchewan for a long time. And for people who own 

property, whether they be senior citizens or otherwise, they 

simply apply their property tax to both purposes, both the 

municipal and the education side. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Next question comes from William and 

Patricia Jarvis of Saskatoon: I want to know about those 

freeloader Saskatchewan cottage owners who are not assessed 

Saskatchewan school taxes on their cottages. The rest of us 

cottage owners are. This is not fair at all. We are paying school 

taxes twice. Either all cottagers should pay school taxes, or 

none. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — We have a number of different types of 

resort properties in Saskatchewan. For people who are property 

owners in resort communities, they do pay education tax in their 

property tax. But we also have the people who own resort 

properties . . . or not own but lease resort properties in regional 

parks and provincial parks. 

 

None of our properties in regional or provincial parks are 

assessed on a basis for taxation purposes. So what we have are 

people who own cottages in regional and provincial parks who 

pay lease fees, and those lease fees are supposed to be 

somewhat at the same level as for someone who owns property 

in a community that is incorporated as a municipality. 

 

So we have two types, and it's simply a problem that we have, 

one being assessed for property taxation purposes, and one 

being leased, and the lease fee being established by the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — My next question comes from Mrs. N. Berrns 

from Saskatoon. I want to know why the lottery profits or a 

good portion of it are not used to reduce the deficit. It's 

wonderful to use these profits for sports, arts, etc., when the 

country can afford it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well that's an interesting question, and I 

know there are a number of different approaches to it. 

 

First of all we have changed, as you are aware of and the people 

are aware of in Saskatchewan, the licence fee structure for Sask 



March 6, 1995 

 

649 

Sport. We are the only jurisdiction that has Sask Sport set up as 

an autonomous agency outside of government that collects the 

lottery profits and they pass to the government then a sum of 

money that we call the licence fee. Other jurisdictions do it 

somewhat differently. 

 

But in regard to the usefulness of those funds as they apply to 

sport, recreation, and culture across Saskatchewan, there is a 

great deal of research now that shows that people who are 

engaged in sport, recreation, and cultural activities are healthier, 

more productive, and are more community minded and are 

happier in their lifestyles than people who are not engaged in 

those activities. 

 

So we need always to provide some support and some resources 

for people who do not have their own resources to make sure 

that they have access to sport, recreation, and cultural activities. 

If you like, it's a holistic approach to the wellness program. And 

the lottery profits support that portion through the Sask trust 

sport organization. 

 

And we believe that's a right way to go. It's one that's envied 

across Canada. And we'll leave it as it is because it is important 

that young people and old people across the province continue 

to have some funds and some resources in order to access sport, 

recreation, and cultural activities. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Next question comes from Mike Krakalovich 

from Pelly and is in the same vein. His question is: why can't 

we use our Lotto monies for medicare and hospitals rather than 

sports. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well again, the licence fee that this year 

is set at seven and a half million dollars goes into the General 

Revenue Fund that does go into funding programs like health 

and education. And what is left in the Sask Sport trust goes to 

help those community-based organizations that can be looked 

upon as providing wellness services to the communities. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — The next question, Madam Minister, comes 

from A. Bodnarchuk from North Battleford: I want to know 

why you pay out so much money for prizes from lotteries when 

people are being turned away from hospitals because of a lack 

of space. Why not use some of that money every week and open 

up the hospitals again? Which is more important, health or 

sports? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I'm glad you brought that up 

because we have research now that shows very definitely that 

people who are engaged in sport are healthier, more highly 

motivated, are more goal-oriented, have healthier lifestyles than 

those people who aren't engaged in sports. So when you look 

upon where our money is best used, if we can keep people out 

of hospitals, I think that is far more productive than waiting 

until they get into hospitals and putting money there. 

 

So I would say once again that putting money into sport is part 

of the wellness model. And allowing people to engage in 

healthy lifestyles is far better than waiting till they are sick and 

then trying to cure them afterwards. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — This next question, Madam Minister, comes 

from Ron Mlazgar of Nipawin: I want to know why the NDP 

hasn't done anything to change the R.M. Act of 1989. The NDP 

thought this to be a very unfair tax at the time. It is very 

burdensome to small farmers on low assessed, and even large 

farmers who want to retire on the home quarter. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — I gather that's an amendment that your 

administration brought in in regard to assessing residents on 

low-assessed properties. I'm not quite sure, but I think that's 

what he's talking about. 

 

We have talked to SARM and we have talked to some 

municipalities about whether they want to see that changed. We 

are right now lacking a better alternative, if I may put it that 

way, and a more fair alternative. So in the absence of having 

anything at this point in time that directly shows that we have a 

better way of doing it, we will leave that amendment in place. 

 

Although there are certain landowners and certain property 

owners who feel that it is discriminatory, we will wait until 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) has 

finished with their general reassessment and see what advice 

they can give us. And if there is a consensus it needs to be 

changed, we will look at changing it. 

 

But I would say once again, this is an amendment that was 

brought in under the last administration, and at this point in 

time we haven't got any clear direction if there is enough 

pressure out there for us to undertake to change it and to replace 

it with something that we're not quite clear of yet. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — My next question comes from Robert Butt 

from Flaxcombe: I want to know why your government 

opposed a 10 per cent tax on lottery tickets back in the 1980s, 

and now you condone the wholesale thievery of these video 

slots. You are making honest people criminals. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well there are two sides to that question. 

I gather one is, why we are in VLTs. And I think we have said 

over and over again that the jurisdictions to the east and the 

west and the south of us have VLTs and Saskatchewan cannot 

be an island in a country where there are gaming activities 

going on around us and our people are going to take part in 

those activities. 

 

And our hospitality industry has wanted to have VLTs, so we 

have supported that for legitimate purposes, both for economic 

purposes, but because we feel that it is very difficult to go 

against the tide of what's happening across Canada. And if 

people choose to engage in VLTs, then they should have the 

right to do that. Government isn't Big Brother and cannot stand 

on their shoulder and tell them how to spend their money all the 

time. 



March 6, 1995 

 

650 

In regard to the 10 per cent on the lottery tickets that was first 

implemented by the last administration and then withdrawn, it 

was very clear that the public was not prepared to spend that 

extra 10 per cent on their lottery tickets, and the lottery profits 

fell substantially. And those profits were going back to help 

community-based organizations, and so it was depriving them 

of their ability to provide services to their local community. 

 

So I think there are really two issues here. One, we have VLTs 

(video lottery terminal) for legitimate purposes that we have 

explained time and time again. They are here because they are a 

fact of life across North America . . . and that we are 

distributing the profits back to the communities in many ways 

through the General Revenue Fund and through the nine and a 

half million dollars that we have allocated within our budget 

this year. 

 

We also oppose any tax on lottery tickets because that is a direct 

tax that takes away then from the lotteries their ability to raise 

money. 

 

The Chair: — Before we proceed further, I just want to remind 

the member from Thunder Creek that we ought not to use 

language or to say things indirectly that we cannot say directly. 

 

In the letters that the member has read, he has on one occasion 

used the word crooked and on another occasion used the word 

thievery. This is not the kind of language that we would 

normally allow members to use in the House, so that if the 

member does come to a letter where he sees language that he 

ought not to use, then perhaps he might substitute his own word 

for that. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your 

ruling. One is torn with these. As you've noticed and the 

minister's noticed, I have offered no commentary of my own at 

all because these responses are directed back to the individuals 

and I . . . The direct democracy that's involved with this type of 

initiative I appreciate. 

 

And I am hesitant to take licence with the feelings of taxpayers 

who are no different than I am in regard, and this is their 

legislature as well as mine. And I will attempt, Mr. Chairman, 

to temper my remarks. But I am trying to do this as honestly as 

possible for the process and will finish up with one final 

question to the minister today in this regard. 

 

This comes from Robert Janowski from St. Walburg, and it's an 

issue that Madam Minister dealt with earlier, this time from the 

west side of the province. Why does Saskatchewan not use 

standard time in the winter? Why does Saskatchewan use 

daylight saving time all year? We do not turn our clocks back 

an hour at the . . . Why do we not turn our clocks back an hour 

at the end of October? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I guess that question and the first 

one you asked shows the dilemma that we face: that the people 

on the east and the west side of the province see the sun at 

different times in the afternoon or the morning, and depending 

on your perspective, you feel that the clock should either be 

moved ahead or back. 

 

Once again we believe that The Time Act that we have has 

served Saskatchewan well, that we are not going to change it, 

and there is no consensus in Saskatchewan that would show us 

what we should change it to if we should decide. So in the 

absence of a consensus and because what we have is working 

well, we do not believe that there is any need to make any 

changes at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you for those answers, Madam 

Minister. We will forward those back to the individuals, and 

they can judge for themselves whether they liked your answers 

or not, or if they wish to take the issues up further with you in 

the future in the way that you answered their questions. 

 

As I said in my opening statement, there's been a number of 

things that have changed. The estimates for this particular area 

of government probably, for the first time in three years, weren't 

as contentious as they had been because all of the offloading 

which you had done on junior levels of government wasn't 

occurring this particular year again, that that offload had been 

achieved, and you had now balanced your budget on their 

backs. But obviously they were not being harmed in any way 

further than what you'd already done to them. 

 

However we've had a pretty dramatic change in the last week 

with the change to the Crow benefit, the statutory rate that was 

associated with the moving of grain and other products out of 

the prairie basin to port. I've been noticing in the media that 

there has been very strong reaction from the groups in the 

province which you are directly responsible for. In fact some of 

those groups were in the legislature here last week to voice their 

disapproval with what is occurring. 

 

SARM particularly and their president have been very vocal in 

the fact that there are huge consequences now coming down on 

local government because of what is about to occur. We are 

going to see probably massive branch line abandonment. We 

are going to see a hastening of the building of inland terminals. 

And local government, both urban and rural, because of the 

offloading which has occurred particularly over the last three 

years, are now feeling that they are absolutely stretched to the 

maximum to provide basic infrastructure services, given the fact 

that their costs are going to ratchet upward significantly. 

 

I have introduced petitions in this House in this session over a 

two-week period that were sponsored by one particular RM in 

my riding, concerning one particular highway. And if one took 

time to look at the petitions, I don't think there was a man, 

woman, or person over the age of 18 in a span there of about 60 

or 70 miles and 30 or 40 miles on either side of that particular 

road which did not sign that petition. Now that RM have been 

very concerned because they've had a high through-put elevator 

constructed in their community three years ago, and they are 

now very knowledgeable about the impact of increased trucking 

into their RM and what is happening to the basic road 

infrastructure and the costs that are now being passed on to the 



March 6, 1995 

 

651 

ratepayers of that RM. They've lived the experience. 

 

We now know that all over this province that same type of 

experience is going to be felt, and I believe that your 

government have been negligent in moving forward with some 

of the preparatory work for this transition, and you have 

negated the ability of local government who are also working 

quite diligently, I might add, in the late 1980s, as some of your 

officials will know, on analysis of ways to cope with this 

change. 

 

And because of the offloading and the cut-backs which have 

occurred from senior government to them, most of that has 

gone by the wayside because now they're down to basic survival 

and aren't going to have the ability to meet the challenges that 

are going to crop up very rapidly for them. And I would like to 

know from you what representations have been made to 

yourself as Minister responsible for Municipal Government by 

local government over this issue and the issue of how they are 

going to cope on restricted budgets with some of the impacts 

that are coming down. 

 

And I also would like to know what you are doing as the 

Minister responsible for Municipal Government as part of a 

coordinating team within provincial government as it faces 

these challenges vis-a-vis the federal government. And can 

local government be assured that they have an ally on their side 

rather than someone who, at its own convenience, will offload 

or pick their pocket because of their own budgetary demands? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you for that question, and these 

are indeed changing times and for municipal governments, very 

challenging times. If I may, I'd like to go back into some of the 

history that you prefaced your questions with. 

 

Yes, we have made cut-backs to the revenue-sharing pool. The 

cut-backs that we have made, I think the biggest cut-back was 

the 1991-92 budget that . . . or the 1990-91 budget that was 

passed which was essentially your budget the first year and then 

the three subsequent ones that we have passed . . . Together all 

of the reduction and revenue-sharing grants to both the urban 

and rural come to about 3 per cent of the total municipal 

expenditure. So it's the amount of money that comes from the 

provincial government to municipal governments for their 

purposes is a minor part of their budget, really, and what we've 

cut back is less than 3 per cent of their total expenditures. 

 

I gather what you're saying . . . you are alluding to municipal 

governments as though they're homogeneous, and there is very 

distinct difference between urban and rural. And I gather what 

you're saying is more oriented to the rural rather than the urban 

side because it's on the rural side that you're going to see the 

greatest impact on the roads and road maintenance because of 

rail line abandonment. So I assume what we're talking about for 

the moment may be more directed to rural Saskatchewan than 

the large urban centres. 

 

In regard to what we are doing to work with them, let me say 

first very clearly that the Government of Saskatchewan is in no 

position to back-fill for any of the problems that are created by 

any of the changes that are imposed by the federal government's 

budget. 

 

We have come through a very difficult time. We have balanced 

our budget, and we are now going into a period where we know 

we have sustainable budgets. But that does not mean we are 

going to take on the obligations and the responsibilities of a 

national transportation system because that has been vacated by 

the federal government and in fact offloaded onto someone 

else. It is their responsibility to come up with a national 

transportation system, not the provincial government. 

 

Having said that though, we do understand there is a need to 

develop a forum and a dialogue and do research and to find a 

way of getting the attention of the federal government and to 

place before the federal government alternatives. We have been 

in discussion, at least for the last two or three months, at the 

municipal-provincial round table with SARM about the effect 

of the change of the Crow benefit. We continue to work with 

them. We had a meeting with them today. We'll be having 

further meetings with them. Our officials have been working 

with their officials. They are on the provincial transportation 

policy committee. They are working with the Department of 

Highways. 

 

They have not asked us to back-fill and to provide further 

funding because they know that as taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

we can't pick up that shortfall either, either as municipal 

governments or as a provincial government. But we are working 

with them consistently. We are working with them 

cooperatively. We're providing joint analysis. We're undertaking 

reviews together with them to see what alternatives there may 

be before us. But I'd say clearly to them and clearly to the 

members of this House and the public, the Government of 

Saskatchewan is not going to back-fill and provide funding in 

the areas that have been vacated by the federal government. We 

do not have the capability to do that. But we have to bring them 

to the attention of the federal government, their obligation and 

their responsibility in regard to transportation. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, I'm sure that that will be 

reassuring to anyone in municipal government. I specifically 

asked you about the coordination that's going on within 

government  what ministers are involved?  some of the 

things that can assure people that we're simply not talking any 

more, that we're actually preparing ourselves to do things. 

 

And I would disagree with you about urban Saskatchewan not 

being involved. Most of the members of SUMA, as we both 

know, are small compared to the big four in this province. 

 

Even cities such as Moose Jaw which have one large terminal in 

place  and I understand another one being contemplated for 

construction  is finding big-time changes in the way that they 

maintain their road infrastructure on the periphery of the city. 

The RM of Moose Jaw has found that there has been 



March 6, 1995 

 

652 

tremendous pressure applied to the blacktop roads which are in 

proximity. And I think your department's been involved with 

them on those discussions. 

 

This is going to be multiplied all across urban Saskatchewan. 

Most of our small towns, villages, hamlets have one or two 

paved main streets in them. Most of those paved streets have 

been put in through their capital-sharing grant systems, and they 

are taking a pounding, Madam Minister, like we've never seen 

before. Any place that has had construction of one of these 

major through-put elevators or terminals has seen a tremendous 

increase in truck traffic because that means that those urban 

areas are going to have to bear some of the brunt of the changes 

that are occurring. 

 

I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you had known what was 

going to happen last Monday, if you would have been so ready 

to send back to the federal government that $317 million that 

was part of the GRIP claw-back. 

 

When you people changed the formula and built that surplus — 

used 188 million of it yourselves to balance your budget — but 

the fact that Ottawa was committed and had budgeted that 

money to the province of Saskatchewan, as they did to the 

provinces of Manitoba and Alberta, money that was already 

committed as spent, and you allowed them to claw it back out 

of this province, knowing full well that that $317 million 

probably would have gone a lot further than the 300 million 

which they are now proposing as transition over the next six 

years, to allowing rural people — and that's both urban and 

rural — to be able to cope with this coming change, because 

that money would have been in rural Saskatchewan. It wouldn't 

have gone anywhere else. It would have been spent there. It 

would have been taxes, school taxes. It would have contributed 

to the infrastructure cost which you now in turn are going to be 

asked to help bear. 

 

And I really wonder if those thoughts went through the 

government's head as they allowed that money to go out of this 

province and then in turn get clobbered last Monday by the 

federal Liberal government. Because that money would have 

gone a long ways. 

 

So I guess the question is, Madam Minister, tell me which 

ministers are together in a working group; what plans you have 

to try and perhaps recover some of that money given the 

infrastructure costs which you know are coming. 

 

I mean the minimum estimate that people in SARM are putting 

forward is probably $100 million more per year in infrastructure 

costs. And I'm sure that as time goes on and the abandonment 

takes place those costs will go up. Given those kind of numbers 

that we're dealing with, can you tell me which ministers are 

involved in the working group and what specifically are your 

plans? 

 

Is it targeted to highways? Is it targeted to grid roads? Is it 

targeted to farm access? Is it targeted to the main street of 

urbans? What are the target areas that you've now outlined 

given the fact that you know what's coming? And what 

assurances can you give people in municipal government that 

they aren't going to be the ones who ultimately bear all the 

burden, i.e., the taxpayer of those RMs and town councils, and 

that you're simply not going to be standing by, watching the 

world pass you by, as you have recently. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I thank you for those questions. 

There are a number of different aspects of it. I don't intend to 

engage in another GRIP debate with you. I think you would be 

hard-pressed though to find very many people in Saskatchewan 

who support the old GRIP program that was brought in in 1990-

91. And so we'll leave that as it is, understanding that you 

obviously have to defend it because you were there at the time. 

 

The issue of the money — we have provided support for farm 

families and I'm going to let the Minister of Agriculture talk 

about that. 

 

In regard to the impact on municipalities, there definitely is 

going to be an impact on urban municipalities. I didn't mean to 

imply that there wouldn't be. The impact that urban 

municipalities are going to be affected by will be the 

abandonment of the branch lines. And there are going to be 

small communities all across Saskatchewan that will probably 

be losing elevators and they'll be losing population and there 

will be changes in the way farming is done. And we probably 

will see a change to bigger farms because of all of this. And 

there will be more trucking. Everybody understands that this is 

going to be the end result of these changes in deregulation and 

the Crow benefit. 

 

So we understand there is going to be impact on urban 

municipalities. Probably we'll see a demise of a number of 

urban municipalities as they lose their grain handling facilities 

and a lot of their commerce that surrounds that. And we're 

worried about that, as SUMA is worried about that. 

 

And I know the president of SUMA has made those comments 

that he is worried about how these communities are going to 

survive in the future, because they have been built up around 

providing services for farmers and especially grain handling 

services for elevators. 

 

So that is one aspect that we're very, very concerned with. And 

we have to simply understand that there's got to be some 

approach locally made to supplementing what is there now, and 

we're going to work with them. But it's going to be a very 

difficult change for them and one that probably will be very 

difficult to stop. 

 

In regard to again how are we working with either the urban 

municipalities or rural municipalities on their infrastructure 

problems, we have a working committee, as I said, made up of 

officials in our department, in Ag and Food, and in Department 

of Highways, and in the Department of Finance, that are 

working now with SUMA and SARM officials to try to 

understand what the impact will be. 



March 6, 1995 

 

653 

I can't give you details about that because there is still a $300 

million fund that was announced by the Minister of Finance in 

Ottawa last week in his budget that he has not given any 

definite details about, that is supposed to go to try to provide 

some interim support for the infrastructure. And we still haven't 

been able to figure out exactly what he meant by that and where 

it's going and who is going to get it. 

 

So we are working with those people at the local level, with an 

interdepartmental committee, trying to find out what it is the 

federal government intends to do, first of all with the $300 

million contingency fund they have set aside over five years — 

who's going to get it, what it's going to be used for, how it can 

be disbursed. 

 

And secondly, we have to know how this is going to change the 

transportation network in Saskatchewan, whether there's going 

to be short lines or whether there isn't; whether there's going to 

be more highway hauling and what's that going to do to our grid 

roads. 

 

We are doing an analysis. We have a transportation committee 

that's been working. We'll continue to work with them, but at 

this point in time we can't give you definitive answers because 

there's still a lot of unanswered questions coming from the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I wouldn't spend a 

whole lot of time worrying about that money. Saskatchewan 

traditionally gets about 56 per cent of the Crow. You’re looking 

at about 160 million over five years, six years — you're looking 

at, maximum, about $30 million a year and the administration 

down there will gobble up a good part of that, as federal 

bureaucrats are wont to do. And I expect the time you get to 

play with it, if you do, it will be very slim. 

 

And they've already said that they're going to earmark a lot of 

that in order to allow certain products to have an easier 

transition to market than they potentially would have. The 

alfalfa industry, which you will be familiar with, is a prime 

example — six cubing plants in this province which now all of 

a sudden are on the economic verge of bankruptcy if all comes 

to pass. 

 

And I would suspect that a good portion of that money will get 

targeted, that when you look at this amount of money over the 

entire breadth of the Crow statutory region you're not talking 

about a lot of money. And I suspect you'll have very little of it 

actually end up in the hands of yourself or Municipal 

Government to play with at the end of the day. 

 

I wonder if you could tell me then — you tell me you've got a 

working group together — if you could tell me who is the head 

of it, if it's a deputy or associate deputy. I'd like to understand 

the structure, because obviously people are going to be coming 

to us and others and saying the problems are coming, where do 

we go with them? Who are the people? Who are the faces and 

the names that we're going to have to deal with? And what is 

the structure? Who's in command? Who's second? Who's 

bringing up the rear? That sort of thing. And if you could 

outline for me who these people are, from the various 

departments, so that we have a clear understanding of the folks 

that are going to be front and centre as this issue comes 

forward. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well as I've said, we have been . . . in the 

municipal/provincial round-table meetings, we have been 

discussing this for some time, starting last year when we . . . the 

Department of Highways had a transportation committee that's 

worked. And I don't want to answer questions on behalf of the 

Minister of Highways and Transportation because that is his 

area, and to a large extent I guess we have some shared 

responsibility here, but he is a lead minister. 

 

What we have is a working committee of bureaucrats who are 

working with the officials at SUMA and SARM — and it is 

headed up by the deputy to the Premier, Frank Bogdasavich — 

who are working now to understand some of the consequences 

of the federal government's decision and what locally we can do 

to adjust to it or what impacts it's going to have on both the 

infrastructure as well as on commerce and trading patterns in 

Saskatchewan. So we're working from that approach. 

 

As far as ministers are concerned, I'm obviously very concerned 

about the impact on municipal governments, and I keep in very 

close contact with the president of SUMA and SARM. We have 

again a working committee made up of the Minister of 

Highways, Minister of Ag and Food, Minister of Finance, and 

myself who are working with the two presidents at the officials' 

level, at the political level, talking to them, keeping in touch, 

and sharing information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Do you have a list, Madam Minister? The 

Minister of Highways is the lead minister but the Premier's 

deputy minister is the lead bureaucrat; is that what you're telling 

me? Is there a list that you can provide to me of the folks that 

are actually the working group, people from your department, 

Ag and Food, Highways — who else did you tell me? — 

Finance. Can you give me a list, and you can send that across at 

any time. I realize you wouldn't have it now. But I'd like a list of 

the players who are involved in this particular exercise. And I 

believe it's absolutely incumbent that they not simply talk about 

this issue but that there are some concrete plans being made to 

cope with what will become inevitable. 

 

It's simply the pace, that neither you nor I can determine what 

that is. And if you could give me that commitment to give me 

that list of people so, in my role as critic, when I'm dealing with 

the same players that you have that . . . they ask me questions, I 

can say well this is the structure that the minister gave me, and 

this is where you go for the answers that you're going to need as 

you come up against these problems. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, we'll pass you over the list of the 

officials' committee, and how we're approaching it at a political 

level as well. 

 

Let me assure you and the people who are asking you questions 



March 6, 1995 

 

654 

and the public of Saskatchewan that we're taking this very 

seriously. We are endeavouring to, first of all, analyse the 

impact and to find out from the federal government whether or 

not they will minimize that impact through other resources or 

other programs like another infrastructure program or an 

expanded highway program or some subsidy in another way. 

 

But having said that, I would say that I wouldn't want to leave 

any illusions with anyone. We are not going to be able to 

replace that Crow benefit with provincial money or municipal 

money and think we will come out equal to what we were 

before they removed the Crow benefit from Saskatchewan and 

from the Saskatchewan transportation infrastructure program. 

It's just not within our ability to do that. 

 

And so we have to be very careful what signals we're sending 

out. And our signal right now is not one that we're going to 

move into the position that's been vacated by the federal 

government. And I would hope that you as members of the 

opposition would not be advocating that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan pick up a cost that is the obligation of the federal 

government. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I think you've seen 

from our response to this issue over the last week that we don't 

advocate that at all. We advocated a little tougher stance by 

yourself. And when it came down to the horse-trading that you 

did with the federal government, that you hadn't given away the 

whole barn instead of just one of the horses in the team. 

 

It's very important, Madam Minister, that we understand what 

you're up to, because there are people out there, particularly in 

the rural RMs, that believe that on the agenda will be the 

amalgamation of rural municipalities which you will hasten 

because of the changes in the Crow benefit. 

 

The obvious impact on the grid road and main farm access 

structure will be very significant. When one looks at the costs 

of maintaining the current system by RMs which have been 

depopulated partly through government policy, then people are 

looking at both voluntary, and suspicious of involuntary, 

amalgamations in order to fund the necessary infrastructure that 

currently is in place. 

 

I know last year the subject came up at the SARM meeting and 

you dealt with it at that time. And could you tell me, are there 

any plans, any carrots being tied to any sticks in order to have 

this happen; or do you foresee that system, now that Crow 

changes have occurred, speeding up, and what has been the 

history over the last 12 months since we were here last, with 

voluntary amalgamations in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well once again on the Crow, I think we 

have said about as much as we can on the Crow benefit. In 

regard to the impacts on governance within the rural municipal 

structure or the urban municipal structure for that matter, we 

have said openly time and time again that we have no design or 

grand plan and that if there are going to be amalgamations, they 

have to be grass roots and they have to make sense and they 

have to be voluntary. 

 

And so where there is a desire by municipalities to try to share 

services or to share costs or to share another kind of a 

governance model, we have tried to facilitate that discussion. 

We have tried to remove barriers, if there are barriers either in 

our legislation or in our funding formula, so that they do not 

stand in the way of what local people at the local level want. 

 

Once again, I don't see a huge change in the structure of 

municipal governments at this time simply because of the 

change in the Crow benefit and the change in transportation 

policy. I think there is going to be a need to work together very 

closely, both at the municipal level between the urbans and the 

rurals in areas, and between the municipal governments and the 

provincial government. But that does not mean that there is 

going to be wholesale changes in there, it's going to be a forced 

amalgamations, because I don't know, quite truthfully, I don’t 

know what that would really accomplish. 

 

These people decided at the local level where the efficiencies 

are, how they provide services, and if it's not in their best 

interests to have a larger unit, then I don't know why we would 

impose it. Because they are the ones that manage their budget 

— not us. 

 

So I have no design to make any changes at the municipal level. 

I've said that openly. What we have said is we'll remove barriers 

that might exist in legislation or in the revenue-sharing Act. 

And that's all that we're doing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I appreciate your 

empathy with the way that local folks manage their affairs. It's 

unfortunate that the Minister of Health and his predecessor 

don't have the same attitude that you do as far as rural people in 

particular. 

 

I agree with you — I think they're very competent at managing 

these things. And they have had to cope for a long time. And 

whether they want to be small units or larger units, they do that. 

 

Obviously your government doesn't think they're competent 

because in health care you've driven it from the top down. You 

said, local people, you don't matter. We won't even allow you to 

be elected to manage our tax dollars. So it's curious how you 

people sort of chase your tails around when it comes to the 

issues of local governments. 

 

But I say to you, Madam Minister, it does matter. Because when 

an urban . . . a small urban no longer has the ability to maintain 

its tax base, what usually happens is it applies to join the RM. 

And what you have in most of my small towns — I don't know 

about yours — are a bunch of dwellings that, quite frankly, no 

one will use once the current occupant has passed away. 

 

A lot of those particular dwellings will probably have to be 



March 6, 1995 

 

655 

destroyed. The act of maintaining that particular piece of 

infrastructure then falls in the lap of the rural RM which in 

many cases has no choice but to accept that particular small 

urban. Those costs then become a relevant factor. 

 

And I say to you that there will be pressures to amalgamate 

because of that, the loss of taxes that they will get from grain 

companies, railway companies and other businesses which will 

then vacate their premises because of those losses. You will 

have schools, medical facilities, all changing because of the 

lack of tax base that will be present. So there will be very strong 

ramifications for a lot of places. 

 

And I think that most people agree today that efficiencies are 

achieved partly through increasing size, so there will be 

pressure to amalgamate. And I guess how we manage that 

pressure so that locally elected people maintain some say . . . 

and it isn't driven down from the top like it has been done in 

health, and I don't think anybody can deny that. The budget 

numbers confirm that. That if we're going to manage these 

changes to municipal government through this period of 

transition that there has to be some structures put in place. 

 

And yes, you will have the responsibility to manage it or 

someone else, and senior government I think has some 

obligation not only to make that transition as smooth as 

possible but to lay out a pattern which will be usable in the next 

century. And I haven't seen anything that would indicate that 

you've thought about what that pattern is or how we're going to 

achieve it. 

 

The next 18 months, Madam Minister, will show us a lot of 

things about that. And if the federal Minister of Transport has 

his way, you ain't seen nothing yet. So I think we need to start 

thinking about it if you haven't already done so. I think that 

there has to be a working group put together that can manage 

some of those transitions because they're coming just as sure as 

you and I sit here. 

 

Can you tell me, have you begun that process, and have you any 

conceptual idea what that might look like? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well first of all you talk about 

amalgamations, and there is no process to amalgamate a village 

with a rural municipal government other than to devolution and 

where you have an unorganized hamlet and it's put under the 

governance or supervision of a rural municipal government. So 

you have to be careful about the terminology that you use. 

 

We have no mechanism yet where there is a governance model 

that shows where you have some urban units and some rural 

units coming together, and any other method other than what 

we've used in the past, which is dissolution of a village into 

hamlet status and then that is being governed by the rural 

municipal council. 

 

There are other models that have been talked about certainly. 

We have . . . when you're talking about amalgamations, it 

usually means rural to rural because those are units that have 

similar jurisdictions and have the same legislative framework in 

which they operate. 

 

We last year removed some barriers where there could be 

voluntary dissolution of a village if it felt it was unsustainable. 

And we are very careful; in fact we do not allow a rural 

municipality to take on the liabilities of a small urban 

municipality. They still have to make sure that whatever 

liabilities are attached to that urban governance structure is still 

paid for by whoever owns property within that urban 

municipality. 

 

So when you're talking about the changes, you have to make 

sure that you're not obligating taxpayers in another region to 

take on liabilities that are the responsibility of, say, a small 

urban. There is no doubt that we are going to have 

unsustainable communities in the future in the sense that there's 

going to be no visible economic unit to them any more because 

more and more of their services are disappearing, and you're 

going to have a collection of houses maybe with people living 

in them, but maybe more often than not people moving out as 

well. 

 

We are talking of course with SUMA about this thing. They 

have an urban government renewal task force where they have 

looked at this very same question you have brought up. We are 

also talking to SARM about it. What we have done though, we 

have placed $50,000 in the ICC (inter-community co-operation) 

program this year to talk about those kind of restructuring 

models. Because truthfully what happens with our revenue-

sharing grants right now is small urban governments are 

reluctant to give up their status as long as they can be regarded 

as a corporate urban entity and therefore they are able to receive 

revenue-sharing grants. 

 

So we need some transitional kind of a model here, but we are 

not driving it from the top down and we're being very sensitive 

to wait until we have some people at the local level approaching 

us for guidance and for resources. And to this end, we have 

placed $50,000 in the ICC program to help with that. 

 

We are trying to remove the impediments that might be existing 

in legislation. We are working with SUMA and SARM to see 

how this might be changed in the future. If there is 

amalgamation between urban and rural communities, what kind 

of governance structure do you need in place then that would 

give everybody in that community, both the people living in the 

village and the people living in the rural areas, adequate support 

and a level of comfort that their political problems are being 

dealt with fairly? 

 

So there is no easy answer, but there is lots of discussion going 

on. And the task force that the urban governments have 

undertaken, I think, approaches it from one level; the rural 

municipalities approach it from a different level. We're 

facilitating that and removing where we can impediments and 

providing resources where we can at the same time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Part of my last question, I asked you how 



March 6, 1995 

 

656 

many amalgamations had occurred in the last year, both at the 

RM level, and how many organized hamlets had devolved 

themselves into rural RMs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The village of Plato reverted back to a 

hamlet status and was placed under the supervision of the RM. 

So there's only been one. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So no RM or group of RMs have approached 

government in the last year about changing their status? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — There may be discussions going on at the 

local level. Some of the RMs have explored the issue. They 

haven't done anything on an official basis, approaching us. I 

know the RM of Grant and the town of Vonda and the village 

of Prud'homme looked at trying to form a different kind of a 

unit. But again we have different legislation governing the two 

different types of municipalities, and there wasn't any way that 

they could form together legitimately or legally into a different 

unit. 

 

But they are the ones that came closest to approaching a new 

governance model, and they're still working on it. And we need 

just to be able to provide them with data and research about 

what can be gained by this model and what they are losing on 

the other hands as far as autonomy or delivery of services. 

 

So I think the best thing we can do is to be facilitative, to be 

cooperative, to encourage them where they want to look at it, to 

allow them to do it. But we don't drive the system. And at this 

point in time, there hasn't been a lot of that discussion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, I have been approached by 

RMs over this specific issue because of the impact of the treaty 

land entitlement process. There are a number of RMs in this 

province that are having fairly large portions of their tax base 

removed, some of which are very close to where I live. 

 

They, I think, are being realistic in looking at their alternatives 

and what they do with the remainder of that particular entity. 

That's why I'm surprised that you say you don't have a model up 

and running, because that concern is out there. And I don't think 

it's . . . it's almost inevitable that they will not be able to 

maintain, through their existing rate base, their current 

infrastructure. And I'm wondering what you have in place, 

given that these things start to tumble across the province as the 

treaty land entitlement process speeds up. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Again, the best thing I can say is where 

they need advice from our municipal advisers, both in 

community planning or in fiscal services, our people will go out 

and talk to them. But it has to be voluntary. There is no barrier, 

legislative or otherwise, that prevents municipalities, RMs from 

joining together if they feel that their units are unsustainable. 

They have been doing it over the course of the last number of 

years, and where they feel at the local level that is the best 

course of action left open to them, they will undertake it. And I 

have complete trust in the local politicians to make that decision 

locally. 

 

Again, our officials help them. They provide them with 

background research. They provide them with analysis. They 

facilitate the process if that's what needs to be done. 

 

But we are not going to unilaterally decide that we are going to 

undertake lots of amalgamations across the province of 

Saskatchewan and get everybody concerned about governance 

instead of about sustainable services. Because I think in the end 

what we need to talk about is how do we provide services at the 

local level to the greatest number of the people at the most 

affordable cost. 

 

And if there needed to be a change in the governance structure, 

so be it. They'll make that decision and they will do it. If there 

doesn't need to be a change in governance, then they won't do it. 

They can find other ways — other ways being intermunicipal 

agreements. 

 

So again I say our government is not driving this process — 

we're facilitating it, providing information where needed, and 

we trust, at the local level, that those people will make their 

own decisions that best suit their own needs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I can appreciate you 

want to do these things in an orderly manner. 

 

I recently had an experience myself with your department, and 

I'd like to commend your officials. I subdivided a piece of 

property off. It was 41 acres, fairly easily done, metes and 

bounds; it didn't have to have an official survey or anything. 

But that process took from August to December, not because 

your folks weren't extremely diligent. When you put all of the 

Crowns in, and everybody else that has to have a say in whether 

these things can occur or not, it is devilishly slow. I've got two 

more that I'd like to do, and I don't know if I want to go through 

the grief that goes along with that process or not. And like I say, 

your officials were always ready to get at it, but everybody else 

out there seems to just sit on their thumb and dither. 

 

And what you're talking about, with something as large as an 

RM, where you have those other players involved and all of the 

rigmarole that would have to be gone through with these other 

folks, I think most people would shake their head and say, I'd be 

better off to let this thing fall in the basement rather than try to 

come up with a new structure. 

 

Because there's a lot of other players besides yourself who have 

a very large say as ownership and governance change in a 

particularly entity. And that's why I was wondering if you have 

models up and going. Because I do honestly believe in treaty 

land entitlement, and it's a good process. As it moves forward, 

the need to amalgamate and change the way that some people 

govern themselves is going to come about. 

 

And it can be a very frustrating and slow experience, as I 

personally found out, because there are all these other players. I 



March 6, 1995 

 

657 

mean, you've got buried pipelines, you've got buried gas lines, 

you've got buried electrical lines, you've got water, you've got 

all sorts of people who will be interested in the changes in 

ownership or governance of a particular unit. 

 

And it will be extremely frustrating if there is not a way for this 

to occur without all of the players sort of jamming at the gate. 

And that seems to be what happens at present. It's a very slow, 

frustrating experience. And I tell you, you don't want to have 

the banker waiting, like I did, through that, because it starts to 

get awful expensive. 

 

So I don't know, if you haven't started on that process, could 

you maybe give me some assurance, and by doing so give 

taxpayers some assurance that perhaps this process can have a 

more clear light at the end of the tunnel? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I guess there's a number of 

responses to the question. I think one of the greatest barriers, or 

the greatest problems on amalgamations will be how you 

rationalize the assessment structure and the mill rates. And 

that's going to take a lot of time because you'll be going into 

different school divisions with different mill rates and different 

services. 

 

And what you have if you have amalgamations taking place, 

you have different municipal structures with different assets and 

liabilities and mill rates trying to merge together. And that takes 

a fair length of time. And you can't . . . I don't think you can 

hurry that unnecessarily. 

 

But if you're talking about what problems may be the largest 

ones to overcome as far as what happens if there were to be a 

spiralling number of amalgamations, it probably would be in 

regard to this whole issue of how you equalize assessment and 

how you come up with mill rates that are compatible in 

different jurisdictions that either involve school boards or other 

units that may be there as well, like library boards. 

 

So it's not a simple process; it's fairly complicated. And you, as 

you've found out, alluded to when you tried to do a subdivision, 

there are a number of players, some involving the Crowns, but I 

don't think in regard to municipal structures that you're going to 

find the Crowns standing in the way. It's more going to be the 

case of how you go about the taxation structure and the 

assessment changes that will have to be put in place before you 

can merge two different types, especially if you're talking about 

an urban and a rural; but it happens as well with rural to rural. 

 

So again all I can say is we are providing the support, we're 

listening to the local governments, taking their advice. Where 

they need legislative changes we have made them. Those are the 

amendments we brought forward this year. 

 

Where they have said that some of the revenue-sharing 

formulas stand in their way, we're trying to remove that part of 

the formula. And where there is a problem with assessments or 

other local government bodies, we are trying to be supportive 

and try to engage in dialogue at that level as well. 

So it's a process that I don't think behoves us to hurry into, 

because the greatest success will come in allowing it to go at its 

own speed, and when they're comfortable with it they'll initiate 

it and it will be something that they're willing to live with. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, and I wish 

you would echo those words at the cabinet table when the 

Minister of Health is on his next rampage. You know, go slow, 

let the folks figure it out, spend their own money, do it 

reasonably. I'm sure you could give a very impassioned defence 

for how local people manage their own affairs if you'd only do 

it on their behalf. 

 

Speaking of revenue sharing, you have recently branched off 

into a new area of revenue sharing. And this directly affects 

municipal government; $9.5 million of VLT profits with 

communities. 

 

And I would like to know more about that — when this was 

sort of decided upon and how your discussions with local 

government have gone to date on the handing out of this 

money. Have you conclusively settled the issues with both 

SARM and SUMA in how this money is going to be divvied 

up? And what your expectations are in the future as far as this 

revenue pool — is it a static 10 per cent or is this going to 

fluctuate over the next several years? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I thank you for the question 

because it's very timely. In fact I spent almost the entire 

morning in a meeting with SAHO (Saskatchewan Association 

of Health Organizations), SUMA, and SARM discussing this. 

Let me back up a little bit to when the government made the 

announcement and the background and the reasons for doing 

that. 

 

Obviously when we implemented the VLT program we had 

certain expectations that it would bring in a certain amount of 

revenue, and we incorporated that into our balanced budget. 

And we found out that we had underestimated that revenue and 

there were going to be surplus funds, and there was about 10 

per cent. And so we decided that what we could best do to 

support local communities was dedicate this 10 per cent net 

revenue back to local communities. 

 

We initially engaged in a discussion with the four associations 

— SUMA, SARM, SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association), and SAHO — because they represent the major 

delivery of services at the local level. SSTA afterwards decided 

that they would not want to participate in these discussions and 

so they withdrew from the group. And that left SUMA, SARM, 

and SAHO at the table discussing how they could best 

distribute these funds to the local communities for the most 

urgent or the most essential needs, or to the groups that had the 

greatest need. 

 

And we are continuing that. I guess what I would say to you is 

we believe these groups are very much in tune with local needs. 

They realize on a number of fronts where they think they could 

put that money to best use. 



March 6, 1995 

 

658 

There are some innovative ideas that have come out of the 

meeting this morning that we are continuing to work on and 

they are talking to their respective associations to get further 

advice about. And I look forward to their recommendation 

coming to the government in the very near future about this. 

 

We have made a commitment that we asked for their advice and 

their recommendation, and we'll wait for them to give it to us 

before we make any public announcement about what we're 

going to be doing with those funds other than that they have to 

be put to work back at the community level to some use that is 

broadly felt and that the most number of people in 

Saskatchewan can feel the benefit of. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That would be 

an interesting group. You've got SAHO (Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations) who want the 2 mill levy, 

which you agreed to a couple of years ago, for health costs. And 

then you've got SUMA and SARM who would love to trade 

something to get rid of it. And, you know, the fox in the 

chicken coop thing, it would be an interesting table to sit 

around because one definitely needs more money, and the other 

one doesn't want to give it up because they're trying to protect 

some taxpayers. 

 

So what's the relative . . . if you were to compare those to this 

10 per cent on VLTs as opposed to the 2 mill levy which 

municipalities now have to fork over to health care, how do 

they compare in numbers? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The 2 mill levy is $13.2 million; 10 per 

cent is $9.5 million. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So obviously SAHO isn't going to want to 

trade that one off very badly, are they? They're making more 

money as it right now than they would be on the other. 

 

Madam Minister, you said that you haven't determined then 

how the . . . is it going to be done community by community? 

Do I understand that this is 10 per cent of my community or the 

gambling done there, or is this sort of a generic 10 per cent 

across the province on the total take? Because I know there's 

communities making pretty strong arguments to government 

that they are contributing far more than their share to the booty 

and want more back. So how are you going to do this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — It's 10 per cent of net revenue that comes 

to the SGLA, the Saskatchewan Gaming and Liquor 

Association. It is . . . some communities contribute a fair 

amount through the VLT program; some contribute very little. 

And there are some communities that don't have a VLT 

program. I mean if you looked at RMs, they don't have a liquor 

licence facility where they would have a VLT program there. 

 

So it is very difficult to say that you would distribute it back to 

a community in relation to what is being taken out because of 

the VLT program, because that in effect would leave out all of 

the RMs. Very few of them, as you know, have licensed hotel 

outlets or wherever where you would find a VLT. 

(1630) 

 

So we are in discussions with them right now about what that 

money can be used for. And of course you have brought up one 

aspect that it can be used for, which is a two-mill levy, and we 

have discussed that and looked at it. But there are other ways of 

going about it that may be as appropriate and more useful as 

well. 

 

We have looked at whether it should be distributed on a per 

capita basis or whether there should be some generic program 

province-wide that we could put in and fund that would be for 

the benefit of all. So it's not as simple as, say, well we'll take off 

the two-mill levy because there are consequences to that. And 

you would be surprised at the amount of consensus around the 

table about whether that is a right approach or not a right 

approach. 

 

I think I would, with due respect, give a lot of credit to SUMA 

and SARM in looking at this very realistically and being very 

practical about what we want to achieve. So there is a common 

element that has emerged from the discussions this morning 

that I believe will be supported by the people of Saskatchewan, 

and I hope it will be supported by the members of the 

opposition when we do announce it. But at this point in time 

I'm not going to pre-empt what may come out of those 

discussions because they are going back to their respective 

memberships and looking at it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, it would be a very 

foolish, starving man who bit the hand that was attempting to 

feed it. And I think after what your government has done to 

municipal government in the last few years, they are in bad 

need of a cash infusion of one kind or another, and I suspect 

they would reasonably look at a lot of things. 

 

Now are you telling me that SAHO is there as an active . . . The 

way I understood your press release and everything, that this 

was going to be a sharing arrangement with local government. 

Certainly as yet that isn't SAHO. I mean they aren't elected. 

They aren't anything but something your government thought up 

at present because they're all appointed people. They're 

government functionaries, if you will, that sit on that board. 

And are you saying that they are going to be active participants 

in the divvying up, like, not only as advisors but actually 

receivers of this money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Again they are an advisory body. SAHO, 

because they provide a very critical service to communities . . . 

And when we made the changes in health care, both SUMA and 

SARM had comments to make about that. And so I think there 

is a very strong connection between health care delivery and 

municipal governments. And they have already acknowledged 

that in the past by virtue of comments that they have made 

especially on the municipal side about the changes in health 

care. 

 

So at the table, these three groups are an advisory body. The 

money sits within municipal government. It's dedicated to 



March 6, 1995 

 

659 

community and social development programs, and it's very 

broadly defined right now. 

 

Once again we're waiting for them to make a final 

determination about what the most critical need is in 

Saskatchewan and how this could be best put to use that would 

serve both the wellness model and the services that are 

delivered by SAHO and the common services that may be 

delivered through the rural and urban municipal governments. 

And there's a lot of common things that they have there that 

they want to look at. 

 

So it sits within our department. When it's transferred, it will 

probably be transferred in some way through to municipal 

governments or perhaps through another third party, but we 

haven't defined that yet. And we're waiting, as I said, for them 

to finish their discussions. I think there was a fair level of 

consensus arrived at the meeting this morning. And I think that 

everybody in Saskatchewan will be pleased, and they will be 

very supportive of these three groups and their ability to work 

together for the good of all people of Saskatchewan and to put 

this nine and a half million dollars to very good use that will 

benefit many, many people. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, I can appreciate where 

they're coming from. I mean you made the decision that you 

were going to, because of the heat you were taking over VLTs 

and their social impact, that you were going to distribute some 

of the money back to the folks. Now if there's nine and half 

million bucks in the kitty, and I suspect you could get a group 

of just about anybody in this province to sit down with you and 

talk about divvying that up. 

 

What we want to understand and should be concerned about as 

legislators is that this money is going to be dealt with in a 

proper manner and that we simply aren't into some 

electioneering gimmickry here where we're trying to get the 

mostest voteses for the leastest money, you know, type of 

exercise. 

 

And that's why I'm concerned about the sale involvement at this 

time because on one hand you've got SARM which is all duly 

elected folks representing specific number of ratepayers; you've 

got SUMA which are all duly elected folks representing X 

number of ratepayers. I mean why not have the school board in 

there? They spend large amounts of money. They've got X 

number of ratepayers, taxpayers, you know. 

 

I mean I can think of lots of organizations around the province 

which would qualify for what you told me the criteria was. All 

of a sudden I've got SAHO in here as a major player  which I 

don't think anybody anticipated, who aren't elected  who say 

they represent people, but I'm not sure that they do. We'll have 

to wait and see when they're finally elected how many of them 

get turfed. And yet they are now at the table as one of the strong 

players in this. And I don't see how this squares. 

 

And you haven't told me anything. You say you had good 

discussions this morning about what's coming down. There's 

also an election coming down in this province some time in the 

next few months. And I'm quite concerned about how this $10 

million carrot that you've held out is being used and whether it's 

being fairly used because a lot of communities are saying, we're 

not happy with VLTs; we're not happy with the provincial 

gaming policy. We believe that there has to be changes; there 

has to be more latitude. We're locally elected; we think it isn't 

proper that this is imposed on high. 

 

And yet on the other hand, you're now divvying up the money 

with people that I think a lot of people in local government will 

find a little bit offensive because I don't know too many RMs 

that are in delivering health care directly. Some of the big cities 

have been involved in it. Now the health districts have it. I 

know my RM isn't involved in a whole lot of things. They used 

to be on the ambulance board before they got that taken away 

from them. 

 

So how do you square this business with these government-

appointed health boards now being the determining factor in 

how this $10 million, which was to be dedicated back to local 

government particularly . . . how do you square this with what's 

taking place? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well first of all, again I will say that the 

health care boards are going to be elected this fall, so they will 

be a locally elected group. Health care is essential service that is 

provided to all people across Saskatchewan at the local level. 

It's community based. And as you know, it's not just 

institutional care. It has a lot to do with other factors in the 

community. There are environmental factors. There's housing 

factors. There's transportation factors. 

 

Wellness is many things, and it's just not the idea of going to a 

doctor and getting a pill or going into the hospital. And we've 

been trying to tell the people that there is another approach to 

health care. So the people on the health district boards realize 

that health care is very broadly based, and it overlaps in many 

ways services that are being provided by municipal 

governments. And thank goodness, both the rural municipal 

governments and the urban municipal governments realize that 

exact same thing, even if you don't. 

 

And so there's a lot of commonality between those three groups, 

and they are engaged in a very useful and a very productive 

discussion right now. And they don't see the kind of dissension 

that you seem to think must be there by virtue of them having 

two different approaches or having two different groups of 

constituents. 

 

They are very respectful of each other. They understand the 

process, and the process is that they will provide advice to the 

government on what they think is the most necessary and the 

most useful purpose that we can put this nine and a half million 

dollars to that will benefit the greatest number of people. And 

this has nothing to do with being in an election or not being in 

an election. 

 

And you know, I suppose if you want to be cynical, you can 



March 6, 1995 

 

660 

use anything to make a point. But I think that is simply cheap 

politics, and I don't see any useful approach to that. This is a 

sincere attempt to place back at the local level nine and a half 

million dollars for their use, and we asked those people who are 

at that level providing critical services to give us advice. We 

had a meeting with them. I believe there's a lot of common 

purpose there, and I believe the final recommendation that they 

will give us will be something that is accepted by the people of 

Saskatchewan in good faith, as I hope it will be accepted by 

you, without any talk about the politics around it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying, Madam Minister, is 

that this group will determine the final outcome of the money. 

The government will stand back and say, it's entirely in your 

hands, you do with it as you wish; I as a minister, or cabinet, 

aren't going to interfere in how this money will be spent. Is that 

what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — What we have said to them is, we would 

like to see a consensus arrived at by these three groups so that 

we don't have to arbitrate between two or three 

recommendations. We have said that we want it to be broadly 

based, to be something new and unique and visible within the 

communities, and that we don't want to see it to go to top up 

programing that is already there. In other words, our preference 

is not to top up the revenue-sharing program for municipal 

governments with this nine and a half million dollars. That is 

not one of the things that we have asked them to examine. 

 

So with all due respect there are some parameters that we put 

upon it; not a lot, but I think that would be one or two of them, 

that it has to something new and unique and it can't go to top up 

already existing program funding. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — No money at all can go to existing program 

funding, and that will include both municipal government and 

health care — it has to be something new in health care? 

Because you said SAHO are the big players, so there's no 

existing areas of their funding that can be touched by this 

money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The purpose was not to supplement 

funding that was already there under normal programing 

transfers from either Department of Health or the Department 

of Municipal Government. From what we said is, we don't want 

to use this as a top-up on the revenue-sharing program. We 

believe there are other needs that it could be appropriately 

applied to and the same applies to the Department of Health. 

 

Now again there are a number of emerging issues that we're 

looking at and I don't want to go into any more detail than that, 

but there has to be a consensus. We are not going to be saying, 

SAHO, we don't like your idea but we like SARM's idea. What 

I've said to them very clearly is, we want this group to come out 

with a consensus recommendation that supports your services 

or the constituents that you provide services to, broadly based, 

either in wellness or in municipal services. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, in the answer before, 

you were fairly emphatic. You said that this money is not to be 

used to top up any existing programing. Okay. And that's fair. 

And that means that it can't be on the municipal side with 

revenue sharing; it can't be lots of things that I can think of. 

And I agree with you that if you're going to do this, then you 

should put those stipulations on it. 

 

But it appeared to me when we got down to the health side that 

you started to weasel on me because you said, well there's new 

things coming along, you know. I mean are you going to . . . 

Home care comes into a particular community and well we're 

going to use home care . . . I mean I admit I'm suspicious as to 

the mix that you have together at the table. And I'm just 

wondering if you're not looking for a way to shove money over 

into a health care initiative that is floundering, at best, in some 

parts of our province. 

 

And I'll give you an example. Community A says, we would 

like a doctor. Now a doctor in a community, to a lot of people, 

does a lot to help the social-economic area. Okay. They don't 

have to drive as far. So community A in health district B says, 

well why don't we all get together and take our share of this and 

we'll put up a clinic and buy a house or we'll do something to 

entice a South African doctor to come to our community and 

sign on. 

 

And there might be enough money to do that. But the health 

district board has got the hammer  and the Department of 

Health  on how many doctors can practise in the province of 

Saskatchewan and who pays the salary and those things. And I 

think if you want to make this work, if it is a worthwhile 

program, that you stick to what you said, that it won't top up 

existing funding but it clearly be going back to communities 

without the other agenda being mixed in. Do you want to 

comment on that? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — You have explained it better than I can, 

even though you are suspicious. It's too bad that you always 

have to be suspicious before you are able to look at something 

reasonably and rationally. 

 

You're right. We didn't anticipate this to go to top up funding 

that they felt they had not received adequate funding through 

regular programing delivered through the Department of Health. 

And that's not to say that it will . . . there will be an aspect to it 

that will have to have probably some health delivery 

connotations to it, or aspects of it that might look in a way to be 

health oriented. But it might also look to be very much 

municipal oriented. 

 

So I guess I can tell you, look at emergency services. They go 

many directions and they cross a number of boundaries and 

there's a number of uses there. And that is one way that you can 

look at both sides of the issue. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So some of the communities in the South that 

have been clambering for ambulance service possibly could get 



March 6, 1995 

 

661 

ambulance service out of here? Is that what you're telling me? 

Mankota, Coronach, some of these communities that are feeling 

left out in the cold by health reform could possibly get 

ambulance service? Is that a logical extension of your thought? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — I said ambulance services are provided to 

regular programing funding from the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — A doctor would be too, Madam Minister. I 

mean there's all sorts of things. But once again you're telling me 

that it isn't local people that are going to have control; it's going 

to be top down, and nothing ever changes I guess that way. 

 

I want to ask you about the issue surrounding VLTs in 

communities. As minister responsible for local government, I 

know you've had representation from people who say we don't 

want this stuff in our community. And you've given me the 

standard government answer. Is there no process for local 

government to determine through . . . I know you can have a dry 

town, like if you don't want to have liquor in your community. 

And there are places in our province that are dry from back in 

the 1920s. If I'm on an Indian reserve and I vote dry, I'm dry. 

You know substance abuse isn't allowed in certain areas of our 

province. 

 

Why are you telling local government that they don't have the 

power through by-law to empower themselves to be gambling-

free areas in the province of Saskatchewan when you do it with 

liquor? Because you tax liquor, you tax all sorts of things, and 

yet you would empower them as their minister to do that but 

you won't do it with gambling. Why is that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well the short answer is that was 

discussed at SUMA and the membership of SUMA turned it 

down. They said they didn't want to take on the responsibility. It 

wasn't part of their obligations under The Urban Municipality 

Act to make a decision about gambling. It was the responsibility 

of the provincial government. So quite clearly the urban 

governments did not want to take this on and they said so very 

clearly in the result of a vote that was put by resolution at their 

convention. They turned that authority down. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well as I understand some of the 

communities, Madam Minister, they really don't care what 

SUMA thinks. They have the ability — and correct me if I'm 

wrong. When they voted they voted to go dry without SUMA, 

and under their by-laws they have the ability to maintain that, as 

does an Indian reservation. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, are you telling me that SUMA had to be 

involved in this and give blessing to someone passing a by-law? 

I mean in Moose Jaw we passed a by-law you had to walk on 

the right-hand side of the street, for goodness sakes. And that 

didn't need SUMA's blessing, and yet that set a precedent that 

could have been really strange for the province if we all had to 

walk on the right-hand side of the street, you know. 

 

I mean they voted to go dry on their own; it had nothing to do 

with SUMA. Now, Madam Minister, are you telling me that to 

vote within your jurisdiction to ban gaming requires SUMA's 

blessing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I think you're confusing the two 

issues. First of all, as far as what they have a right to do, they 

can pass by-laws that decide how they're going to regulate 

commerce within their municipality. And through zoning by-

laws or through licensing by-laws, they can license premises 

and so forth. And if they don't want to give out a licence for 

someone to have a liquor outlet, they don't have to. But it 

probably would be challenged in this day and age. 

 

I can't think of a community that has a hospitality industry like a 

hotel or a lounge and has decided to not allow a businessman to 

have that opportunity if he wants to take it and provide that 

service to the public. So a municipal government has a right, 

through zoning by-laws and through licensing by-laws, to 

regulate commerce in their jurisdiction. 

 

Gaming is a provincial jurisdiction and we have sole 

responsibility for it. I don't believe there is any municipality that 

says that they want the provincial government to devolve into 

their jurisdiction the whole issue of gambling and gaming. That 

is not clearly what they have sent a message to us about. They 

have said this is your issue and you manage it and leave it at the 

provincial level. 

 

So there are two very clearly different things. One is zoning, 

and one is licensing in regard to commerce, and they have 

jurisdiction over that. The provincial government has 

jurisdiction over gambling. And we have a provincial policy 

that says in venues that are age restricted that people have the 

right to put in VLT machines, and we've put them in there. 

 

Now the issue is, if they want them out, why can't we allow 

them to take them out? And you have to be practical about this 

and say, why do they want them out? If it's because they fear 

that there is a draw-down on the resources within their 

community, that too many people within their community are 

going in and putting money into those VLT machines, then we 

would say to them, what's to stop them from going out of your 

community, down the road to the next community where there's 

VLT machines and putting the money into their VLT machines? 

 

You can't draw a ring around a community or build a wall 

around it and say nobody can go out of our community and 

spend money in one down the road. And so it's self-defeating to 

say that we want not to have VLTs in our community because it 

poses an economic hardship, and too many people are spending 

their money in VLT programs and the VLT terminals. 

 

If the people want to do it and it's their money and they are in 

there because they have a right to be there because they are over 

18, then I don't think the government or anybody else should 

tell them what to do with their money. That's their money. And 

if they choose that form of entertainment, then I don't know 

why members of the opposition or anybody else would go to 

somebody and say, I believe you're spending your 



March 6, 1995 

 

662 

money wrongly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, we raise these 

questions because you people are so full of contradictions. I 

mean what you just said totally contradicts the Minister of 

Finance and her crazy 9 per cent sales tax and the reason she 

gives to defend that foolish piece of nonsense when we sit next 

to Alberta and Manitoba and this province just bleeds and 

hemorrhages all over the place. You should be an advocate for 

folks at the cabinet table, because you make all the right 

arguments but obviously you don't do it. 

 

The reason we're concerned is because you're saying that people 

don't have the right to manage their own communities. People 

can vote, Madam Minister, in this province, not to have the 

government-controlled liquor monopoly, okay, selling liquor. 

As I understand it, it's on the books. When I was minister of 

Native Affairs, there were communities approaching me about 

voting to not have liquor, period. Okay. And as far as I know, 

those are legally constituted communities, they have village 

status, and they don't want liquor. 

 

So if on one hand they can vote to not have your liquor 

monopoly, why can't they vote to have your gambling 

monopoly? And if people in that community — I agree with 

you totally — want to go down the road and spend their money 

on VLTs, that's their right. And I'm not disputing the right of 

individuals. 

 

What I am disputing with you is why you think you have the 

right to impose your will, through a Crown monopoly, on a 

community? And there are communities . . . and I guess the 

only way you and I would ever know if they are right or wrong 

is to be able to put it to a vote. And I guess in a democratic 

society you should either be able to vote or not vote on whether 

you have things that are morally objectionable to the people in 

that community. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well you're getting into again the 

legislation. And under the section of The Urban Municipality 

Act that allows municipalities to hold plebiscites, it very clearly 

says that they have a right to hold a plebiscite in any area that 

falls within their jurisdiction. Gambling does not fall within the 

jurisdiction of municipal governments, and therefore a 

plebiscite on gambling is outside of their jurisdictional review, 

and that is what is in the Act. They can only operate within the 

confines of The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

They can only have plebiscites or referendums, if you want, in 

regard to issues over which they have jurisdiction. They do not 

have jurisdiction over gambling. Gambling, by way of the 

Criminal Code of Canada, is a responsibility of the provincial 

government. And that is where it resides and that is the 

difference between this and those other issues. 

 

The issues of liquor licensing can be done through zoning and 

licensing of businesses. And if they want to take on a 

businessman and say, we are going to close down your liquor 

licence or your liquor outlet in our community and throw you 

out, then I guess they have the right to do that because all they 

have to do is take away his licence to operate. 

 

But again, I would say, if they threw out the man who has a 

liquor venue or a lounge or a beer parlour in their community, I 

guess in that way they would be throwing out the VLTs because 

the VLTs can only operate in age-restricted venues. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


