






















































March 29, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 20, 1995 

 

 
987 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: — I will ask the minister to introduce his officials 
to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right I have the deputy of Saskatchewan 
Energy and Mines, Ray Clayton; to my left the assistant deputy 
minister, Dan McFadyen; behind the deputy is Bruce Wilson; 
and behind me, Phil Reeves. Also along with us tonight from 
SEM (Saskatchewan Energy and Mines), we have Lynn 
Jacobson, Doug Koepke; and from Saskatchewan Research 
Council, Crystal Smudy; and Merette Heggelund from SECDA 
(Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 
Authority). 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman. I 
wonder if the minister might take this opportunity to elaborate a 
little bit more on how he thinks the uranium industry and the 
combination of Cameco and AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada 
Ltd.) and nuclear research and the combinations of uranium and 
nuclear might be doing in his view. He hasn't said an awful lot 
about it and I'm sure it's just an oversight on his part but he 
might want to comment on where he sees the nuclear energy 
going from not only mining, which I understand looks like a 
pretty big expansion, but the whole uranium and nuclear energy 
business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. And to the hon. 
member, I would want to begin by saying that, although we've 
been through estimates here before this year — looking at the 
department's operations — we indeed haven't spent time during 
estimates discussing the uranium industry as it pertains to our 
province. 
 
Let me say in the outset that I believe, as many people in our 
province — as I would indicate, probably the vast majority of 
the people in Saskatchewan — believe that we really are 
blessed with a rich resource that has much potential in terms of 
creating energy opportunities around the world. As you will 
know, there are now many countries that are dependent on that 
resource, our resource. We're the largest supplier in the world, 
and there are many countries that are really dependent on this 
resource to supply their energy needs. 
 
So quite clearly, it's not only been an opportunity for us as a 
people in this province, to develop a resource to generate 
revenue for government, for industry, and for suppliers of 
industry. So it really has become an integral part of our mining 
industry and I think we recognize that. 

The investment opportunities that we've created here in 
Saskatchewan and that have happened in Saskatchewan over 
the last decades have been and continue to be a major part of 
our economy. And I think that it's one area that as we develop 
new technologies, new designs in terms of reactors and 
disposal, which is as yet an unanswered question, it's incumbent 
upon us to develop and to work with industry to develop that 
research that will make this a safer industry than it already is. 
 
I indicated that with respect to research, quite an important 
component of this particular industry, as you will know we've 
signed a memorandum of understanding with respect to the 
design of CANDU (Canadian deuterium uranium). As well, 
AECL's been involved in some development of disposal 
technology for radioactive waste, and we were just able to 
announce the expansion of the McArthur River mine which will 
employ, during construction, some 250 people, and on an 
ongoing basis as the mine and the mill are developed, 2 to 300 
permanent jobs. 
 
And so I think it's safe to say that the Government of 
Saskatchewan recognizes the importance of this industry. We 
recognize our commitments globally with respect to the 
environment and safety, and as well we recognize our 
responsibility to ensure that there is an energy resource for 
countries that aren't blessed with rich hydro, which many of our 
provinces and we are in this province, to help them create a 
supply for their energy demands so that their industries can 
flourish. So I guess it's safe to say that we recognize this as a 
very important part of our mining operations in the province 
and we recognize the impact on our Saskatchewan economy, 
and as well we recognize the impact on the global economy. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I wonder if the minister could tell us what he 
expects the income to the province to be from uranium in terms 
of royalties and/or taxes of various sorts, what the government's 
share is in Cameco, and what they think might be the benefits 
of that, and also . . . well he can start with that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, I will ask the 
member, if he would, to turn to page 18 on the Saskatchewan 
Estimates 1995-96. For the fiscal year '95-96, we're estimating 
some $17.1 million. In the 1994 — I'll just give you some back 
history here — we're forecasting for fiscal year end $19.9 
million. And we estimated in '94 $24.8 million. 
 
I'm looking right now at the royalties; our officials are getting 
that information together. So if you want to continue, they're 
bringing — I believe — the Cameco shares and what our 
residual shareholding is. I believe it's in the neighbourhood of 
30 per cent; it's just under 30 per cent. And I think my officials 
are telling me that we have 28.9 per cent as it stands now. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So your estimate is approximately $20 million 
in royalties . . . is estimated from uranium. That's from all 
uranium activity in Saskatchewan. And you have about 30 per 
cent of the Cameco shares, is that correct? 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
988 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, what we're suggesting, in terms 
of revenue from uranium for the '95 fiscal year, is a forecast of 
17,100,000, and we have 28.9 per cent shares in Cameco. 
 
Mr. Devine: — If you exercised those shares today, could you 
give me a ballpark of what it might be . . . what the benefit to 
the province might me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, as the hon. member will 
know, the shares are traded on the stock market. They have 
been increasing over the past years, and it's fairly easy to find 
them on a daily basis. What you've got to do is either open your 
Globe and Mail . . . and you can have a look. I'm having one of 
my colleagues check to see what they're trading at today so as 
not to give you inaccurate information. And from that we 
should be able to figure out roughly what the net value of those 
shares would be. 
 
Mr. Devine: — While he's looking that up, would the minister 
want to comment on how he thinks and how his officials might 
think Cameco is doing. Are they generally satisfied with what 
the company's doing, and particularly as a result of the 30 per 
cent . . . or 28 per cent shares that you have in it? And is it . . . 
seem to be going in the direction you'd like to see? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, to the hon. member, it's safe 
to say that we believe Cameco has run a good, business-like 
operation, and as a 30 per cent shareholder, we are quite 
comfortable with the management of the corporation. I think 
they've been doing an excellent job, which should, over a period 
of time, result in dividends to the people of Saskatchewan who 
in fact are the shareholders and own roughly three out of ten of 
the shares. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I guess to be a little bit more specific, are 
you generally happy with the way the company is operating in 
the private sector? Are you happy with the share values? Are 
you happy with the interest internationally in the company? 
 
The hon. member's happy; I can see that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think it's safe to say, just as an 
overview, that in terms of the corporation, we believe that 
they've been fairly effective in their marketing abilities. The 
internal management of the corporation, as is reported to us, 
would indicate that they have a good management team. 
 
In terms of the diversification of their portfolio, it's not a 
corporation that is prone to putting all of its eggs in one basket. 
And so I think you can safely assume that the fact that we're 
holding the shares would suggest that we're very comfortable 
with the management and the way the corporation is operating. 
 
I would also say I think there's always room for improvement. 
And I would think any corporation that would want to maintain 
a competitive edge and would want to maintain its place in the 
market-place would ensure that they're running a healthy 
company with respect to the management, and with respect to 
their marketing, and with respect to diversification of their  

portfolio. So with respect to Cameco and our investment in 
Cameco, yes, I think it's safe to assume that we're quite 
company. It's a healthy corporation and we're satisfied that our 
return on investment is acceptable and adequate. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would the minister . . . would you think that 
the people in northern Saskatchewan and yourself being from 
Prince Albert would be happy with Cameco as it's operating 
today, and its share values, and the way it has operated. Do you 
think the general public feels that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think it would be safe to assume 
that the general public is comfortable with Cameco and their 
involvement in the industry. Polling would indicate that about 
80 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan are comfortable with 
the operations of Cameco and with the operations of mining in 
our province. So I think it's safe to assume that that would in 
fact be the case. 
 
I just want to say that, with respect to the price of shares as they 
were trading on Saturday . . . was 34.75 a share. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Devine: — So $34.75 a share and you have 28.9 per cent 
of the shares. How many shares is that and what's it worth to 
you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, I would like to give the 
member the number of shares that we hold as it pertains to the 
aggregate of the number of shares but I think that the minister, 
being familiar with this place after having sat here for a period 
of time, will know that that's a question that's probably better 
addressed to the minister in charge of Crown Investments 
Corporation . . . will have the officials that have all of those 
details at hand and during those estimates would be able to give 
you the exact amount of shares and what our 30 per cent would 
mean in shares and, I guess, what the net would be in terms of 
the percentage of shares we hold. 
 
I haven't got the officials with that information from Energy and 
Mines, but I'm sure that my colleague, the Deputy Premier, 
would be more than willing to give those answers to you in 
estimates when Crown Investments Corporation come before 
the House. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is Energy and Mines, 
and this is a big energy unit. We're just asking for the number of 
shares that you have in a very large uranium operation that's 
publicly traded. You'd think that you could . . . maybe in the 
next hour, somebody could find out the number of shares that 
are traded. And if you've got 30 per cent of them, you can tell 
us ballpark what it is. I can expect you could dig that up. I don't 
want the last cent; I just want to know ballpark what you think 
it is. 
 
Let me go on to say, is it fair to say, Mr. Minister, that you 
would be happy with the fact that the uranium company in 
Saskatchewan is a publicly traded company given the fact that  



March 20, 1995 

 
989 

the shares are now as high as $34.75 a share? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it would be fair to say 
that any time there's an increase in the value of shares owned by 
the Government of Saskatchewan quite clearly that would make 
us somewhat happy. As I understand it, the shares have gone 
somewhere in the neighbourhood from $18 to 34.75 as we 
indicated, trading on the stock market on Saturday. And I think 
the same could be said for any corporation in which the 
Government of Saskatchewan or any shareholder would hold 
shares. I guess it's safe to say the people who own shares in 
IPSCO, when they see an increase in the value of the shares, are 
quite satisfied and quite happy that that is the case. 
 
I think the same could be said for small oil companies and the 
same could be said for any company that's publicly traded. 
Certainly shareholders are going to be comfortable to see their 
share values increase because that means that certainly there's 
profits have been made. So I would want to say that I guess it's 
safe to assume that any increase in the price of the shares, 
whether it be uranium investment or any other investment, 
would make the shareholders quite happy. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm happy to hear that. Are 
you generally happy or would you feel positive about the fact 
that the public can watch the share values quite easily by 
reading the newspaper, and know that not only locally but 
nationally and internationally people can participate in this 
company. 
 
Are you generally happy with that  and not at all confuse you 
as to where I'm going  are you happy with the fact that it's a 
publicly traded company now and the shares are offered freely 
on the market? Are you personally comfortable with that and do 
you think that that's a generally positive thing for the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think whether an investment 
be made that is being traded on the stock market or whether it's 
land values, as an example, that aren't traded on the stock 
market, any increase by any shareholder would give a great 
degree of comfort. And so I would suggest that incremental 
increases in the shares of Cameco that is trading publicly would 
satisfy me and I believe members on the government side. 
 
Similarly, land values and assets that the government owns that 
is not traded . . . or that are not traded on the stock market 
would make members of the government side of the House 
equally happy. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, do you think that non-publicly 
traded operations will have the same opportunity to attract 
equity and to respond to investment the same as publicly traded 
companies? In other words, having this company publicly 
traded in the market-place, do you think that has contributed 
towards its now quite improved value? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think the member is quite 
clearly trying to define a philosophical difference between 
himself and members of this government: that being that assets  

that are traded publicly on the stock market are good; and that if 
in fact there happens to be Crown assets that are not traded on 
the stock market, those are not good. 
 
Well if that's your theory, and if you're asking if I buy into that 
theory, the answer is no. Because I believe the Crown 
corporations, frankly, have served the public of Saskatchewan 
very well over the years. I think a little unfortunate that over the 
period of time when you were the premier, you — for 
philosophical reasons — decided to liquidate those assets, and 
in many cases have cost the people of Saskatchewan millions 
and millions of dollars when you sold them, and continue to 
cost the taxpayers millions and millions of dollars after you've 
sold them. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that it's not a matter of 
whether it's publicly or privately owned. I think what you have 
to do is find out, and do an analysis of what works, in what 
instance, and what doesn't work. There are quite clearly 
advantages to Crown corporations that I think even you might 
recognize. 
 
The fact that we've been able to develop utilities across this 
province that have been able to serve both urban and rural 
Saskatchewan — the fact is with SaskEnergy, a publicly owned 
corporation under your administration, we were able to develop 
the broadest network in terms of a gas utility of anywhere in 
North America. And I would argue that although we're pleased 
the service was delivered to rural Saskatchewan, the fact is that 
we're going to be paying and subsidizing that service for 
decades and decades to come. 
 
But I guess what I would want to say to the member is, if you're 
trying to paint this as being a government that can only see one 
side of the picture, I think you're missing the mark. And I would 
say to the member from Estevan that we take a very pragmatic 
approach to governing. We tend not to use a political 
philosophy or a personal philosophy, but we attempt to develop 
middle-of-the-road policies so that we can ensure the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan, who are the shareholders of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, are best served by the initiatives that we 
embark on. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Let me put it another way. Mr. Minister, in 
looking at the success of this company, would you have 
privatized the company and put it on the stock market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think the member asks a 
hypothetical question, and I'm going to answer it in these terms. 
 
I think there are many things that your administration did prior 
to October of 1991 that we would not have done. And I think 
one of the first things that we wouldn't have done is built up the 
kind of debt load in this province because to my mind, whether 
you talk public or private ownership, that isn't the argument. 
The argument is whether or not it makes good economic sense 
and whether it's fair business and whether it's reasonable 
business and whether you're representing the interests of your 
shareholders who, in the case of this government, are the people  



March 20, 1995 

 
990 

of Saskatchewan — 1 million strong of them. 
 
So I guess what I say is that clearly there will be some 
differences in the way this government operates, and I think 
those are quite evidenced by the fact that we balanced the 
budget in '93-94. 
 
So all I would say to you is that we take a very pragmatic 
approach to government. We take a common sense approach, 
try and deliver fair policy. And that would be the direction that 
we have come from in the past three years and I believe that 
that's where we're headed throughout the rest of this mandate. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I'm just trying to decide if you wouldn't 
have taken the company public and have it offered for shares. 
We would just like to know. So it's interesting that we're just 
asking the question whether you, I suppose philosophically, 
would endorse publicly traded companies where all of the 
public can invest in them and trade in them. In this case it 
seems to have done very well. If it was in government, we 
wouldn't have the idea of what it was worth. Clearly you 
wouldn't have the index and the performance of the shares. And 
we see more and more people doing that. Philosophically, are 
you saying that you're not opposed to the privatization of 
Cameco and offering it on the market? Would that be a fair 
summary of your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess I would answer it this 
way. If you're asking me if philosophically I'm opposed to 
privatization of every element and every arm and every asset of 
government in every case, the answer would be no, because I do 
believe there are some times and some instances where it may 
make more sense for the private sector to be delivering a 
service, or where it may make sense for the private sector to be 
developing a resource. And I think that's a fair assumption to 
make. 
 
But on the other hand, I will say that I think over the period of 
years that we have used Crown corporations as an economic 
development vehicle in this province, they've served us very 
well. So in terms of asking a hypothetical question as to 
whether or not we would have privatized that corporation that 
you did, I think it doesn't even beg an answer. And the reason, 
sir, is because it's a deal that's already done and it's something 
that's happened years back. And I would rather focus, frankly, 
on the future as to how we'd work with that industry. And I 
would rather figure out with them how they fit into our 
economy and how they develop that resource, and how they 
return for their shareholders generous profits, and how they 
return for the people of Saskatchewan, through royalties and 
taxation, their due for the resource that the people of this 
province own. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I'm getting at is 
indeed the future, and I'm trying to find out philosophically if 
you have anything particularly against privatization and taking 
it to the market. Cameco is certainly a case where the market 
has done very well. Shares have done very well. The 
government is doing very well. It has 28.5 per cent of a very  

valuable company, and it's growing. It's internationally 
recognized and quite exciting. 
 
And I just want you . . . well I guess you confirmed that it is. 
You seem to be reluctant to say whether you would have done it 
or not, but obviously it worked. Now I happen to believe you 
wouldn't have done it, but I think now if you want to focus on 
the future, I think there are more opportunities to do the similar 
things to attract investment and attract economic activity 
because, you know, we're a little bit more sophisticated. 
 
We're looking at the 21st century. We're looking at gambling. 
We're looking at share offerings. We're looking at 
privatizations. If the minister might, maybe he would tell me 
what he thinks, in the mining business, of the performance of 
PCS, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, since it's been 
publicly traded and if he thinks it's being operated in a positive 
fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess rather than to let the 
member from Estevan simplify this debate as to this 
government opposed to privatization, the former administration 
supporting privatization, let me explain it in this way. 
 
Whether or not an asset remains the property of the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . and I ask you to reflect back on the years 
when you were the premier of this province. I think the only 
thing people asked you was not even so much as to whether it 
was privately owned or whether it was owned by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. But I think one of the things and 
one of the reasons that people questioned the member from 
Estevan when he was the premier is what kind of a deal did he 
get when he sold the assets. 
 
And let me just say with respect to Potash Corporation, when 
you're going to write off hundreds of millions of dollars worth 
of debt and saddle the people of Saskatchewan with that debt 
load, I think it's quite clear that you can put shares undervalued 
on the stock market, and I think it's quite clear that you can have 
the shareholders who purchase those assets show very good 
returns for their shareholders. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Estevan, my purpose 
here tonight and the comments that I make are not to suggest 
that the people who purchase those assets that in my estimation 
were undervalued, simply by virtue of the fact that you wrote 
off hundreds of millions of dollars if none other . . . but I think 
it was their responsibility for the shareholders of their 
corporations to get the best deal that they could. And quite 
clearly you gave them that. 
 
And so I say that when you buy a company that's undervalued 
and you buy shares that are undervalued and you know that it's 
a wealthy resource — the wealthiest resource in the world with 
respect to potash — and when you know that markets have been 
developed internationally over the years that that resource has 
been mined, I think it's fair to assume that there should be a 
reasonable return, a fair return, for their shareholders. 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
991 

(1930) 
 
So I just say to the member, having put it in the context of 
selling or not selling publicly owned shares, I think what's 
really important is, when you're selling an asset, that you get a 
fair market value for it and that you get a fair return for your 
shareholders. 
 
And in our case as the Government of Saskatchewan and in 
your case when you were the premier, your shareholders were 
quite clearly a million people in Saskatchewan who live here 
and who pay taxes here and who are now paying off the debt 
that you amassed as a result of some of the, I would think, less 
than fair business deals — let me put it that way — while you 
were the premier. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I'm trying to find out 
is talking about the future. Obviously I want to lead you to give 
an honest interpretation of what possibilities might be there for 
the future for the province in say a portfolio of Energy. Because 
it's really interesting and it's fascinating. Energy and Mines is 
very profitable, very big, and has a tremendous potential. I just 
want to make sure that you're not necessarily hidebound by an 
old philosophy that wouldn't have got any of these things on the 
market. 
 
Now you didn't respond to PCS. You did in a fashion and you 
tried to say that it wasn't all that good. I can't find anybody that 
frankly would agree with you. I think PCS was 60-some dollars 
a share today which is quite phenomenal. And if it was so 
obvious that it was going to be that way, I'm sure you got lots of 
shares and bought lots when it was put on the market if you 
thought it was a give-away, which just doesn't ring. If the prices 
went down, you would have complained; if they go up, you 
complain. 
 
So I mean you can't have it both ways. You're either going to 
breathe in or breathe out. It's on the market, it's publicly traded, 
it's very exciting, it's now doubled in size. General consensus is 
that it wouldn't have got there under the thumb of being run by 
a minister in Crown corporation. 
 
Now I just wondered how you felt about PCS, how it's 
operating today. We can talk about the debt. Your previous 
administration borrowed several hundred million dollars to 
nationalize the mine. We inherited that. We took it to the 
market, got equity, replaced the debt with equity, and let it 
trade. And it's trading very well. 
 
And what I'm trying to find out is philosophically if you believe 
that as two examples, Cameco and PCS in your portfolio are 
doing well and whether you would look for similar 
opportunities in the Energy portfolio. And if you don't quite 
appreciate how well those two corporations are . . . well we can 
go back through that and we can examine it in some detail. But 
I'm sure your officials can tell you how well they're doing. 
 
But what I'm after is that if you will acknowledge that they're 
doing extremely well; they've got international recognition;  

they're attracting international money; the stock is going up 
practically on a daily basis and it's attracting even more wealth 
to the province of Saskatchewan; it's allowing new mines to 
open, new companies to be owned by Saskatchewan; if they 
buy a big phosphorous operation in the United States, it's 
owned by Saskatchewan now because this is where the mother 
company is, whether you think there are some distinct 
advantages than having a publicly-traded company over a 
government-run company. Can you think of any advantages of 
having a publicly-traded company operating in today's market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess . . . true, you are 
asking a hypothetical question because the fact of the matter is 
that Saskatchewan Energy and Mines do not own corporations. 
It's basically regulatory and a licensing body that deals with 
private industry and that deals with publicly traded companies. 
That's the role of Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. So I guess it 
would be fairer to say to you that as the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines, it truly is a hypothetical 
question because we don't have assets to sell. 
 
I guess I could ask you, just hypothetically, if when you sold the 
assets of the people of Saskatchewan and at the same time you 
were building this massive debt, if you ever thought to perhaps 
the year 2000 when your grandchildren are going to be paying 
that debt load probably all of their working lives, whether . . . 
and I just ask you hypothetically, have you ever thought of what 
you were doing when you built that provincial debt? 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the minister wants to 
get into provincial debt, we'll get into provincial debt. I want to 
point out to the minister, point out to the minister, a good part 
of the provincial debt according to the auditor last fall, is in 
operations associated with not the general revenue but with 
Crowns and various corporations. And if you want to look at 
chapter 6, page 16, you'll find those operations are contributing 
something like $600 million net to the province of 
Saskatchewan — net. 
 
And then if you look at the next page, chapter 6, page 18, you'll 
find out the investments in Cameco, and Potash, in 
Bi-Provincial upgrader, Wascana Energy, and Saskferco, 
Meadow Lake, and so forth, have 1.2 billion in net assets — 
equity. And they're going up, obviously as the shares go up. 
That's net so that's paying for the investment and contributing to 
the province. 
 
So if the minister wants to get into whether they're reasonable 
investments, I would ask the minister again, does he believe 
that in circumstances, that a publicly traded company, 
privatized companies, can bring equity and investment and 
excitement and recognition from the market-place to a resource 
here in the province of Saskatchewan or any place else for that 
matter, but particularly here. Does he recognize that's the case? 
 
He's commented that he thought Cameco was doing a pretty 
good job. Let me just back up then. Do you think PCS is doing 
a pretty good job? Would you start there? Could we take you  



March 20, 1995 

 
992 

back there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me say to the member, quite 
clearly Cameco is doing a very good job and I've indicated that 
I feel that be the case and I think Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is doing well. Now let me ask the member from 
Estevan again a hypothetical question, if — and I asked this last 
time — if you had it to do it over again, do you think you could 
have cut a better deal for the people of the province? 
 
Now you may say no, and that may be true. But I'm not here to 
argue about what has happened in the past. I don't think that's 
our role here. I think what I would like to do is describe to you 
and to the members of your caucus and to the people of 
Saskatchewan the direction that we hope to take this province. 
And the direction that we hope to take this province is working 
with private industry and working with other jurisdictions 
around us — Alberta and Manitoba — to be able to build a 
sound fiscal base for the people of this province by balancing 
their budgets and by looking at ways by which we can reduce 
the $15 billion in debt that now accounts for $850 million of 
interest each and every year which is — how many times would 
800 million be of our budget? — 40 times the budget of 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. We're spending roughly 40 
times the amount of this entire budget for this department just 
to service the debt. 
 
And I guess what I would want to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that what we're going to do through 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines is create a fair royalty 
structure for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, for the 
uranium industry, for the oil and gas industry, for the 
companies that are involved in gold mining, and the companies 
that are involved in diamond exploration; we're going to create 
for them an environment where they can say to their 
shareholders, Saskatchewan is indeed a good place to invest. 
 
And the reason it's a good place to invest is because . . . looking 
at the government's fiscal forecasts where they forecasted four 
balanced budgets after the one that they've just delivered, where 
they are creating a stable environment, where we know that 
there shouldn't be over the long haul dramatic increases in taxes 
because these people truly have a handle on the amount of 
money that's being spent every year in interest, and they won't 
have to keep coming to the well. 
 
I think we want to create an environment where the working 
people of this province understand that we are setting aside and 
are working with us to set aside some money to pay back some 
of that debt that has been built up over the years. 
 
And I won't attack you as the former premier, because I don't 
think that's fair. I think that's done, so I would rather put that 
aside and I would rather talk about the future. And I'd rather 
talk about what we might be able to do as a government and 
you as opposition members, to create a stable environment for 
business, to create a stable environment for professionals and 
for our young people to get their education and work in this 
province, to facilitate and create job opportunities, and that's the  

direction of this government. 
 
And I want to say to you this is not a government that's 
hidebound to privatization nor to public ownership. But I can 
tell you what this is, sir. This is a government that is built and 
hidebound to fiscal responsibility, to sound management, to 
fairness, and to a response to industry and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that's the direction that the Premier 
and this cabinet and this government and this caucus have 
shown that we are headed. 
 
We've had now just about three years — over three years — to 
be able to demonstrate our capabilities in terms of fiscal 
management. And I think that's clear and I think it's a record 
frankly that can't be argued with. We've been the leaders; we've 
been the first jurisdiction in five years to balance a budget, the 
first one in this province in 13 years. And so I think on that our 
record is quite clear. 
 
And all I would want to say to you tonight is that you're looking 
at a government, and this is a government, that takes a 
pragmatic approach to governing. We're not on the far left, and 
we're not on the far right. Where we are, and I say to the 
member from Estevan, is firmly planted in the middle. And the 
people in the industry that I have spoken with since I've been 
sworn in as the Minister of Energy and Mines are telling me 
that this is a government they feel they can do business with. 
We've created an environment where they feel comfortable. 
And I want to assure industry and I want to assure every 
member of the opposition that our feet are planted firmly on 
common sense government, on open, approachable government 
and that's where we continue to stay. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well Mr. Minister, I'm sure that you would 
enjoy this humour when you're . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
My colleague just pointed out and says, when you're not on the 
left and you're not on your right, then you must be a Liberal. 
And if that's your new position well I'm sure the public of 
Saskatchewan would know that the minister from Prince Albert 
is now an acknowledged Liberal. He's not quite sure where he 
is, whether he's a little bit left and a little bit right, and he's 
firmly planted in the middle. We've heard that from every 
Liberal prime minister and Liberal leader since Confederation. 
 
Mr. Minister, obviously what I'm trying to do is to find out if, in 
the middle of the road you say you are, whether you will, 
number one, acknowledge the success of taking companies to 
the market and if you would do more of that if there's a 
reasonable possibility of success. Because I'm sure you will 
acknowledge, and I'll ask you again, and you did acknowledge, 
Cameco's doing well. I'm sure you would acknowledge, if I ask 
you politely, whether you think PCS is doing well, whether you 
think Wascana Energy is doing well, or whether you think 
Saskferco is doing well. 
 
Now those companies you have equity in and they are in the 
private sector. And they have to do with gas, and oil, and 
uranium, and potash, and you being a minister of the Crown. 
They are in my view, or at least the market's view, seem to be  



March 20, 1995 

 
993 

doing quite well. Would you acknowledge those four 
companies are successful and would you acknowledge that it 
was a good idea to put them in the position that they're in today 
to reflect that? Or put another way, would you sit back and say, 
I wouldn't have done it, or we shouldn't do it, or I'd never do it 
again, or as you put it, you want to talk about the future — 
would you do those kinds of things in the future, given the 
success of those four that we've just mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess I want to begin by 
saying to your colleague, whoever it was that leaned over to 
you, and your description of a Liberal — well I guess my 
description of a Liberal is a little different in that my 
description of a Liberal is: one day they're on the left and one 
day they're on the right; on any given day and in any given 
place, they can be anywhere. 
 
With your administration there was no doubt; you were way, 
way, way, way over there on the right and you were comfortable 
there and that's fine. Well we're not positioned there; we're 
firmly in the middle. We're going to stay there because we think 
it works, and we've been able to deliver that by balancing . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. That's a very pragmatic New 
Democrat government that I'm describing. 
 
So what I want to say to you is, with respect to the initiatives 
that you embarked upon  and I know you're somewhat proud 
of them and you have all the right in the world to be, if you only 
look at one side of the balance sheet  and I want to say to 
you, you never did look. You see . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member says, look at any side. 
 
Well I'll tell you, you went to the polls in October of 1991 and 
you sit there with a rump caucus because you didn't look at the 
debt side. And I'll tell you, we've been looking at the debt side, I 
say to the member from Estevan, ever since we inherited your 
mess in October of 1991. 
 
But having said that . . . And I don't want to be argumentative 
here because I think what we're trying to do is we're trying to 
look at the expenditures of the Department of Energy and 
Mines and we're trying to look at the future of the initiatives 
and the situation that we face today and into the '95-96 fiscal 
year. 
 
So I just say to the member that how you will see us view your 
initiatives from the 1980s is with a lot of "wish it hadn't 
happened's." And let me explain to you why, sir. 
 
When you look at the operations of government and when you 
look at the third biggest expenditure, as I've explained to you 
before . . . and it's something you've always turned a blind eye 
to. And I wish it wasn't so. I wish I could say to the member 
from Estevan that finally he recants; he realizes that he made a 
fiscal mess of this province. We had the highest per capita debt 
of any jurisdiction in Canada. And he saddled my kids and he 
saddled their kids with a debt load that we're going to be getting 
rid of for a long, long time. 
 

(1945) 
 
I want to say to you, member, anyone can sell assets; anyone 
can do that. Anyone can stand on the corner and shuck apples 
or oranges or shares in a corporation. And if you're willing to 
give them away, they're going to sell fast. And if you're willing 
to keep the paper and the debt by which those economic 
development tools were established and if you want to pass that 
on to your friends and to your neighbours, you can sell anything 
and you can make anything look good. 
 
And I want to say to you, with respect to the initiatives that 
you've talked about — Saskferco, Cameco, all of those — 
they're doing well. And I want to say part of why they're doing 
well is because of the environment that's been created for them 
since October of 1991, since this government took power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can refer to the oil and gas 
industry, who suggest to us that they're very comfortable with 
the fact that we've created an environment for them where they 
can do business. And part of that is the fact that we look at the 
expenditure side as well as the revenue side, and that we're 
dealing with the debt load — something that you every, every 
year chose to ignore was even in existence. 
 
And I say to you, member, it's almost unfortunate that you sit 
here tonight and still won't recognize what you've done. The 
people of Saskatchewan recognized it and quite clearly told you 
so in October of 1991. But three, three and a half years later, 
there's no recanting; there's no repentance from any of you. And 
three out of the four of you were sitting here prior to October of 
'91 and helped build the mess that we now, working with the 
people of Saskatchewan and the business community in 
Saskatchewan, are working our way out of. And we're going to 
continue to do that. 
 
And I want to say, I would rather not even stand up here and 
remind you of the sordid past of the government prior to 
October 1991 because those are days that all of us would just as 
soon forget, frankly. What we would rather do is look at the 
opportunities in the 1990s, look at the environment that this 
government has created for business and for young people, and 
we're going to focus on job creation. We're going to focus on 
development of our industries, working with the business 
community. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Estevan, that I believe 
that the people of Saskatchewan appreciate what's happened for 
their province — their government working with them and with 
business since October of 1990. And I give you the 
commitment that that'll continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to get into 
debating the election, we can be here a long time, and your 
estimates will be a long time. Because I don't need a lecture  



March 20, 1995 

 
994 

from you on electioneering. And I can give some to you and 
you can give some to me. 
 
It's the same sort of attitude lost you the election in '82 and 
again in '86 — that arrogance, as if there's only one way and 
that's the socialist way. That's it — '82 and '86. You had the 
members from Riversdale, and Mr. Blakeney, and that's what 
we heard all the time — there's only one way and it's with the 
government. 
 
And they lost. And they had a balanced budget in '82. Balanced 
budget and they lost every seat in the province but eight. Why? 
Because they were narrow-minded. 
 
Now you've come a long ways and I'm encouraging you, but 
you can't quite take it — can't quite take it. You got to go back 
into some elections. 
 
And do you want to speak about the '91 election? You were 
complaining about the debt and guess who offered the big tax 
decrease? Who did? You did. The big . . . No PST (provincial 
sales tax), right? No PST — that was going to be the big gift to 
people. You were going to reduce taxes. 
 
And you brought it up and you say, well that's . . . you know, 
the reason that people voted was because of Cameco, and 
Saskferco, and Wascana. No, no, you walk in and said, well my 
goodness, there's a terrible debt but we'll offer you no PST on 
the expanded GST (goods and services tax). And people said, 
well that's nice; they must have some magic. They can look 
after all of this stuff and not raise taxes; in fact they can lower 
taxes. 
 
Well guess what? Surprise, surprise, the people voted for you. 
What do they get? Hey I think the PST went up. Didn't the PST 
go up? I thought you promised to take it down? But you took it 
up. The provincial sales tax went from 7 to 9 didn't it? Didn't it 
go up? Is that what you promised to do? 
 
And they people have looked and said, well my income tax is 
gone up, my sales tax has gone up, and you said: well, but . . . 
we promised to reduce taxes but, you know, we really have to 
do this tax increase stuff. Well we want to get into that 
shenanigans where you promise to cut taxes and you increase 
them, and you stand here and say, look how nicely we've 
increased the taxes. How happy people are. You don't want to 
get into that. Well you're into it; we'll get into it. 
 
If you want to stay on the future, the future's what I'm trying to 
find out. How will you allocate the resources in Energy and 
Mines in the future to make the most of it? 
 
And I'll remind the member opposite, the minister, the hon. 
minister, that if you look at all of the debt in Crown 
corporations and in the corporations that have been privatized, 
the net income to the province of Saskatchewan is way above 
the debt, it's $600 million. That's paying for itself. That's what 
the auditor says, $600 million is paying for itself, and that is 
almost 50 per cent of the debt. Those must have been  

interesting investments. 
 
And I'm just asking the minister, if you can take investments 
and put them on the market and have those increase in value, 
the government's better off, the people are better off, and there's 
lots of jobs associated with it. I'm just politely asking the 
minister and his colleagues whether they would consider taking 
more companies to the market? 
 
If he's a in-the-middle-of-the-road kind of guy, he's kind of a 
Liberal now, he's got maybe a little labour legislation on one 
hand that keeps him a little bit left, and he's going to privatize 
the Wheat Pool on the other side and make him a little right. 
Maybe if we can catch him right in the middle, he'd say yes, I 
might just take some more things to the market. It would 
replace debt with equity and create some economic activity and 
some excitement. 
 
Would the minister perhaps, as he wanted to, talk about the 
future in terms of what kind of items he might look at taking to 
the market-place in terms of having publicly traded investments 
or instruments in the province of Saskatchewan, in the next 5 or 
10 years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say to the member, I'm 
not really sure we have a heck of a lot to take to the market, 
simply because everything you could lay your hands on in the 
1980s, you sold off. But I guess, as I've said, that's gone. 
 
But I just . . . I want to remind you where we will allocate . . . 
and the one question you asked me is how we will allocate the 
revenue that comes to the Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
Well it's not an awful lot different than when you were around. 
The money that comes from Energy and Mines goes into the 
Consolidated Fund and we sit down around the budget table 
and we determine how we allocate those funds in terms of 
Health, in terms of Education, and Highways, and other 
initiatives. And that's how it's divided. 
 
I think the one difference is that we have been able to balance 
our budget so that on an annual basis we won't be putting more 
money to the provincial debt because that's finished. 
 
And the difference also will be is that the revenue that comes 
from the Department of Energy and Mines, part of that will be 
surplus, in which we're going to take a third and put to program 
enhancement; we're going to take a third and put to tax 
reduction; and we're going to take a third and put it to debt 
reduction that was created by you and your colleagues when 
you were on the government benches. 
 
So I want to say to the member opposite that that's how we're 
going to allocate the resource revenue that comes into this 
province. And we're going to allocate it in a fair and an 
equitable fashion, and we're going to try and work with the 
people of Saskatchewan to enhance job opportunities with 
resource revenue. And that's how that money is going to be 
spent. 



March 20, 1995 

 
995 

And we're going to try and lower the amount of money that's 
being spent to service that massive $15 billion debt, that $850 
million in each and every year. If we can take a portion of the 
resource revenue and allocate it to debt reduction, along with 
other revenues that we generate in the province, and if we can 
get to a point where we can shed ourselves of the third biggest 
expenditure in the province, and that's the $870 million in 
interest that we pay every year on that debt, that's how we're 
going to spend that money. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm after a development 
strategy in Energy and Mines and all you've talked about is that 
you can raise taxes 1.2 billion and that's the extent of it. There's 
got to be more to economic development than taxes. 
 
Could the minister . . . let me give him another chance here. 
How is AECL doing in the province of Saskatchewan? How's 
research on nuclear energy doing? Does the minister have any 
views on the development, manufacturing, and marketing of, 
say, reactors in Saskatchewan, the latest level of reactors, as 
part of a comprehensive economic development strategy in 
Energy and Mines? 
 
I can't leave this alone because it's just frankly too exciting to 
have the right kind of view of what we could build in Energy 
and Mines in those portfolios, to let you just sit here and say, 
well I'll raise taxes and I'll contribute it towards the deficit. Well 
if you'd have told the public all the taxes you were going to 
increase in '91, you'd have never got elected and you know it. 
There's more to life than raising taxes, like all of these 
economic activities in the Crown sector that are contributing 
$600 million net. 
 
Now they took some strategic analysis. What's the strategic 
analysis associated with AECL, CANDU research, marketing? 
Could you elaborate if you've got any sort of new strategy on 
nuclear medicine, nuclear energy, waste management in nuclear 
energy, the combination of things that are very profitable, very 
large, very big, and it could be quite exciting. Have you got 
more to talk about than just raising the taxes? 
 
That's what I'm after. I mean we're not going to leave these 
successful corporations alone, whether you like it or not. But 
maybe we can add to them and contribute to the wealth of the 
province. Could you elaborate on your view of the future of the 
nuclear business in the province of Saskatchewan from research 
to waste management to new manufacturing to international 
marketing and the like. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say to the member from 
Estevan that quite clearly the work of AECL is an important 
part of what's going on in the development of technology in our 
province in that, as you will know, there are opportunities for 
reactors to develop electrical energy in areas of the world that 
haven't got other sources to draw from. And the work that's 
happening with AECL and the memorandum of understanding 
that was signed with this provincial government is quite clearly 
a part and a component of developing that technology to ensure 
that that happens. 

As you will know, this government is committed up to a 
maximum of $20 million to the end of 1996 to assist in that 
work, and I think that shows our commitment to the 
development of the technology. AECL has established a chair at 
the University of Saskatchewan for engineering research, and I 
think that's a positive initiative. And so I want to say that, with 
respect to the development of that technology, we are doing our 
part as the government. We see it as important work, and we'll 
continue to work with them in terms of developing that. 
 
With respect to high-level nuclear waste, as you will know, 
AECL is conducting and has conducted research in trying to 
develop a technology that will assist the world in safely storing 
nuclear waste. And as you will also probably know, that is 
technology that is ongoing and the development of that is 
ongoing. 
 
So I would just want to say to the member from Estevan, our 
commitment under the memorandum of understanding that was 
signed with AECL is quite clear — we're committed to assisting 
the development of this technology. I think it's a prudent and it's 
an appropriate way to go. And I think it will serve us well in the 
next decade and in many years to come. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I wonder if the minister could be a little bit 
more specific. Do you have any idea, or have you any forecast 
what type of . . . and to the extent of what kind of a profitable 
industry we could have if we manufactured reactors in 
Saskatchewan through a cooperation with AECL and marketed 
them internationally? Say we took the latest CANDU — I think 
it's CANDU 6 that they may be working at, and certainly in 
terms of hooking them up incrementally, looks like they may be 
the in thing  if we were into manufacturing and marketing 
those internationally, has the minister got any research or any 
idea or any thought, could he share with the public what that 
kind of an industry could mean in terms of jobs, international 
markets, and income for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it's fair to say that there 
is potential in terms of development of that technology, 
otherwise quite clearly AECL wouldn't be involved and we 
wouldn't be supporting their initiatives. In terms of the 
potential, I guess that will change and can change from year to 
year and from decade to decade. And certainly the analysis that 
the industry does in terms of demand and customer demand will 
be ongoing and it will change as populations increase. We're 
facing a shortage of some of our non-renewable resources. And 
so quite clearly the opportunities will enhance over the years. 
And as our population grows and energy demands become 
stronger, I think that the potential becomes increasingly higher. 
 
I think it's a process that is ongoing. And I would not want to 
stand here today and tell you that I could predict or could 
guesstimate the number of jobs — in the hundreds or in the tens 
of hundreds — that may be created by technology that can be 
developed here in our province. I can only suggest to you that 
it's the commitment of this government to work with industry  



March 20, 1995 

 
996 

so that they can develop their full potential, whatever that might 
be. 
 
I can tell you that it's our position that we will work with them 
to market the best technology that Saskatchewan and Canada 
has to offer, not only in the nuclear industry, but with 
developments in terms of technology, in terms of oil recovery, 
with biotechnology at the university campus in Saskatoon. And 
the industries and the initiatives that have already taken place, 
we'll work with to enhance on their abilities and those 
opportunities. But more than that, we'll look for new 
opportunities with industry and with business. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, if somebody came to you with a 
proposition and said, it's going to take a lot of money — 
probably millions and millions of dollars — to develop a 
company here in Saskatchewan to manufacture . . . do research 
and manufacture CANDUs and to market them internationally, 
and would take millions of dollars, would you entertain the 
possibility of doing that with them? 
 
Particularly if they said: and we're going to get the money from 
the market-place. We'll set up a public company, publicly 
traded, work with you, bring a brand-new company that's in 
nuclear energy to the province of Saskatchewan. Would you 
entertain that possibility? Have you given it any thought? 
 
If you haven't given it any thought, why wouldn't you give it 
some thought, if in fact you're kind of a middle-of-the-road guy 
and you're in a portfolio that has a potential to raise hundreds of 
millions of dollars in something that is very futuristic, very 
environmentally friendly — many, many exciting things? Let 
me ask you: would you entertain that possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well to the member from Estevan, 
we deal with private companies every day, whether it be in the 
oil-gas industry, the potash industry, the mining industry. 
Whether it's gold, whether it's diamonds — we deal with 
publicly traded companies on a regular basis. 
 
With respect to alternate energy sources, quite clearly we're 
interested in developing the technology and the availability to 
be able to market that kind of technology, certainly. 
 
Mr. Devine: — But what we need to know . . . the public wants 
to know is whether you would endorse the investment of that 
kind of money in a publicly traded company. Because if you 
won't even admit it in the legislature . . . Just say yes, I would 
conceivably and theoretically endorse that kind of investment in 
a publicly traded market. Obviously you need to have the 
support of the government in power if you're going to take it to 
the market and have encouragement. 
 
And all I'm asking you, as the Minister of Energy, for a lot of 
these portfolios — mining and gas and oil and uranium and 
nuclear energy — will you endorse the concept of bringing that 
kind of money into the province if it's publicly traded? 
 
Now if you're the new kind of middle-of-the-road liberal person  

that you say you are, you'd say, well sure, I could do that. I'd 
look at it as a publicly traded company. I wouldn't be adverse to 
that. And you could acknowledge, and where we have seen it, 
it's worked. And if it works as good as these, yes, I'd be very 
interested because it might mean a lot of money, a lot of jobs, a 
lot of economic activity. 
 
Could you bring yourself to that point where, in theory, 
conceptually, you could say to the business and investment 
community of the world, yes, we would look at that in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Could you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Are you talking about direct 
government investment or not? 
 
Mr. Devine: — I am talking a number of things — whether in 
fact you would be supportive of the concept, whether in fact 
investment that you have in AECL or have in uranium or other 
areas that you might have, you might participate in a public 
share offering, whether you would be a joint venture partner, 
whether you would help facilitate that process. 
 
In other words, you would give it minimum . . . at a minimum, 
moral support; modestly, you might give it some equity; and at 
the outside — I suppose the whole nine yards — you would 
endorse it philosophically and you would even be a financial 
player. Would you consider that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, the 
first thing we would say to the member from Estevan and this 
government would say to the member from Estevan or any 
investor, that it's our intention to keep our options open. We 
would look at a business deal based on its merits. We believe 
that the role of government is to be supportive of industry, to 
create an environment where they'll invest. And where we can, 
we'll facilitate. 
 
If you're asking me to condone the kind of investments that you 
made in the past and would we involve ourselves in those kinds 
of initiatives, the answer is no. That's an option that we 
wouldn't keep open because we would base our investments on 
sound business practices. 
 
You and I will disagree as to what will make a sound 
investment, and I recognize that. But then you and I will 
disagree as to how you balance a budget or if you balance a 
budget. We say, you spend what you can afford. You say, spend 
what you want. But we're back on that a bit. 
 
But I would just want to say to the member from Estevan that 
this government will keep its options open in terms of how we 
facilitate new businesses, how we create an environment for 
business to operate, and we'll do it based on a very pragmatic 
approach. And I think that the last three and a half years have 
shown that in fact that type of government is working and 
working well. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, your portfolio is very 
important in economic development. I've tried to get you to at  



March 20, 1995 

 
997 

least acknowledge that the new, publicly traded companies in 
uranium, in gas, and in energy and in mining, particularly 
potash, have been very successful. Then I asked if you would 
entertain a similar kind of investment in nuclear energy, and 
you won't commit yourself. 
 
Now one of the reasons, Mr. Minister, that the public is 
reluctant . . . and I'm a bit sceptical about how you really feel is 
talking about how you responded to co-generation. You said 
you were going to invite all the companies in and you'd ask 
them to submit proposals for co-generation. You were going to 
be very friendly to the business community. They spent 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, and quite frankly, they'll tell 
you that you ripped them off. You not only took their money 
but you didn't even give them their money back and you haven't 
done any co-generation. 
 
Now that isn't the kind of thing that people are looking for. In 
fact it's a terrible record. It leaves a bad taste in their mouth. 
And what more and more people are believing is what you have 
done so far is a bit of copycat, copying the previous initiatives 
in Cameco, Saskferco, Wascana Energy, PCS, and endorsing 
AECL. What I'm asking is, would you take it one step farther 
and at least do better than you did in co-generation because you 
were an absolute — well pretty much — a failure there because 
you didn't get any done. And it cost people a lot of money and 
left a very, very bad taste in their mouth. 
 
Now I'm asking you, will you give them any more confidence 
than you did in co-generation? If somebody came and said, we 
want to participate and build a publicly traded company, would 
you participate with us in energy, particularly in terms of 
nuclear energy, would you consider it? Now that's what I want 
you to give some serious thought to and say whether in fact you 
think it would be a very good idea, and if in fact you could do a 
better job there than you did in co-generation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess I would want to say to 
the member from Estevan, as I said, that we would intend to 
keep our options open. I think that the concept of co-generation 
is, quite clearly, a very positive initiative to look at. As well, 
we're looking at the generation of energy from wind and I think 
nuclear is an option. But having said all of that, I think all of 
those options are really quite meaningless now in that we don't 
need incremental base load. Having said . . . and when we come 
to a period that we will need an increased base load and when 
we will need more energy — and hopefully that will be soon, 
and hopefully we can create more demand on our energy utility 
in this province with expanded industry — then quite clearly 
we'll look at the other options, which is why we have been 
reviewing the different options. 
 
And when the time comes to make a decision as to what kind of 
energy we would . . . and what kind of fuel we would use to 
generate the energy, we'll do it. But as I would say, I think it's 
only fair that we would keep the options open, understand the 
different ways of generating and the different fuels, and that's 
what we're doing at this point. 
 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm just trying to get some 
plans out of you and some of the direction for the future, 
because I read your document on energy options or whatever it 
was and it's . . . it lacks in a great deal of detail. Now maybe 
that's what you want, but let me ask you a specific question. 
Does the minister believe, in terms of the government's 
investment in the natural gas business, whether Saskferco is a 
good project or not? Could he say that it was good or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say that I'm sure that 
the energy that's being consumed by Saskferco is quite clearly a 
benefit to SaskEnergy. They're one of our major customers, and 
I would want to say as well that I think it's fairly clear that 
people who are working in that industry and are working for 
that corporation are quite pleased in terms of their jobs and the 
job opportunities that have been created there. 
 
And as I indicated to you a week ago when we did estimates, I 
told the member from Estevan that I would never stand in my 
place and suggest that every initiative that you embarked upon 
was totally negative. I don't believe that. But what I would say 
to him is, I'm very hard pressed to be able to point to a deal that 
I think was a good deal in the long run, and I would want to say 
that, as you know, you have put hundreds of millions of dollars 
of public funds at risk in different initiatives. 
 
We have renegotiated the Bi-Provincial and I think made that 
into now what is hopefully a good deal. We've renegotiated the 
NewGrade upgrader which was one of your initiatives and have 
put it in a place where it can now handle the debt load that it 
has. We've renegotiated the Weyerhaeuser agreement and I 
would want to say that we're quite comfortable with that 
agreement. But I wouldn't say that every deal that you made was 
a bad deal. But I think you've got to just look at what you've 
done. Look at the $15 billion of debt that you were responsible 
for creating. Have a look at what you have saddled the people 
of this province with. Now you can make the argument, you can 
make the argument that all of the initiatives that you embarked 
upon were first class, that there were no problems with you. 
And you can still live believing — as you did before October of 
1991 — that the people of the province believed you and 
believed in you, but they didn't. 
 
They didn't believe you in October of 1991, and they don't 
believe you now. They understand exactly what kind of a debt 
load and a legacy you left their children. And I want to say to 
you that I would have thought by now, I would have thought by 
now you would have recanted a bit, repented, or at least 
understood that you made mistakes. But it's quite clear tonight 
that you don't believe that. You believe the people were wrong 
in October of 1991. You believed that then, and you believe 
they're wrong now. 
 
Well I want to say to the member from Estevan that I don't think 
any measure of lesson would lead him to understand that in fact 
some of the initiatives of the 1980s were not right. And that's 
fine. And I won't debate that with him. But I'll keep reminding 
him that the people of the province don't believe that. 



March 20, 1995 

 
998 

(2015) 
 
So with that, I would say to the member from Estevan that we're 
going to continue working with industry, working with 
business, working with some of the initiatives and some of the 
people who have invested in this province, and create an 
environment where they can satisfy the concerns of their 
shareholders. And I think that's a responsible approach to take. 
 
And I want to say that we're going to deal with what we 
inherited in 1991, and we'll deal with that through '96, '97, '98, 
'99. And we'll continue to work with the people of the province 
to ensure that we shed ourselves of this debt load that we're 
sitting on. And we're going to work with industry to ensure that 
we've got an environment where they want to invest. And we're 
going to ensure that working men and women have labour 
legislation that is fair and responsive to their work environment. 
 
And the member from Estevan goes this way and that way, and 
he says you can't find a middle ground, and you can't find 
something that works, and that you can't create an environment 
where business can work and where labour can work. Well I 
don't believe you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Isn't that a Liberal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well no, no, a Liberal has never 
been able to achieve that, I say to the member from Estevan. 
 
And we've seen Liberal governments in this province and we've 
seen Conservative governments in this province. And I'll tell 
you, a Liberal will offer to govern over here but this is where 
they end up, the same place the Conservatives do. And all you 
got to do is look at the way the Liberals and Conservatives have 
been changing hats. Unfortunately for the Conservative Party 
the hat is going from the Conservative head now to the Liberal 
head. And she'll get defeated and some of those heads will 
come back over to the Conservatives from the Liberals. 
 
And you know that; you've seen that before. Many of your 
caucus colleagues in the 1980s were former Liberals. And they 
came over to the Conservatives, and now they're moving back 
over to the Liberals, and that's how that cycle goes — it's 
Liberal to Conservative. 
 
But I'll tell you one thing you do get from a New Democrat is 
consistency. You get consistency, and you get decent, and you 
get honest, government. And I want to say to the member from 
Estevan, when and if we go to the polls, that's what we're going 
to be governing on — fiscal integrity. And we're going to be 
governing on fairness. And we'll be campaigning on those 
issues. 
 
Now you may not believe that to be what the campaign 
platform, when it ever comes, will be. But I just want to say to 
you that I think the people of Saskatchewan are comfortable 
with the kind of government that's been delivered in the last 
three years and we'll have a chance, soon, to test that. 
 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting. We're into 
Energy and Mines estimates, and I'm asking him about energy 
and mine companies, and he keeps going back to the '91 
election because he doesn't want to acknowledge the success in 
energy and mines is in the private sector and in the royalties and 
in the projects that are creating well over $1 billion in cash flow 
over and on top of all of the other investments — that he calls 
debt — in his portfolio. And I want to focus on his portfolio 
because, in very good part, it helps the Minister of Finance 
balance her budget. And part of that is making strategic 
investments where we can attract capital and make money. 
 
Now the minister says the people were right in 1991. The 
people voted for what they thought they heard . . . was, I'm 
going to cut your taxes. And you did the opposite. If you had 
told them all the tax increases, do you think you would have got 
the same people elected? No. But you didn't; you didn't come 
clean. Then when you're in, you say, oops I've got to raise taxes. 
 
What I'm pointing out is in your portfolio, sir, as we went 
through the other day, you're picking up close to $1 billion in 
oil royalties, land sales, revenue associated with drilling of oil, 
and heavy oil associated with upgraders, and also money 
associated with two Crown corporations that you have in energy 
and power — over $1 billion. And I pointed out this evening, if 
you take all the Crown corporations and the major investment 
in government enterprises here by the auditor, they're 
contributing $600 million. And you don't want to talk about 
that. 
 
That's not negative; that's positive. And those positive numbers 
come from investing in oil and gas and potash and in fertilizer 
and in upgraders and in refineries. And you're picking up the 
benefit. And I just want you to acknowledge that some of those 
things were obviously initiatives that you were very much 
against. And I'm trying to wonder if this new, 
middle-of-the-road, NDP/Liberal magic man here now would 
say yes, I'll encourage even more of that in AECL, in nuclear 
energy, and a combination of things that could be very exciting. 
But for some reason or other, you won't acknowledge. 
 
I want to ask the minister again: does he believe Saskferco is a 
good investment for the people of Saskatchewan? Yes or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess what I want to say to 
the member from Estevan is what he continues . . . and 
consistently forgets, is the amount of write-offs with respect to 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the hundreds of 
millions of dollars you wrote off. All of a sudden — poof! — 
it's gone. It's part of the public debt, but you won't recognize it 
because you won't recognize public debt, and you won't 
recognize loan guarantees to the hundreds of millions. You 
recognize none of that. What you say is, forget the fact that we 
put the province in debt. Forget the fact that we put them in 
debt. 
 
Is Saskferco making profits? The answer is yes, Saskferco is 
making profits, and we're certainly hopeful that every  



March 20, 1995 

 
999 

corporation that operates within the boundaries of this province 
makes profits. 
 
But what you forget is the hundreds of millions of dollars of 
public funds that you tied up, and the hundreds of millions that 
you wrote off. Did you write off money on the PCS sale? Did 
you write money off on PCS? You answer that, and then we can 
continue the debate. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I thought I heard you say that 
Saskferco was a profitable deal. Did you say that? Is it a 
profitable deal? Is it a good deal? Is it a good investment? Were 
the equity investments and the guarantees a good thing for the 
province of Saskatchewan? Yes or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I want to say that it certainly 
is a good investment for Cargill; otherwise they wouldn't have 
been here. And you know that, and I know that. 
 
But you answer me this. I say to the member from Estevan, did 
you or did you not or will you or will you not admit that you 
wrote off hundreds of millions of dollars of debt on the Potash 
Corporation privatization? 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, in this forum we go through you 
answering the questions as I put up. I will ask you if you think 
PCS is a good investment. And I've already asked you, but you 
didn't answer, so now I'm going to Saskferco, and I'll come back 
to PCS. 
 
Is Saskferco, an equity partnership between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Cargill, a good thing for the people of 
Saskatchewan? Is it profitable? Is the equity returning good 
return on the money that's there, return on investment? And in 
fact are the loan guarantees paid, and are we making money? In 
other words, were the guarantees good? Is the equity good? Is it 
good for the gas industry? Is it good for the people of 
Saskatchewan? Do you believe that it is? Yes or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me answer this way. Quite 
clearly the member is not willing to speak of the write-offs of 
Potash Corporation, and I understand that, and I can understand 
quite clearly why, because it's pretty tough to make an argument 
for privatization on the one hand with a devalued share, when 
the people of Saskatchewan are eating a massive 
hundreds-of-millions-of-dollar write-off . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You didn't even understand it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, no. I mean that's fine. You 
asked and I'm answering. 
 
And it's fine for you to forget the one side but not the other. 
You asked me whether I thought the investment, the Cargill 
investment, is good. You bet, Cargill has been doing very well. 
Otherwise they wouldn't have come into it. Otherwise they 
wouldn't have been involved in it. 
 
Are there some positive aspects to the agreement? The answer  

is absolutely. The people that are working . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are they all positive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh, and he says they're all positive. 
Now they're all positive. Well I want to say to the member from 
Estevan, that may be your opinion and I'm not going to argue 
with you, I will only want to say that I'm sure that the 
shareholders of Saskferco are comfortable with their investment 
otherwise they wouldn’t be here. You must have been 
comfortable with it, otherwise you wouldn't have signed the 
agreement. 
 
So I guess the question is more appropriately: are you 
comfortable with it? And if you're comfortable with it, fine. 
That's fine because clearly you were the one that made the deal. 
You were comfortable with Bi-Provincial; you were 
comfortable with NewGrade; you were comfortable with 
Weyerhaeuser; and you were comfortable with High R Door; 
and you were comfortable with Supercart. 
 
You were comfortable with all of those agreements, otherwise 
you wouldn't have signed them. All I'm saying to you today, the 
member from Estevan, are there many initiatives that you 
signed that we wouldn't have. And all I'm saying to you as well 
is, that the agreements that we inherited from your 
administration, we are going to create an environment where 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan's interests are well served. And 
that is where we come from. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Built on our initiative. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You're right. High R Door was your 
initiative, and Supercart, and GigaText — all of those. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no, they're not here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, no, but they were all your 
initiatives. And the member from Rosthern said, all our 
initiatives and they were all positive initiatives. Certainly they 
were. 
 
And I'll tell you, High R Door, that was yours too. But all I say 
to you, and I say to the member from Rosthern, that we're going 
to create an environment where business can do business and 
we're going to treat them fairly as a government. 
 
And I know the member from Estevan is trying to vindicate the 
sins of the past administrations and that's fine. All I say to you 
is, as a government we're going to be dealing with what we've 
inherited; we're going to make the best out of it in every 
instance; and the people who have got money invested in this 
province, we're going to respect their investment. We're going 
to work with them to ensure the integrity of those corporations 
where we can. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the minister wants to talk about 
sins; I want to talk about blessings to the province — blessings. 
Saskferco project, I understand it, has a large equity investment,  



March 20, 1995 

 
1000 

shareholders, called the province of Saskatchewan. How are we 
doing in that investment, Mr. Minister? How are the 
government and the people of Saskatchewan, shares, doing in 
Saskferco? Are we doing okay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would want to say to the 
member from Estevan, were I the minister in charge of Crown 
Investments Corporation and if I had the officials around me 
who deal with those investments on a day-to-day basis, I would 
be more than willing to share that information with you in terms 
of how much money they've made in the last quarter, in terms 
of what our absolute investment is at this point. 
 
And you understand as well as I do that Saskatchewan Energy 
and Mines is a regulatory arm of government and a licensing 
arm, and you know darn well the forum by which you ask 
detailed questions on a Crown corporation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's not a detailed question; this is 
general questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well you're asking how much 
money they're making. I can't tell you how much money they're 
making. My people and the people sitting around me right now 
don't have those figures with them, but I can ensure that we will 
get to you, in as much as we can, information as to the profits 
and loss of that corporation. 
 
But I would want to remind the member that questions of a 
detailed nature with respect to those kinds of investments are 
done in Crown Investments Corporation estimates. And that's 
how that's handled. Well you may not be comfortable with the 
parameter of the discussions and the debate, but I say to you 
that that's where those kinds of details are available. 
 
We don't have every arm of government in Saskatchewan 
Energy and Mines estimates. We don't do that. We don't have 
people from Finance. We don't have people from Crown 
Investments Corporation. We don't have people from the 
Department of Environment. And they're brought here when 
their estimates are called. And their officials will work with 
their ministers to answer detailed questions to the best of their 
knowledge. 
 
But I can only say to the member that I can't give detailed 
answers to questions that are not under this ministry and not 
under the purview of this department. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, you've already answered 
questions on Cameco or what the share prices and the 
percentage of shares you have, and it's in uranium. We're into 
the Energy and Mines portfolio, and Energy and Mines has to 
do with mining and has to do with energy. And natural gas is 
energy, and investments in natural gas by the people of 
Saskatchewan, you'd think would have a comment . . . or would 
have earned a comment by the minister. 
 
I'm asking the minister, if he doesn't have all the details, has he 
heard any rumours then whether Saskferco is making any  

money? And do you think it's a reasonable investment? Does he 
think it's a good idea? Is it good for the shareholders? Is it good 
for the gas industry? Is it good as a partnership? Would he 
comment on whether he thinks Saskferco is a healthy project. 
He's the minister. Does he have any opinion — any opinion  
on the equity the government has in a company that's in the gas 
business in Saskatchewan in his portfolio? Is it generally a good 
idea to have the people's money in this project called 
Saskferco? Would he have an opinion on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well as the Minister of Energy and 
Mines, I can say to the member from Estevan: I have no opinion 
on it. And I can also tell him, as the Minister of Energy and 
Mines . . . but I can also tell him that I don't deal in rumour, 
which is what you asked me to do. I can deal with facts. And if 
you want some facts and figures with respect to the Department 
of Energy and Mines, I can share those with you. And I can 
share those with you in detail. 
 
But I think what the member should keep in mind, the format 
and the forum for questions with respect to individual 
corporations, and that's Crown Investments Corporation. And 
I'm surprised, after being premier of this province for as many 
years as you have, that you've forgotten that in three short years. 
 
So I say to the member: you know the proper format. Bring 
your questions at the proper format when the appropriate 
officials are here to assist the minister in answering the 
questions. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Devine: — You see, Mr. Minister, you've boxed yourself 
in philosophically. I've been asking you, and you wanted to tell 
me, about your future plans and what you're going to do in the 
future in the province of Saskatchewan. And you were so 
hidebound politically, you can't acknowledge good instruments 
for public investment. 
 
You won't acknowledge it. Which is pretty small when you 
think about it. You cannot bring yourself to talk positively 
about hundreds of millions of dollars being invested and turn 
around and returning money many times fold into the province 
of Saskatchewan because you're so hidebound. It's impossible 
for you to do that. 
 
And yet you want the business community and me and others to 
believe yes, you're a middle of the road, you're encouraging all 
these things. I don't buy you're encouraging this. You would 
never have succumbed to sitting down at the business table and 
building a Saskferco. You wouldn't have. You can't even 
acknowledge it's a good project. 
 
Look it — you can't even stand in your place and say: that's an 
exciting investment. It's good for the people. It's good for the 
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). It's good for 
farmers. We've got a great investment there. It's attracted more 
business. 



March 20, 1995 

 
1001 

In fact the company's come back in and done some more, when 
the NDP have given them $3.9 million cash. You must have 
thought that was pretty good, the same company. But you see 
my point. You can't even stand in your place and acknowledge 
fundamental principles about investment in the public sector. 
 
And that's why you've boxed yourself in. And that's why people 
don't believe you. That's why you'll see NDP governments not 
that successful in encouraging private companies coming in. 
 
I'm happy you're rapidly moving to the right; you're well in the 
middle now. And a lot of these things that were so-called not 
on, are on. Uranium's okay — hooray. The NDP (New 
Democratic Party) have now endorsed uranium, it's there. I 
think there's a megaproject. Isn't there a new mine being 
developed? Isn't that a $250 million mine being developed, isn't 
that kind of a megaproject? So the NDP's in favour of 
megaprojects. And they're in favour of uranium. They're in 
favour of, what's that word, that M-word— multinational. By 
George, they're in favour of multinationals now. 
 
Fred, what have you been doing? No, pardon me, the member . . 
. can't say that, I'm sorry. 
 
Some members have got to you. It's encouraging to know that 
that common sense coming from the right wing, from the old 
Soviet Union, from China, from Latin America, from all over 
the world, is finally hitting the socialist party of Saskatchewan. 
And yet we get a minister on his feet, the minister can't 
acknowledge that yes, the privatization and the public share 
offerings have added millions and billions of dollars. He's so 
hidebound. 
 
I knew you were going to get there, Mr. Minister. I knew that 
you were partisan enough, and not strong enough 
professionally, to say yes we have moved to endorse publicly 
traded companies. You can't do that. And, Mr. Minister, I want 
you to know  because you keep coming back  I want you to 
know that all of these investments that you said were so, so 
terrible in terms of debt, not general revenue but in Crown 
investments, and the enterprise investments, are generating net 
profits to the province of Saskatchewan. And I just want you to 
acknowledge that. 
 
The auditor says they’re contributing $600 million a year, and 
the equity investments have a net benefit in equity. Now you 
might not like to hear that but in your own portfolio, isn't it true, 
Mr. Minister, that you're picking up something like $520 
million in oil royalties. I think your deputy said the other day, 
the net value added associated with a couple of upgraders, 
because it's 25 million barrels a day coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan that probably wouldn't be pumped and coming 
through the synthetic business, is $100 million. Saskferco's 
contributing in the neighbourhood of $90 million. Your two 
portfolios that you look at in gas and power are what, 150 to 
$200 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's a very large amount of money, in excess of 
a billion dollars, and most of it coming from the initiatives in  

the private sector, that I'm just trying to get you to acknowledge 
 like Saskferco, which takes natural gas out of the ground, 
which you were very much against, and your party was, drilling 
for it, pumping it, making fertilizer, selling the fertilizer to 
farmers across Saskatchewan, participating in a very large 
market. I'm trying to get you to acknowledge that that's a good 
idea. And you know what? You won't even acknowledge that's 
good. 
 
Now how can we have confidence in you as the leader of the 
energy and mining portfolio when some of the most exciting 
companies in North America — PCS, Wascana Energy, 
Cominco, Saskferco — are leading the way; AECL and more 
that you could do, and not only won't you acknowledge them, 
you don't seem to have any plans on where you're going to take 
them. You won't even entertain the possibility of putting 
forward some . . . even some possible investments. And I 
suppose it's because of co-generation. 
 
Well I mean, the minister can't get off that easily. He is in 
charge of a major portfolio with billions of dollars at stake, 
saying: Well I guess we'll re-visit the tax promises of the '91 
election and find out who got elected and who didn't. That's not 
good enough. What I'm asking is, what's your strategy for 
economic growth in your energy and mining portfolios, and 
does it include more share offerings and participation by the 
private sector internationally. And if it is, let's hear it. 
 
And if it isn't, I want to know why you haven't explored it. 
Couldn't you at least come forward with some basic, 
fundamental ideas on economic development and value added, 
in a portfolio that is as big as you'll find in any jurisdiction in 
Canada, if not the United States. Do you have any plans for 
some exciting economic development in your portfolio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I want to say to the member 
from Estevan, and I know he understands  he understands 
quite clearly  that this is not a department that invests in 
corporations. It's a regulatory and a licensing body, and if he 
had . . . and if he had some questions that were pertinent to the 
portfolio, and to the department, I'd be more than willing to be 
able to answer them for him. 
 
But I can tell you what I think is exciting, is the fact that in 
1995-96, we're estimating $523.4 million in terms of revenue 
for the people of Saskatchewan through the development of 
their natural resources. And I think that's exciting. 
 
I think it's exciting the fact that we'll generate $350 million 
roughly in oil this year. And I think that's exciting because what 
that tells me is that the investors, the people of the oil and gas 
industry, are wanting to do business in this province. That, I 
think, is exciting. 
 
And I think what is also exciting is the fact that we were able to 
announce the construction, the beginning of a construction, of a 
new mine creating 250 construction jobs at McArthur River. I 
think that's exciting, and those are the kinds of initiatives that 
this department has been involved to help to facilitate the  



March 20, 1995 

 
1002 

development of. 
 
I think it's exciting that last year we had record land sales, and 
that the oil and gas industry was willing to invest over $200 
million in land purchases. That to me is exciting and I think that 
speaks to the future. 
 
But it also speaks to the last three years by positioning this 
government where people want to come to this province to 
invest. 
 
And I say to the minister . . . or to the member from Estevan, he 
can haul out facts and figures  many of them I'm sure 
figments of his imagination because we heard some of them the 
other night  and what you do is you talk about, on one side, 
revenue and options. But you always forget what the costs of 
that was. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, you just ignore 
the other side. The auditor doesn't deal with that, and you know 
that, but I don't want to get into that debate. 
 
What I want to say to you, what's really exciting is the fact that 
we're going to be opening a new uranium mine that's going to 
create 250 to 300 jobs. And I think that's exciting, and that . . . I 
want to say I acknowledge the investment by the private sector 
in terms of their desire to invest their investment dollars here in 
the province. 
 
And I think the gold mine that we were recently up at, the 
Contact Lake gold mine just north of La Ronge where people 
from La Ronge and area are working  we were up there for 
the pouring of the first brick of gold  and I want to say that's 
exciting. 
 
But I want to say to you what's more exciting than all of that is 
the activity that's created in the retail sector, where last year the 
retail sales were up 9 per cent in this province. That's exciting. 
 
And I want to say to you that it's partly because of the initiatives 
created by the royalty structure put together by this department, 
by the Department of Energy and Mines. Now I say to the 
member from Estevan, if you have some specific questions with 
respect to the department, we'd more than willing to help to 
answer them. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, you just don't seem to 
understand. You keep telling me that you're a regulatory 
agency, and I imagine that you have money that comes into 
your department, royalties from mining and gas and oil. What 
I'm trying to get out of you is that can you adjust your policies 
to make more money for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you have any new ideas, any new ideas . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You did. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Exactly. Just like you see today, $600 million 
net coming in because of Saskferco, because of oil royalties, 
because of upgrading oil, because of public share offerings that 
are creating a great deal of wealth. 

Do you have any new regulatory ideas, any new initiatives that 
would encourage more investment so you can collect more 
money in your portfolio? You are a regulatory body. You must 
have planning and strategic analysis: if we could do this, this, or 
this. 
 
I asked you about AECL. I asked you about nuclear energy. I 
got fluff for an answer. I've asked you about Saskferco and 
natural gas and upgrading, and I got fluff for an answer. I asked 
you about PCS, and I got fluff. These are very exciting 
companies. You don't even seem to acknowledge . . . well you 
won't acknowledge them, but you don't understand what they're 
doing. I'm just trying to get you to focus on some of the 
potential, exciting potential, in the province. Do you have any 
new strategic analysis or strategies that you could share with the 
people of Saskatchewan that would encourage industry to come 
into the province? Do you have any in your portfolio? Not in 
retailing, but in your portfolio of Energy and Mines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well with respect to the future, I 
want to say that, quite clearly, it's our responsibility to put in 
place a fiscal framework for industry to operate. We are 
working to enhance the kind of information that we make 
available to people who are looking at investment, looking at 
exploration. 
 
That technology is changing and the department is working 
with government and within government to ensure that we have 
that technology available in the future in the 1990s and in the 
year 2000. 
 
And we're looking right now at incentives for developing and 
enhancing oil recovery technology. As you will know, the oil 
fields and some of our fields in this province are marginal, and 
as technology develops, we're better able to have people invest 
in those areas and invest in technology to help recover oil from 
marginal wells. And I think that's one of the things that we're 
looking to in the future. 
 
But I want to say to the member from Estevan, one of the 
interesting comments that comes back from the oil industry on a 
regular basis is they say, look, your royalty policies and the 
structure that you've put in place are working. And what they 
are also saying is, if it works, don't fix it, saying we're investing 
more than ever has happened in this province. We want to do 
some drilling; we're going to do exploration; and we're going to 
be pulling that oil out and we're going to be selling it. It's going 
to mean royalties for you folks and it's going to mean profits for 
our shareholders. 
 
So I guess certainly there are initiatives that we're looking at. 
We're looking at the possibility of enhanced recovery initiatives 
and we'll continue to do that, working with industry. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, would you rule out the 
nationalization of any particular part of the oil and gas and 
mining business, by your administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can't think of an area that we  



March 20, 1995 

 
1003 

would be interested in investing in. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would that mean that your previous policies of 
nationalizing companies in potash or in oil was wrong? Or does 
it mean that you're just not going to tell us that you might have 
some ideas about nationalizing some various companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well what I would want to say is 
the relationship that we have with the oil industry, oil and gas 
industry in Saskatchewan, is working quite well. We think that 
we're satisfied in terms of the royalties and the revenues that 
we're generating. Their shareholders are satisfied that they're 
making a reasonable return on profits. 
 
And I would want to say to the member from Estevan, that the 
1990s are certainly a different time than we'll see in the year 
2000 and 2010. I can say to you that we have no interest in 
investing in oil companies at this point in time. But I'd also 
want to say to the member opposite, even if we felt we did, we 
wouldn't have the money to be able to do it, simply by that fact 
that we're sitting on a $15 billion debt, as you're well aware of. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I'm trying to find out 
is what strategic methods you have in mind for increasing 
economic activity in your portfolio, and you're just very elusive. 
You won't endorse public share offerings. You won't 
acknowledge the success of the joint venture relationships. I've 
asked you specifically if you'd look at a public share offering 
and participate in one in atomic energy, manufacturing and 
marketing of CANDUs. You won't acknowledge it. 
Co-generation, you've just thrown up your hands, so that won't 
work. 
 
Does the minister have any new strategic analysis on how he 
could encourage investment, more investment in the province 
of Saskatchewan in nuclear energy, in mining, in gas, or in oil, 
or in the value added manufacturing in those industries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, to the member from 
Estevan, what we're most interested in is creating an 
environment where business wants to invest. And how do we 
do that? Well you develop a royalty structure that will allow 
them to operate in the province and allow them to satisfy their 
shareholders and their shareholders' profits. We introduced a 
new policy on uranium and we've done that working with 
industry. We introduced the new royalty structure on oil and gas 
revenue. We did that working with industry. 
 
So I think what is important is that you work with industry to 
develop an environment where they want to invest and where 
they want to do business. And I don't think there's any major 
trick to that. I think it's a matter of using common sense. It's a 
matter of working with the industry. If you look at every sector, 
whether it's oil and gas, potash, uranium, or others, natural gas, 
they're all doing fairly well and they're all investing. And I think 
that's the kind of climate that we have attempted to create. And 
I think the success is in the statement of revenues and the  

fact that they are investing and that they are generating revenues 
for the people of Saskatchewan through royalties and taxation. 
 
I mean what we want to do is create a fiscal framework, create 
an environment, and to facilitate investment. And I think we've 
been very successful. And the record and the numbers that 
we've put in this year's Estimates will show quite clearly that 
that's the case. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials. I was reading an article from 
today's paper that piqued my interest, and it's an area that I have 
some interest in and I'm sure you also do. It's about an energy 
deal recently signed between the province, I believe an oil 
company, and the Joseph Bighead Reserve, dealing with natural 
gas deposits up in the Meadow Lake area. 
 
It must have been quite a shindig here because it says the 
deputy minister danced. Knowing your deputy as well as I do, I 
felt that must have been quite a show up there. But I guess it 
leads to the bigger question, Mr. Minister, about this process 
because there are a number of these initiatives going on in the 
province now and they've been outstanding issues for quite 
some time. And the Department of Energy and Mines wasn't 
always on the same wavelength as the department responsible 
for native affairs when it came to some of these issues. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could elaborate on the policy that 
your department has come up with. And I believe the situation 
at Carlyle, although that involved the federal government, was 
similar in this one. And how many more of these particular 
circumstance are around where the province is obviously giving 
up some jurisdictional rights vis-a-vis royalties with various 
Indian bands in the province. I wonder if you could elaborate, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me say to the member from 
Thunder Creek that there was no giving up in the Joseph 
Bighead announcement that you saw today, no giving up of 
jurisdiction. What there was is a pool of gas that is both 
partially in reserve and partially off reserve. And what they did 
was put it together in what they referred to as unit management, 
for good management of the pool. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it says here, "Royalties 
alone for the band are expected to be nearly $450,000 in 1995," 
and that, "The band . . . gets royalties based on estimates of how 
much of the gas winds up coming out from under the reserve." 
 
Now I do understand pooling arrangements, Mr. Minister. 
There must be something specifically done here to come up this 
arrangement. Is it the same as Steelman or is it . . . are you 
telling me that there's been no change in the way you do things 
as far as this agreement is? Because obviously native people 
around the province are going to read this and say yes, why 
aren't I getting the same deal that Joseph Bighead is? 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
1004 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay. I'm told by my officials that 
this is the first situation where the unitization involves both on 
reserve and off reserve. And what this is, as I've indicated, the 
first one of that kind. And what they have tried to do is, by a 
formula, determine how much comes from the reserve land and 
the reserve portion of the pool and how much would come from 
off and from outside of the reserve. And what they're 
attempting to do is to manage it as a pool. And the amount that 
was indicated, as I am told, in the paper for revenue would be in 
the neighbourhood of $450,000. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair: —Before we proceed to item 1, administration, can 
we ask the minister to reintroduce us to the officials who have 
joined us here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of 
all, to my right, Pat Youzwa, the deputy minister of Economic 
Development; and directly behind me, executive director of 
programs division, Bob Perrin; and to Bob's right, Wayne 
McElnee, director of economic policy; and seated in the back, 
Sharon Roulston, director of internal operations; and Alison 
Stickland, executive director of northern affairs. 
 
And so I look forward to questions from members of the 
opposition. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome to the Minister of Economic Development and his 
officials. I hope that over the next while we have a productive 
session. Actually I hope that we have a little bit more of a 
productive session than we have had over the last two hours. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I found the last two hours very fascinating as my 
colleague, the member from Estevan, was questioning the 
member from Duck Lake, the Minister of Energy and Mines, 
about his vision, his perception of what the future looked like as 
we further try to develop the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it was a little bit like pulling hens' teeth I guess, Mr. 
Chairman, to get the minister to admit that there were some 
good things that had happened in the '80s. And we, I think are 
going to try to pursue that vein of thought as we ask the 
Minister of Economic Development some pertinent questions. 
 
(2100) 
 
And I want to begin, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, by 
asking not only you, but the Associate Minister of Economic 
Development, some very specific questions. And we are aware 
and the viewers perhaps are aware that the last time Economic 
Development was up, I was specifically asking the Minister of 
Economic Development questions about his particular  

department. And I admit, Mr. Chairman, that the discussion at 
times was perhaps not dealing specifically and solely with the 
economic issues but somewhat politically orientated. And I 
hope, quite frankly, that we've both gotten that off our chests 
and that today we can pursue the economic issues just a little bit 
more in detail. 
 
Now therefore, Mr. Chairman, I direct my first question rather 
directly at the Associate Minister of Economic Development. 
Because, sir, it is my understanding that your part of the 
portfolio has been specifically designated to be economic 
development in the North. And as such, I am extremely 
interested in what goes on in the North. I think there's 
tremendous potential in the North and I think this potential 
should be pursued, and I think you would agree with me as 
well. 
 
I believe that you consider that to be your mandate, your 
specific job that you have as associate minister, to do what you 
can for citizens in your own community and your riding of 
Athabasca, but also certainly the people in the Cumberland 
riding as well, and ultimately for all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. So what I would ask you first of all then is to 
perhaps elaborate a little bit about the vision that you would 
have for the northern people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that you have been in the legislature for . . . you're the 
longest surviving member, I believe, in this legislature right 
now, if I'm not mistaken, or certainly one of them. And you've 
been sitting in the back benches all these years with some pretty 
pent up emotions, I would imagine, because you could see what 
was needed but never were quite in a position where you could 
actually pull some of the throttles and some of the levers to 
make those things happen. 
 
Now that finally you are in that position — and once again I 
congratulate you for that achievement — and I'm sure that the 
rest of the people of this province are looking forward to 
hearing what you envisage for the North in so far as economic 
development for those peoples and all of the people of 
Saskatchewan are concerned. Would you want to please take 
this opportunity to elaborate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I want to thank the hon. member for Rosthern for that question. 
And yes, I would appreciate taking the opportunity to give you 
my views of what is taking place in northern Saskatchewan and 
what I see as the future for the North. 
 
You indicate that there is a lot of activity up in northern 
Saskatchewan and a lot of opportunities, and I fully agree with 
you. There's tremendous opportunities in the North. As you 
know, we have so many resources up in the northern part of our 
province, starting with the forestry and the rivers and the lakes 
for tourism, the mining industry, commercial fishing industry. 
There's just so much that can take place. 
 
But we have to develop it in a slow and safe manner, especially  



March 20, 1995 

 
1005 

when you're dealing with the mining industry. 
 
Right now with the programs that we have, my colleague, the 
Associate Minister of Education, with Education and Training 
. . . and what the Premier has indicated quite clearly in his 
speeches in the House, that our direction will be towards 
education and training and jobs. 
 
And I think it's important in northern Saskatchewan, if you're 
going to create jobs, you have to make sure that the citizens 
who are living in the North are well educated and well trained 
so that they can take advantage of the opportunities that will be 
forthcoming or that . . . they're there right now. 
 
I'm sure you realize that in the forest industry the price right 
now of forest products have never been higher. So there's so 
many opportunities in the forest industry — in the softwood, in 
the hardwood, in railroad ties, fence posts for the farmers — 
there just seems to be no end for the forest products at this time. 
 
And there are many jobs being created — there's saw mills, 
there's the pulp mill in Meadow Lake, the saw mills in Meadow 
Lake. There are smaller saw mills that are starting up, up in the 
west side and up in the east side of the province. Large 
contracts are being developed with fence post industries for the 
farming communities, not only farming in this country — in 
Saskatchewan and Canada — but they're going south of the 
border. So there are many opportunities there. 
 
Another area that I have been looking at since I got this 
portfolio, and that is to bring the processing of our fish back to 
Saskatchewan. As you're aware, right now all the fish that we 
produce in this province . . . we catch the fish in northern 
Saskatchewan and then we put them on trucks and take them 
1500 miles to Winnipeg for processing; and along with that 
goes the jobs also. 
 
So this is something that I'm looking into, and I hope that I can 
convince the federal government that . . . and the crown 
corporation, the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation, that 
they should be processing that fish up in northern Saskatchewan 
and bring the jobs back where they belong. 
 
I don't mind the corporation being a central selling agency. I see 
nothing wrong with that. But I don't believe that we should be 
processing that product out in Winnipeg. So I'm working on 
that. 
 
Now we see a lot of development in the North in education. The 
community college system is now operating — and operating 
well. If you go into the North and you see the expansion of the 
community colleges, and it's expanding only because it's 
working in conjunction with industry. There's the mining 
industry and the forest industry. And the community colleges 
are working together to train individuals to take advantages of 
the opportunities in both of those industries. 
 
We see a lot more young men and women graduating out of the 
grade 12 system in northern Saskatchewan, and that's been  

increasing over the years. And they're not all going to be 
miners, and they're not all going to be fishermen. And they're 
not all going to work in the forest industry. But you just go to 
any university around the province and go into the hospitals, 
and you see the young women from northern Saskatchewan 
who are nurses today. And they're all over, so I see exciting 
times ahead for the citizens in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
No doubt the mining industry has played a major role in the last 
number of years and will continue to play a major role as we 
take a look at the developments that will take place in the 
industry. And I just want to indicate to you that the 
announcement the other day that McClean Lake will be starting 
that new deposit and that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which lake, Fred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — The McClean Lake deposit, they're 
going to build that mine, and their initial investment, I believe, 
is around $250 million. And a lot of that, the goods and 
services, will come out of Saskatchewan. Hopefully 50 per cent 
of the jobs will be for the North. The other 50 per cent will be 
for the South. Head offices are in Saskatoon. 
 
And McClean Lake is not a big deposit, by any means. When 
you take a look at the deposits that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan, the McClean Lake deposit has between 40-45 
million pounds of ore. And that may sound like a lot of ore, but 
it's not really. When you compare that to Key Lake which had 
110 million pounds, and Cigar Lake, which has not even started 
in the development phase yet, has 385 million pounds. 
 
And there's going to be 250 jobs at McClean Lake, so you can 
just see as, you know, the next 10, 15, 20 years that 
development, as it takes place slowly and carefully and safely in 
the best interests of all citizens in this province, I just think that 
there are exciting times in northern Saskatchewan in the mining 
industry. And the mining industry will certainly play a major 
role. 
 
Having said that, I think I'll take my seat, and you may have 
some supplementary questions that you would like to ask me on 
anything that I have indicated here. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I know 
that there's a wide-ranging scope of activities and possibilities 
and potentials in the North that should be continued to be 
pursued. You mentioned a number of them and you predicated 
a lot of the success in the North depending on the types of 
education and educational programs that were available and are 
available in the North. 
 
And I know from my visits up North, when it comes to the 
educational component, I've been extremely impressed, for 
example, when I went into the town of La Loche, for example, 
and toured their school. And as a former educator and so on, I 
think I know what to look for, and when I went into that school 
in La Loche I was amazed. I was amazed at the discipline, the 
attitude. 



March 20, 1995 

 
1006 

You can walk into an area and you can immediately sense 
whether that is a learning experience that those kids are going to 
have or whether it's not going to be a learning experience. And 
so the schools are there for the four R's . . . or the three R's and 
the other kinds of things. 
 
And I got the very distinct impression that because of the types 
of teachers that were there and the job that they were doing, that 
these kids did have the opportunity to get a formal education. 
And the trick is to have something for these kids when they 
come out of school to apply their education to, and that is what 
has always been lacking in the North. 
 
We've been hewers of wood and drawers of water and we have 
been good traditionally in pursuing the fundamental industries, 
the main industries; but when it comes to secondary industry, 
value added and tertiary industries, that's where we've always 
lacked in the North . . . what we've lacked in the North. 
 
And I think that is going to be your challenge as an economic 
minister of the North, is to be able to do those value added and 
to create meaningful, long-term, permanent, good-paying jobs 
for the folks in the North. Not that there's not always going to 
be room for fishermen and lumbering and these kinds of things, 
but we want to do more. As you have indicated, we want to do 
more than just haul the fish out of the water and put them in ice 
and truck them down to Chicago or wherever they happen to 
wind up. 
 
So from that perspective, Mr. Minister, I certainly wish you 
well in your endeavours as you go about it. And I quite frankly 
think that we are in a sense heading in the right direction, 
because one of the greatest potentials that we have in the North 
— and you've already alluded to that — is the mining industry. 
And obviously the greatest mining industry that we have in the 
North is the uranium and the potential of uranium. 
 
Now I don't want to put words in your mouth, but I think you 
are light years ahead of your own party in many instances over 
the years as to recognizing the potential that uranium mining 
could have for the people of the North. And I'm glad to note 
now that finally your party has caught up with you, recognized 
that factor, and is now preparing to reap the benefits of that, 
obviously taking safety and all these other precautions in mines. 
So there's a great deal of potential there. 
 
I was interested in noting that when you started talking about 
McClean Lake and its potential, and comparing it to Cigar and 
to Key Lake, places that I have visited as well. And the 
potential is there because, when we start talking about the 
uranium mining industry, it's staggering, the economic spin-offs 
that can be associated with that, right from the mining of it, 
from the elementary processing of it, the shipping down — let's 
say — to the States, the selling to the users, and then comes the 
question of what do you do with that product in the end. 
 
And I'm just wondering what your vision, sir, is of that uranium 
part of the economic situation in northern Saskatchewan. How 
do you envision, what do you see in the future role for the  

North of the mining industry, uranium in particular? Could you 
expound on that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much. Yes, you 
indicate that I felt that education and training will play a major 
role in northern Saskatchewan, and I want to just indicate to 
you that that is true, and there is a . . . and my colleague, the 
Associate Minister of Education, has announced a $10 million, 
multi-party training plan, and that will train people for new jobs 
in the forestry and mining industry. And this is a joint 
commitment by the province and the federal government and 
the Prince Albert Grand Council. And these are all geared 
towards education and training. Northern development will also 
play a major role, and then, as I announced, the northern 
development fund which will provide loans for individuals to 
take advantages of the opportunities that will be created in all 
the industries in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, the uranium industry will be developed, but we as a 
government have made it quite clear that it will be developed 
slowly and carefully and safely. We will not allow development 
to get ahead of any of these items because it's so important. And 
that is the reason to have the training programs along with the 
mining industries. 
 
(2115) 
 
But what I want to make it quite clear, that education and 
training is not going to be strictly for the one industry. As you 
indicated, they don't all want to be fishermen, and they don't all 
want to be lumberjacks, and they don't all want to work in the 
mining industry. And we want to make sure that the young men 
and women who are coming out of grade 12 in northern 
Saskatchewan will have the opportunity to go in any direction 
they want — if they want to go into the trades or if they want to 
go to university. And we have many of them that are going to 
university in the South, as I indicated before, and there's going 
to be a lot more of them. 
 
But this, I have always said and I have always felt, that is the 
key to the success in northern Saskatchewan. It don't matter 
how many resources you have or how much the resources are 
worth, if you don't have a population that is not well educated 
and well trained, then they're never going to be able to take 
advantage of the opportunities when they do arise. 
 
And that's why over the years you've always seen we've had to 
import teachers. We've imported social workers and RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police). And that is starting to 
reverse itself now. You see more and more northern teachers. 
You see more and more northern social workers, more 
Northerners are getting into the RCMP. And they don't 
necessarily stay in the North. You can find nurses are nursing in 
Saskatoon. They're nursing in Big River. They're nursing all 
over. Social workers move around. We have RCMP who are 
moving out. 
 
So I think that our philosophy of making sure that we can get 
our citizens in northern Saskatchewan well educated, you know  



March 20, 1995 

 
1007 

. . . and the commitment by industry to work closely with 
northern people — the mining industry — who will work 
closely to see that we get at least 50 per cent if not more of the 
labour force. We have an opportunity, and we've got to take 
advantage of it. We're no different than the Scandinavian 
countries or Germany or Japan. All those countries who are 
ahead of us in economic development are a well-educated 
population. And that's exactly what we have to do; we have to 
follow in the footsteps of those countries because it's just so 
important. 
 
But yes, I think there's exciting times up there. The new 
economic development fund for the North, I think that's a part 
and parcel that will go a long ways in creating the type of 
opportunities that Northerners so rightly deserve. I want to 
indicate to you, sir, as a former minister, you know what the 
situation is up there. And we have a long ways to go to catch up 
to the constituents that live in your constituency and in the 
South. 
 
So I think that when anyone says to me, you're putting more 
emphasis on the North, I think maybe we are putting more 
emphasis on the North now, but we're 20, 25 years behind the 
South. So we have to do that to catch up. But I think we're 
catching up fast and I'm pretty proud when I go into the 
communities and I see the young men and women, from 
families, who have graduated and they're out making their 
living and raising their families and they have a future. And I 
think that's important. 
 
I guess if anything that disappoints me is to see labels that are 
put on by broadcasts that I seen the other night on the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) when they refer to La 
Loche. You alluded to La Loche and you went into the school 
and you seen what kind of a school it is. I don't like to see the 
build-up the way that the CBC were speaking about a 
community in my constituency. You talk about the school up 
there and then you go into the reserve on Black Lake and 
Fond-du-Lac and look at the new schools that have been built 
up there. They're just magnificent schools. And they're proud of 
that and that'll be part and parcel of success in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I agree, Mr. Minister, that one of the 
problems that we're facing in the North and bringing the North, 
as it were, into the 20 and 21st century is the stereotyping that 
has occurred in the past. 
 
And you talked about the CBC. I don't know if I particularly 
like mentioning particular media outlets, but why not. I know 
that when I was minister back in '89, I think it was . . . yes I 
believe it was 1989 as Minister of Social Services, one of my 
objectives was to go to the North and see first-hand . . . 
hands-on approach. And we decided that we would visit La 
Loche, made all the arrangements, and part of my homework 
was to study up a little bit on La Loche so I would have an idea 
of what to expect. And one of the things that my ministerial 
assistants did for me was to bring me a CBC taped show of La 
Loche, and this was about two days before I went up there. 

You talk about stereotyping. And the kind of TV program that it 
was where it showed barred windows, where it showed people 
staggering around, and this was supposed to be the welfare 
capital of the world. And that is exactly the impression that that 
TV program gave to me, and quite frankly, I said to myself, do I 
really want to go there. Do I really want to go there? 
 
But we did. And that is exactly the school that I was talking 
about a few moments ago that when I went into, and I went into 
two schools there. I went into the public school, grades 1 to 8, 
and I also went into the public high school as well, and I was 
completely impressed, thoroughly impressed, with the attitude, 
the demeanour, and the whole learning situation that was there. 
The kids wanted to learn. The kids wanted to learn, and so this 
stereotyping is something that I think we have to try to get away 
from somehow. And the media is of course one of the culprits 
in many of these occasions that foster and perpetuate this kind 
of stereotyping. 
 
So from that point of view — and I just want to slide over a 
little bit — you've mentioned mining a couple of times, and I 
just want to pursue certain aspects of that. You say that it has to 
be developed slowly and that it has to be developed carefully. 
What is your perception now of how this development is 
occurring in the North? Do you see the uranium development, 
for example, proceeding slowly right now, carefully right now? 
Should it be going slower; should it be going faster? What do 
you see for the uranium mining industry in the next few years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Well let's take from 1982; that's the 
last mine and mill that opened up in the uranium industry in 
northern Saskatchewan. That's the Key Lake mine. So the next 
mine that will go into production will be probably in 1997, the 
one they've just announced at McClean Lake. 
 
So I think that what has taken place is taking place and I fully 
agree with that. And the policy of our government is that we're 
not moving too fast, and I think we're not moving too slowly. 
As you know, there's been a surplus of fuel in the world and 
energy for the nuclear power plants. Russia has had a stockpile, 
and they've been bringing it over here. So rather than get 
yourself into a situation where you have a glut on the market, 
you have to develop it slowly. And that's when I talked about 
slowly. 
 
And I talked about carefully. And I think that if you go up and 
you look at any of the mines and the policies that the federal 
and provincial Environment departments, the regulations that 
they have to go through, you'll find out that it's been done 
carefully. And the result of that brings safety to the individuals 
who are working there, and it also brings safety to the 
environment. 
 
So yes, I think it's moving along at the pace that it should move, 
considering the world events. And I wouldn't want to see it 
move any faster because I think that you have to be awfully 
careful when you're doing this and make sure that it is done 
safely. So yes, I would indicate that that is right. 



March 20, 1995 

 
1008 

You talked about the stereotyping, and I fully agree. I think this 
is bad because when I take a look at how the communities in 
northern Saskatchewan are working together with government 
in community development and trying to get themselves in a 
position where they can take advantage of opportunities when 
they come up, building houses, schools being built, and there's a 
lot of Northerners now who are getting into the trades and are 
getting ahead. And I think that that most certainly is significant 
in housing and restoration of houses. That's being done by 
northern contractors. 
 
So I think, you know, you take a look at . . . there's 
construction, local construction companies that are setting up in 
all communities and they have gained this knowledge through 
the years of building the homes. 
 
You talked about being a little bit leery about going into those 
communities, but I assure you once you went in there, you 
didn't have that feeling. And I just say to you, and I say to 
anybody that's listening, that any time they want to go into 
northern Saskatchewan they'll find that they're no different than 
anybody in any other part of this nation that we live in. They are 
no different than you and I. They want the same thing for their 
children as you and I do. They want to see that their children get 
a good education and an opportunity to get ahead. 
 
So I think that while it is a long ways from southern 
Saskatchewan to northern Saskatchewan, the folks up there are 
no different than the folks in the South. They just want to be a 
part of society and they most certainly want to be equal 
partners. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, when I said I was leery of going 
in there . . . I've been, I think, to every community in the North 
over the years. I'm not leery of going into any of them. What I 
meant to say was, based on that documentary alone, is what I 
said, someone who didn't know better wouldn't have gone there. 
That's the point that I was trying to make. 
 
As far as the economic development in the North then let's just 
pursue this one aspect a little bit further. You're taking about 
Cigar Lake; you're talking about McClean Lake. You're talking 
about the development in the North, and you think that it's 
going at about the right speed. 
 
You're concerned about the safety aspect and I think we all are 
about that. You're talking about the glut of uranium on the 
market depressing the prices somewhat, although I would 
suggest to you they are better than they have been and the 
potential and the future looks pretty good. 
 
What I'm very pleased at is that you folks, as a party, and 
particularly since you are now forming the government, have 
seen the light of day, have seen the potential within this 
uranium industry and the tremendous potential it has for us in 
Canada of having the highest grade, probably the greatest 
reserves, of uranium in the world. 
 
And when you have a physical attribute like that, when you are  

blessed with natural resources like that, it behoves us to, in a 
responsible fashion, develop them, develop them for the 
betterment of mankind and specifically for the betterment of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And on that note, and since you're talking about the glut of 
uranium and some of the depressed prices, I referred a few 
minutes ago to what I would consider the cycle of uranium. 
First of all, it's got to be gotten out of the ground; it's got to be 
processed; it's got to be shipped down to where it's going to be 
used; it's going to be used; and then it's got to come back to 
somewhere and you have to do something with that. 
 
What do you think, Mr. Minister, is the end result of the stuff, 
the ore, that we take out of the ground? We've taken the ore out 
of the ground, we've utilized it for the benefit of mankind, and 
now what do we do with it? And particularly, I'm talk . . . well 
first of all you wanted to answer that so far, so I'll give you that 
opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Yes, I wanted to answer that because 
I just want to make it clear that while we produce uranium in 
this province, we do have a policy that we will not proceed with 
a deep burial site for the waste. But we don't have any utilities 
in the province. We export the yellowcake out of the province 
for utilities all over the world. 
 
And I just wanted to indicate that AECL, Atomic Energy of 
Canada Ltd., are in charge of handling the waste, and as you 
know, with the new processes that are taking place in the world, 
they are now reprocessing the waste. So you end up with very 
little waste. And in Pinawa, Manitoba, AECL has had an 
experimental project going over there to see if they can handle 
the waste. And I think that it's going to be many years before 
they come out with the final results. 
 
But I would just say to you right now that the policy of this 
government, as it is right now, we are not looking at developing 
any deep burial sites or bringing back any of the wastes from 
utilities outside of Saskatchewan and bring it back into 
Saskatchewan at this time. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Would you care to comment, then, about 
some of the proposals being made by the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council. I understand that they are somewhat interested in 
pursuing what is apparently a very, very significant possibility, 
potential, economic potential, of taking care of the waste of 
uranium. Have you . . . or has the Meadow Lake Tribal Council 
made any overtures to your government in supporting their 
interest in perhaps doing precisely that? Could you give us an 
update on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — No, they haven't asked us as a 
government. As you indicate, they've suggested that they want 
to look into this but they're doing that on their own and they 
have not approached the government per se to get involved in 
it. And they would . . . What they're suggesting is that they  



March 20, 1995 

 
1009 

want to take a look at the possibilities that are arising out of the 
results of Pinawa, Manitoba, where they have had the 
experimental repository down there for a number of years. That 
is now completed so I'm sure they'll be looking at that. I know 
they've made a trip out there but they most certainly haven't 
approached the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, I recognize first of all 
your great desire to help the people in the North and there is a 
potential solution to part of your problems here. And it seemed 
to me that you have just indicated that you have a closed mind 
to this potential at this point and you're just basically saying, no, 
we're not interested. There are literally thousands of jobs, 
potential jobs here, as many as 4,000 jobs, I've heard, on a 
potential such as this. 
 
And you're telling me that you have had no contact with the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council, who is obviously very interested, 
because by your own words, you have been indicating that 
they're going to Manitoba. And what it almost seems to me is as 
if you're saying, well Manitoba's started in this, they're 
interested in it, and so therefore you're telling the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council to go to Manitoba if this is what they're 
interested in. 
 
So what you're saying now is that you've made no contact, 
they've made no contact, you haven't been in contact with each 
other about this potential. It just seems kind of strange to me 
that the economic ministers of this province would not be 
exploring all possibilities. You know, in your own party a few 
years ago, development of the nuclear industry in Saskatchewan 
was a potential that you could not foresee, but circumstances 
have shown you the way. Now you are involved, intricately 
involved, in the uranium industry and its proliferation. 
 
But at the same time you just got up and say, well no, we're not 
going to do any of that, we're not interested in that; the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council is but we've had no contact with them. Let 
them go to Manitoba. That to me, sir, seems as if it's somewhat 
short-sighted. And would you want to rephrase your answer, 
perhaps. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could, for the member opposite 
who seems to think we have a new policy on uranium 
development in the province, I would remind him that going 
back to the 1940s when Tommy Douglas was premier of this 
province, uranium was being mined in the province. And during 
the 1970s, of course, the Blakeney government had mine 
expansion as well. And in fact probably the least development 
that has occurred in the last 50 years has been that period when 
you people were in government. 
 
Now obviously that wasn't because you had a policy against 
uranium; it had to do with world prices and oversupply. But to 
try to paint a picture that CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) or NDP governments have had a policy opposed to 
uranium development is completely false. Tommy Douglas 
developed uranium. Al Blakeney developed uranium. And the 
Romanow government does. 

I say again, over the past 50 years probably the fewest dollars 
were invested in uranium development and new development 
when you people were in government. So just so the record is 
straight, whether you like uranium or don't like uranium, let's 
not try to rewrite history of uranium development because 
you're very much inaccurate when you say that somehow we 
have had a policy that has been opposed to uranium 
development. There were many, many fewer dollars invested in 
uranium in the 10 years you were in government than any 
period of time in the last 50 years. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, let's not try to rewrite 
history. I think everyone in this province, when it comes to 
uranium industry and the NDP Party, knows automatically 
where your party has stood over the last number of years. All 
we have to do is remember some of your party resolutions at 
your annual conventions. 
 
All we have to do is take a look at some of the members that 
you had in this House. And I just name Peter Prebble and a few 
names like that that represented your party, that spoke for your 
party, until very, very recently when suddenly you saw the light 
and you decided that we better get off our duff and get along 
with the world and do these kinds of things. 
 
And it seems to me that the Associate Minister of Economic 
Development and I were having a very, very reasonable, 
rational discussion on this because his purpose is to do what is 
right for the North. And he has, in my opinion, always 
advocated what your party has finally caught up with — simply 
because of the potential for his people in the North. And I 
commend him for that. 
 
But for you to get up now and say, well sorry, folks, we're not 
really late comers, late bloomers; we've really always been there 
 it's just that circumstances didn't allow us  I think that's a 
pretty big stretch of the imagination. And drawing a long bow 
like that is going to break it, and the arrow is just simply going 
to fall to the ground and not hit the mark as you were intending 
to when you got up. 
 
But unfortunately the Associate Minister of Economic 
Development did not have an opportunity to answer my 
question, so I'll give him that opportunity now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Well as I indicated, the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council has not come to the government. And most 
certainly they haven't come to me since I've had this position for 
only six weeks. 
 
As you know, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council has made 
announcements that they have a 20-year plan in which they are 
exploring a number of economic development options. And in 
those options they include that they indicate that they want to 
do a research and development on the deep burial sites. But that 
is on their own. They have not come to the government and 
have made a proposal to the government. Most certainly not to 
myself as the Associate Minister of Economic Development, 
they have not come to me with that. 



March 20, 1995 

 
1010 

And I just want to make that clear that, you know, we've always 
supported the safe development of the uranium industry in this 
province. And you know the only time that we didn't do any 
development is when your government was up. Because the last 
mine that was opened up, as I indicated before, was in 1982. 
That was the Key Lake Mine, when you took over, and there's 
been no mine opened up since. We just made the 
announcement. 
 
But to indicate and to make an . . . to try and make an issue out 
of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council's 20-year economic 
development strategy and items that they may have in that 
strategy, I think this is the wrong place to do that. And I just say 
to you, sincerely, it is not in the plans of this government, at this 
stage, to get involved with the waste from nuclear power plants, 
whether they be in Canada or the United States or any other 
place. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I hope I'm wrong in my interpretation of that 
answer. Does this mean now that you have no interest in 
pursuing this? You would acknowledge that there are literally 
thousands and thousands of jobs and tremendous economic 
spin-off at stake. 
 
Now what you are saying is that you're reverting back to the 
Peter Prebble syndrome and saying there's too many dangers 
involved here, so therefore we're closing our mine, we're 
shutting off all possibilities. The Meadow Lake Tribal Council 
may be miles ahead of us, but we have no contact with them, 
we're not interested in them, we're not interested in this at all 
because it's not safe. And I may concur. I'm not saying that it's 
. . . that we're at the stage where we can safely do that. But 
certainly what I am saying to you is that we have to explore 
opportunities. 
 
And I'm again just amazed that you know that the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council is pursuing this as a viable option. And 
you're saying they haven't contacted us; we haven't contacted 
them. There's a site in Manitoba that is showing some potential. 
Let them go over there. Export 4,000 jobs to Manitoba. I'm 
surprised to hear you say that, sir, that you are not out there 
fighting, kicking, screaming, for every opportunity to do what is 
right for the North. 
 
And I'm not sure if that's the right thing at this stage. But surely 
you've got to get involved on the ground floor on this, become 
part of the solution. Are you prepared perhaps then, to make an 
overture to the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and say to them 
exactly what have you got done so far? Where are you at? How 
can we help? How can we work together on this? 
 
What are we supposed to say as an opposition, if the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council gets a deaf ear and a rebuff from you as the 
Minister of Economic Development in the North, and they 
come to us and say what can you do for us? Are we supposed to 
tell them well no, the government isn't interested in this, so I 
guess we'll just have to wait until those guys get turfed out and 
then we'll see what we can pick up. Or are you prepared to look 
and investigate some of the tremendous potential that is there  

and see whether we can develop anything. Are you prepared to 
do that or what is your stand? Do you plan to be aloof, as you 
are right now, for evermore? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Well I just want to make it very clear 
that there's very few places on this globe where research and 
development is taking place into deep burial sites. Sweden is 
looking at it; France and Germany are looking at it together; the 
United States is looking at it; and Canada is looking at it. And 
Canada is looking at it through Atomic Energy Control, and 
that's AECL in Pinawa, Manitoba. And I think we just have to 
let that process take place. They have the experimental mine in 
Pinawa, Manitoba. The research and development is being done 
there. We don't have wastes in this province. Manitoba doesn't 
have wastes in Manitoba. All they're doing is the research to a 
deep burial site. 
 
Now I think that we, as a government, if we want to use 
common sense, then we want to wait and make sure that we get 
the results of all the research and development that has taken 
place in Pinawa, Manitoba, because the bulk of the waste is in 
Ontario. There's a little bit in New Brunswick and a little bit in 
Quebec but that's controlled by AECB (Atomic Energy Control 
Board), by the Canadian government. And I just say to you that 
I'm sure that AECL, when they find out what the results are in 
Pinawa, Manitoba, they will probably be looking at other sites 
in Ontario also because Ontario is in the Precambrian Shield 
and that's where the majority of their wastes are. So I think in 
all fairness to the hon. member from Rosthern, we should wait 
and just see how things work out and see what the research and 
development indicates in Pinawa, Manitoba. And at this time, 
as I indicated before, we have no plans to get into the research 
and development to deep burial sites at this time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well I'm really disappointed, I guess, more in 
the tenure of the answer than the actual practicality of it. An 
attitude of laissez-faire, of sit back and wait, let others do it, it's 
in the hands of AECL, and in Ontario there's a Precambrian 
Shield too. 
 
It amazes me, sir, that you as a government are prepared to sit 
back and let things happen. Why would you not be a 
proponent? Why would you not be part of that process? Sitting 
back and wait for things to happen — we would never have 
Saskferco. Your partner there said that this is doomed to failure. 
One year later Saskferco was a glowing success. If fact it's one 
of the largest jewels in your Crown jewels. It's the one that you 
hold up to the world and to the financiers in the East, saying 
what a wonderful project that is. 
 
And so for you to sit back now and say the potential of 4,000 
jobs in northern Saskatchewan, if we pursue this and can 
perfect it  yes, with all the safety precautions in place  but 
that you’re not prepared to be a proponent of the deal, and part 
of that leading edge working in conjunction with whomever to 
accomplish that fact, just amazes me — that you're prepared to 
sit back and just let things happen, let the process take place. I 
can't see that at all. And I don't think that it behoves well for a 
government that is sitting on top of the largest, most stable  



March 20, 1995 

 
1011 

Canadian Shield with the largest, the richest uranium resources 
possible, that you wouldn't pursue it in an active fashion. Find 
out — and if it doesn't work, it doesn't work. I'm not promoting 
anything that's going to be unsafe. 
 
But things develop. Techniques are developed. Technologies 
are increasing and we've got to be part of that process. Please, 
sir, get up and say that you made a mistake. That you're not 
going to sit back and wait. Would you do that? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Well as I indicated to the hon. 
member, the research is being done in Pinawa, Manitoba. And I 
also indicated that we, in developing uranium deposits in 
northern Saskatchewan, that we were going to move slowly and 
safely and carefully. And I think this same applies to looking at 
deep burial sites for wastes in northern Saskatchewan. We want 
to make sure, we want to get the results of all . . . there's 
hundreds of millions of dollars that have been spent on research 
and development at Pinawa. 
 
Now we want to make sure that we get the results of all this 
research that has been done. So we would . . . you know, why 
would we want to risk going in helter-skelter and testing to see 
if we can find a safe place to put it when all the research has 
been done just east of us, and hundreds of millions of dollars of 
Canadian taxpayers' money? 
 
So I say that, in closing off, that we're developing the industry, 
the uranium industry, slowly and carefully and safely. And if 
anything else is developed up there as far as waste goes, that 
would have to be done exactly the same way, and we want to 
see what the results are of the research that's been carried out in 
Manitoba. That's a Canadian project. It's not a Saskatchewan 
project, it's not an Ontario project, it's a Canadian project. So I 
think that in all fairness we should just sit back and find out the 
results of all the research and development that has been done, 
and then we will see if we can proceed carefully and safely and 
slowly. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well just sitting back and waiting, Mr. 
Minister, is what concerns me — that you're quite prepared to 
let AECL in Manitoba do their research, and here we are sitting 
in Saskatchewan as spectators. We are the major player in the 
game, and yet you've put us on the bench. We're sitting on the 
bench while the players are actively out there. 
 
Have you, as a government, made any offer to AECL? Have 
you made any offer at all for a site in Saskatchewan to be used 
for trial purposes, so that we could do a trial set right in 
Saskatchewan conditions? Have you made any kind of an offer 
at all? Have you been any kind of a partner in this whole 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Well as I indicated, the research is 
being carried on at this time, and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not in Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Mr. Thompson: — No, and it's not a Saskatchewan 
project. As I indicated, it's a Canadian project. Your colleague 
sitting beside you, I'm sure, has been there, and he visited when 
he was the minister of Energy and Mines. He knows what's over 
there, and he knows the type of research that's taking place. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Hundreds of millions of dollars of 
Canadian . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And what is Saskatchewan getting out of 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — We'll have to wait and just see what 
the results are. But it's not a project that is specifically for 
Manitoba because they don't have nuclear power plants in 
Manitoba. It is a Canadian project, and the research is taking 
place, and I just think it wouldn't be prudent for us to go ahead 
and start looking for a site of our own when there's a site in 
Manitoba that has been paid for, and all the research and 
development has taken place there, for the taxpayers of Canada, 
for all of Canada. So I just say to you, to the hon. member from 
Rosthern, that I think we should wait. Let's see what's happened 
there. Talk to your colleague, your seat mate. He's been there; 
he's visited; he knows what's going on there. And I'm sure you 
do too. 
 
With that, I'm just going to say that in closing off, that as a 
government we want to wait and make sure what the results are 
of the research and development that has taken place in Pinawa. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:51 p.m. 
 
 


