






















































April 7, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 7, 1995 

 

 
1435 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
today to present from Stony Rapids. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to present 
petitions today on behalf of the people from the Tompkins, 
Hazlet, and Gull Lake areas of the province. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearms 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
I'm happy to present this today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, 29 students from St. Joseph's School in Swift 
Current. They're sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They're  

accompanied by their teacher, Kelly Hammond, and the 
chaperons, Vivian Lahaye, Barry Cuthbert, and Debbie 
Michelson. 
 
I look forward to meeting with these students at 11 o'clock in 
room 218. I hope that they enjoy their stay here in Regina and I 
hope that they enjoy the question period. So please welcome the 
students from Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I'd like to introduce to you and through you 
with great pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, my partner and husband 
for almost 27 years, in your gallery. As everyone here knows, 
our spouses and our families are the ones who sacrifice most 
for our service to this province. And I'm sure you'll join with me 
in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
great pleasure for me this morning to introduce to you and 
through you to my colleagues in the legislature, on behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Regina Elphinstone, a group of 
seven students from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology). They're seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They're part of the English as a second language program. 
They're here accompanied by their teacher, Ron Mang. They 
will shortly be having a tour of the building and I look forward 
to meeting with them later on for tea and conversation. Please 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Diefenbaker's Centennial Birthday 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 1995 marks the 
centennial of the birth of the only Canadian prime minister from 
the province of Saskatchewan, the Rt. Hon. John George 
Diefenbaker who was born 100 years ago this year. 
 
Dick Spencer of Prince Albert is the author of an excellent book 
about the Chief. On the cover slip of the book, prominent 
Canadians like the former governor general, Ramon Hnatyshyn, 
and the hon. member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan . . . and they describe John Diefenbaker as a truly 
great Canadian patriot who stood for a united Canada — a 
statesman who was admired by countless Canadians from 
Newfoundland to British Columbia. 
 
The book Trumpets and Drums by Dick Spencer is an excellent 
book about Dief the Chief, and I'm pleased to note it is in the 
Legislative Library. Mr. Speaker, as a member of this Assembly 
who knew John Diefenbaker, I do believe that we in Canada  



April 7, 1995 

 
1436 

should follow a tradition of our American neighbours where 
they honour presidents with a postage stamp to mark the 
centennial of their birth date. 
 
On September 18, 1995, it would be wonderful if Canada Post 
issued a stamp honouring the 100th birthday of John 
Diefenbaker and issue it on that day at the post office in Prince 
Albert, Saskatchewan and post offices all over Canada. 
 
The bust of Mr. Diefenbaker in the rotunda of this Legislative 
Assembly is a constant reminder of the man from Prince Albert 
and his legacy in being a champion of freedom and a defender 
of national unity in Canada. I think it very appropriate that 
Saskatchewan's only prime minister in Canadian history be 
remembered on the centennial of his birth date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll be sending a copy of my statement to the 
minister responsible for Canada Post and also to the Prime 
Minister of Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists Annual Meeting 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists is holding its 50th annual 
general meeting and conference, April 6 to 8 in Saskatoon. I 
want to recognize the SIA (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Agrologists) and also Saskatchewan agrologists for the job they 
do in promoting sustainable agricultural practices. 
 
Agrologists play a major role in the advancement of agriculture 
in Saskatchewan. The SIA is instrumental in maintaining high 
standards of practice in professional agrologists. It also fosters, 
among all segments of society, recognition of the contribution 
by agriculture to our economic well-being. 
 
The province has historically looked to professional agrologists 
to deliver the agriculture programs and services needed by our 
producers. Today, agrologists are involved in a variety of 
activities including food quality, marketing, environmental 
protection, as well as production. The agriculture industry looks 
to its professionals for the delivery of agricultural programs. 
The professional agrologist also has responsibility to transfer 
the latest in agricultural technology, enabling the development 
of a strong, diverse agriculture industry capable of meeting 
today's challenges. 
 
To assist the SIA and its members meet these challenges, this 
government last year promoted the new Saskatchewan 
agrologists' Act which was effective December 1, 1994. 
 
I call on all members of the legislature to join me in 
congratulating the SIA and its members for the work they are 
doing and in wishing them a successful annual meeting and 
conference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEDA's Annual Historic Model Legislature 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From time to time, 
the members of this Assembly lend their chairs to young people 
from across Saskatchewan. This weekend is one of those times. 
The Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association, or 
SEDA, will hold its annual historic model legislature. 
 
SEDA's model legislature is unique in that it holds its sessions 
in the context of another historical time period. This year the 
youths who replace us focus on the 1930s. Several topics to be 
debated include farm debt, farm relief, unemployment, the civil 
service, and public works projects. 
 
I am also honoured, Mr. Speaker, to have been asked to serve as 
one of the Speakers for the model legislature, along with my 
colleague from Regina Albert North. I only hope that I may be 
as capable as yourself in that position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SEDA, which is one of the many organizations to 
benefit from Saskatchewan Lotteries, asked me to thank all 
members and staff of the legislature whose cooperation helps 
make their event successful. In return, I wish to thank SEDA for 
their continuing desire to afford young people with a legislative 
experience. 
 
I also wish the best of luck to the model legislators. I hope that 
the experience of sitting in this great legislature will be as 
memorable to them as it is to me. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Achievement Award to Dr. Ahab Spence 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to a 
member of the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College who has 
received an award that was highly deserved and a long time 
coming. 
 
The second annual aboriginal achievement awards were 
televised on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) last 
night. One of the 14 recipients was Dr. Ahab Spence of SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College). I should say, Doctor, 
Professor, Reverend Ahab Spence. 
 
Dr. Spence has devoted his long and distinguished life to the 
cultural, linguistic, and spiritual education of his people. He 
was born in Stanley Mission during a time when, shall we say, 
advanced education for aboriginal people was not encouraged. 
Dr. Spence became a teacher, a minister of the Anglican church, 
and a professor. 
 
Now and for the past several years, he is a professor of Indian 
languages, literature, and linguistics, at the federated college — 
this at an age when most people are long retired. 
 
Equally deserving of this award is his wife of over 50 years,  



April 7, 1995 

 
1437 

Bette Spence, a wise and respected elder at the college and an 
accomplished artist. They have several distinguished children 
including one who writes for the Leader-Post, for which they 
can be forgiven. 
 
I ask members to join in paying tribute to the Spences for their 
contribution to Canadian life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Penitentiary Warden Retires 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After serving 31 
years as warden at the Saskatchewan Penitentiary in Prince 
Albert, a distinguished alumni at that formidable institution has 
just been released. 
 
Warden Jim O'Sullivan has retired, and as the editorial in the 
Prince Albert Herald said, Prince Albert has lost one of its 
strongest builders. Jim O'Sullivan spent 21 years of his years 
with the Correctional Services of Canada as warden. If we on 
the outside think back on the changes in our society during that 
time, we will recognize that these years have been very 
demanding on those whose job is one of the most difficult in 
society. 
 
Increasingly, they have had to take on more prisoners who have 
been given longer sentences and keep them in custody with 
limited resources; and at the same time, to maintain a 
professional relationship between the penitentiary and the 
community of Prince Albert. That, Mr. Speaker, is a tough job. 
 
We who have a close association with those who work at the 
correctional institutions understand the strain perhaps more than 
others. At any rate, Mr. O'Sullivan earned his reputation as a 
fair, supportive, cool, determined leader — a reputation 
recognized in 1993 when he was named warden of the year by 
his North American peers. 
 
He has served his country and his city honourably and well and 
he deserves recognition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Indoor Track Games Open in Yorkton 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There is an 
important event which will be getting under way in my riding 
later this afternoon, the 20th annual Yorkton Sunrise Lions 
Indoor Track Games will be held at the Parkland Agriplex in 
our city. 
 
One thousand athletes from over 50 schools across 
Saskatchewan and some from Manitoba will be taking part in 
these games, and some 200 volunteers will be involved to 
ensure that these indoor games run smoothly. 
 
Students, mostly between the ages of 10 and 15 years, will be 
competing in carded and uncarded events such as the high  

jump, the long jump, shot-put, races, and many relays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is this event worthwhile in providing 
opportunities for young athletes to develop and measure their 
athletic skills, it also gives young people a chance to meet; form 
new friendships and acquaintances. 
 
The Yorkton Sunrise track meet continues to be the premier 
event of track meets in Saskatchewan. Accordingly, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to extend my best wishes to the athletes, to 
meet director Mr. Dave Baron, and to the Sunrise Lions and the 
many volunteers who will be involved. And I know that the 
1995 games in Yorkton will be again the best ever. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
MLA Pension Plan 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. Mr. Premier, your sweetheart pension deal just 
keeps getting sweeter. As if your $80,000-a-year pension wasn't 
enough, if you happen to get re-elected — happen to get 
re-elected — that pension will jump to 80 . . . to $100,000 a 
year. Two million dollars or more by the time you turn 80, paid 
for by the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Premier, the question is: is it fair, is it fair that you stand to 
collect $2 million pension when you have attacked the 
pocketbooks of very Saskatchewan taxpayer? Mr. Premier, 
when are you going to do the right thing and roll back these 
outrageous pensions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Considering the fact that there was a newspaper report painting 
the worst possible scenario of the McDowell recommendations, 
I guess one should be able to anticipate that this question would 
be asked. And I certainly have anticipated it. 
 
I want to say to the House, and to the member opposite, that 
clearly there may be an intended consequence of Mr. 
McDowell's report, as has been indicated by the media report 
and by the member opposite. But I also want to say that that 
kind of an intended consequence is something that will have to 
be taken into consideration when the McDowell report is 
considered by members of this House, because I'm sure that it's 
not something that was intended by Mr. McDowell in his 
report. 
 
But I want to, having said that, also say that government will 
show the same kind of leadership on that as it has shown in the 
past, as it has shown by having MLAs' (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) salaries frozen since 1991 at 1990 rates; 
having cabinet ministers take a 5 per cent cut in their salaries;  



April 7, 1995 

 
1438 

having the number of MLAs reduced from 66 to 58, which 
members opposite oppose; having had a 25 per cent cut in 
communications allowances for members — that's leadership, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has shown leadership in the past, it's going to 
show leadership in the future, and I'm quite prepared to 
compare that leadership to the leadership of the former 
government or the leadership of the Liberal Party in this House, 
which it's displayed recently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well it may be the worst possible 
scenario for the taxpayers of this province, but the best possible 
scenario for the Premier occurs that he lives to be 80 years old. 
Show some leadership and accept the pension plan that you 
yourself touted the best in Canada, instead of your obscene one. 
 
But fortunately for the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, it's the answers 
like that from the Deputy Premier that are going to keep the 
Premier from getting re-elected and getting that ridiculous 
pension raise. 
 
My question is again to the Premier. under the new scenario, 
you and your four cabinet colleagues stand to collect eight and 
half million dollars by the time you turn 80 — eight and a half 
million dollars, paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayer  
taxpayers that have had their own pensions cut, that have seen 
their GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) cheques cut; 
taxpayers that have seen their pay cheques cut by your tax 
increases, but did you take a cut? No. You stand to collect a 
hundred thousand dollars a year from those very same 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Premier, enough is enough. Will you set an example? Set 
that leadership and roll back your obscene pension. Do it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that 
the member has changed the debate and the questioning to a 
leadership, because that's exactly what I want to talk about. I 
have indicated that the McDowell commission has . . . and have 
indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the McDowell commission has 
some recommendations with possibly some unintended 
consequences. And I think that that's something that's going to 
have to be addressed. I have no doubt about that. 
 
But I want to go back and remind the members the leadership 
that this government is showing — all of the things which I 
have mentioned, plus the fact that operating expenditures of 
government have been cut by $276 million this year over the 
operating expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan in 
1990-91 when the Tories were over here on the benches of . . . 
the treasury benches. 
 
I want to say to the House and to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
spending, for example, of Executive Council has been reduced  

by $1 million or 13 per cent. 
 
I want to ask the member . . . ask this question: why didn't his 
colleagues show the same leadership when Senator Eric 
Berntson, the former deputy premier of the Conservative 
government, became a senator and gets senator's pay and 
double dips with his formula-planned provincial pension? Why 
didn't they show leadership then? 
 
I ask the Liberals why didn't they show leadership when the 
first day the Liberal leader walked into this House her first act 
was to walk into the Legislative Assembly Office and demand a 
37 per cent increase in her personal salary, which she got; the 
only increase for any MLA in this legislature since 1991. Why 
didn't they show better leadership than that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the 
headline in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix reads: A pension 
bonanza awaits veteran MLAs. Well, Mr. Premier, you're 
getting the bonanza while the member from Elphinstone lives 
outside of his constituency on the ponderosa north of Regina. 
 
You talk about the cutting the pensions and the severances for 
previous MLAs. We agree with that, Mr. Minister. We would 
indeed cut off the pensions that Eric Berntson is receiving and 
that Allan Blakeney is receiving. Allan Blakeney sat in here for 
an extra length of time just to collect that severance package, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
My question is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Your own 
members are interfering with your member asking a question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 
Premier who defends the indefensible while the taxpayers and 
business in this province are mired in his tax swamp, up to their 
knees in alligators. 
 
Mr. Minister, a $100,000-a-year, taxpayer-funded pension is 
outrageous. You know it, I know it, and the public knows it, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, when are you going to finally do the 
right thing and get rid of these obscene pensions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
interesting dissertation by Conservatives who have well 
developed the reputation of being the worst managers as a 
government this province has ever had. And therefore we have 
today, which our young people are saddled with, a $14 billion 
debt because of the kind of spending that they had. 
 
Now the member opposite knows very well that the pensions in 
Saskatchewan for members of this legislature were formed in 
1979. The taxpayers association of Saskatchewan reports that 
because of that reform it has saved taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
$12 million. That's not insignificant. 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1439 

Now why do they stay on this topic in their grasp desperately to 
try to save themselves from falling out of the bottom of the 
polls where they are today. 
 
Because they don't want to talk about the Statistics Canada 
report today which talks about our unemployment rate being 
again the lowest in all of Canada. That the labour force of 
486,000 persons in February of 1995 is 4,000 more than in 
1994 at the same time. That the 449,000 people employed in 
Saskatchewan in March of 1995 is 9,000 more than a year ago 
in March of 1994. That agriculture has seen an employment 
increase of 2,000 people. 
 
That's why they're raising this issue. Because they don't want to 
talk about those kinds of things because of the success of this 
government in job creation in Saskatchewan which is only 
beginning and will continue into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

VLT Expansion 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
the minister has one thing wrong, and that is that we are rising 
in the polls. It's the Liberals that are dropping out of the bottom 
of the poll. They're on the downward trend. 
 
All right, Mr. Speaker, it looks to me as if this is Friday. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It looks 
to me as if it's Friday, and I have a choice of five ministers out 
of eighteen to ask a question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member knows full 
well that that comment is not acceptable in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have five critic 
responsibilities is what I was referring to. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
choose to ask this morning a question of the minister 
responsible for gambling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we finally started to get a little bit of progress out 
of minister number . . . what's the number . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Six. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Five, minister no. 5, for gambling. She finally 
started to admit that she has a gambling problem. It was a small 
admission, mind you, but that's a good step for any gambling 
addict to take and that is first of all the admission. 
 
Madam Minister, last night you said that you might allow 
communities to ban VLTs (video lottery terminal) through a 
community plebiscite. Would you clarify that new policy of 
yours, Madam Minister. Exactly how would this new policy 
work? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank the 
member from Rosthern for his question. I would have called 
that a very liberal interpretation of my remarks, but seeing as 
you're asking it, I won't say that. 
 
Our policy on VLTs is as it's always been  to have controlled 
and limited expansion; to have a ceiling on the number of VLTs 
in Saskatchewan; for the purpose of keeping jobs in 
Saskatchewan, specifically rural Saskatchewan. You know very 
well that it was the rural hoteliers that approached us for this. 
Now communities do have a right to express their opinion on a 
range of things and we as governments listen. 
 
And I would just have to say that I would reaffirm my previous 
comments, that a plebiscite would only work if it was held in 
Albert, Manitoba, and in the United States, because that's where 
our problem is coming from in terms of loss of revenue in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Madam Minister, on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio yesterday, you indicated that 
each community was going to have the ability now to determine 
their own steps that they wanted to take. But, Madam Minister, 
it seems to me that today you're right back and that you're short 
. . . that your repentance — let me put it that way — in front of 
the church groups last night was pretty short-lived. You're right 
back now to your standard, uncaring answers. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that you do not really care, Madam 
Minister, that people oppose your slot machines; that people are 
being hurt by your slot machines; that every day people pump 
their pay cheques into your slot machines on the false hope that 
they may hit the jackpot, like the Premier hit with his pension. 
 
And, Madam Minister, while the Premier hides behind his stack 
of money, all you care about is the money your slot machines 
suck out of people and suck out of communities. Like your 
gambling commissioner said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Does the member have a 
question? I want the member to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is the question that people have been asking us, and 
that is that people are telling us, communities are telling us, that 
they are not allowed to opt out of taxes. And that's what this is, 
Madam Minister, a tax. 
 
And so I question, Madam Minister, when are you going to 
admit your gambling policy is nothing more than a tax? A tax 
on people that can least afford to pay it. When are you going to 
admit that, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to 
thank the member for his question. I never tire of reminding  



April 7, 1995 

 
1440 

you that in 1983 you privatized bingo and thereby expanded the 
bingo gaming activity in this province by 2,500 per cent. I don't 
recall you showing any particular concern over who was 
spending their money there or what they were doing. 
 
I would have to say that the one thing that has changed recently 
in gaming in Saskatchewan is that we have a policy of 
prevention, education, and treatment, which never existed 
previous to now. Even though I have had people talk to me who 
have a gaming addiction, who have said that they had their 
gaming addiction many years ago, well in advance of any recent 
developments. 
 
So I would just have to say that our policy remains as it is: to 
have controlled and limited expansion, to have machines in 
areas that are age restricted, and to respond to the concerns of 
rural hoteliers and rural communities about loss of revenues 
over the border. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, this pension mess just gets 
deeper and deeper. Today I table over 200 letters from people in 
my constituency who disagree with the outrageous size of these 
pensions. These letters were mailed to me before the Premier 
refused to roll back his million dollar pension. 
 
One of the letters states, and I quote: Politicians are supposed to 
be in parliament to serve the people and represent them, not line 
their own pockets. This person does not believe it is fair that 
our Premier and a select few will receive million dollar 
pensions while they do without. 
 
My question is to the Premier: how can you put yourself on a 
pedestal and ask the people of this province to pay higher 
personal income tax, higher gas taxes, higher utility rates, and 
increased drug costs, to deal with the deficit and debt, while 
you refuse to do your part by rolling back your million dollar 
pension? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, I think . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm a little 
fascinated. I would suggest to the member opposite that she 
check the letter which she quotes from because it may very well 
be that the letter she got is talking about federal Liberals who 
have the pension in Ottawa which is far, far different than the 
pension in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which was reformed in 
1979. I just invite her to check that letter. 
 
And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, who is it that raised gasoline 
tax in Canada this year? It was the federal Liberals. Now I say 
to the member opposite, let's stop being such a hypocrite, along  

with her leader. 
 
She knows very well that whereas . . . It is in this province we 
have addressed and provided leadership by reducing the cost to 
the taxpayer by freezing MLAs salaries at the 1990 rates, by 
reducing members' of cabinet salaries by 5 per cent, by reducing 
the cost of communications allowance by 25 per cent, and the 
list goes on. And I ask the member to address that question. 
 
And while she does that, Mr. Speaker, I want her to explain in 
this House why her leader, the member from Greystone, while 
this was happening, in the form of leadership, was demanding a 
37 per cent, $17,000-a-year increase in her personal salary. And 
that caucus was demanding about a year ago a 352 per cent 
increase in their caucus grant. That's not leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. What we have done is leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
every cabinet minister received a 75 per cent pay increase and 
within a week of being appointed to cabinet. Obviously what's 
good for the goose is not good for the gander. Mr. Speaker, we 
need a little leadership here, and we are sure not getting it from 
the Hon. Premier. 
 
You are trying to hide behind teachers and other retired 
workers. I quote another concerned constituent: I contributed to 
a pension fund for 35 years. It is nowhere near as generous as 
those listed 
 
Hardworking people like this pensioner are not going to collect 
$2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I was elected, I have tried to lead by 
example by refusing to take per diems. This has saved the 
taxpayers almost $10,000 since I was elected. My question to 
the Premier: since the Premier has refused to lead by example, 
will you now follow my lead and sacrifice your extraordinarily 
high pension to benefit the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Shaunavon seems a little exercised today, and I 
don't blame him if he was embarrassed, as I think he should be, 
about his leader and her performance and the way she has sort 
of operated in this House with her big increase. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that the people . . . the 
question that people are really asking is why do the Liberals . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, this is what they're asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — You think, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Shaunavon might want to hear the answer to the 
question? 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1441 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the member who asks the 
question that the people are asking, why does the Liberal caucus 
think that they're special? Why does the Liberal leader think 
that they're special? Why is it that in December 1991 — that's 
the date when the Liberal leader was the only member of this 
House — the first act that she performed was to stomp in here, 
go to the Legislative Assembly Office, and demand a 37 per 
cent increase in her pay — even the rules did not allow it, and 
she wanted to do it in spite of the rules. That wasn't leadership, 
Mr. Speaker, that was the Liberal leader, as this Liberal caucus, 
looking at their own personal self-interest. That's one of the 
issues here. 
 
I want to say, why? Why are they trying to do this rather than 
talk about jobs and the economy? Because although the 
Conservatives have nowhere to slip in the polls because they're 
on the bottom already, they're slipping so fast that there is a 
debate taking place, maybe even among those members, to 
dump that leader after the next election because they don't think 
she can meet the grade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Five of these 
privileged MLAs are planning to run again in the impending 
election. If they are lucky enough to retain their seat, they will 
stand to substantially increase their take of taxpayer dollars. The 
Deputy Premier stands to gain over 16,500 more pension 
dollars if he serves one more term and then retires. 
 
I would like to quote from another of my constituents: I am a 
widow, mother of three children. I get less than $1,000 a month 
from pension. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier will gain more in one month 
than my widowed constituent will receive for her entire annual 
pension. 
 
My question is to the Deputy Premier: how can you stand there 
and say the people agree with you receiving a million dollar 
pension when they clearly don't? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask 
the member from Regina North West — I think that's the 
correct name of the riding  I want to ask the member from 
Regina North West, has she written to the Prime Minister and 
complained about the federal Liberal pensions? I want to ask 
her, has she talked to her leader and asked her why in this 
so-called Bill which her leader has proposed in this House she 
has not included her brother, Mr. Ham, who was a member of 
this House and is on the old formula plan? Is there a double 
standard here, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I want to ask her, why doesn't she talk about jobs? The reason is 
because this government is creating jobs. Why doesn't she talk 
about balancing the budget? Because this government has 
balanced the budget. Or talk about reform to the health care? 
Because this government has got a plan. 
 

Why doesn't she talk about things? I'll tell you why, Mr. 
Speaker. Because the Liberal Party does not have any kind of a 
plan. They don't have a plan and therefore they can't talk about 
it. The only plan they've got is protecting Liberals in this House 
and outside the House who are living on the old formula plan, 
and I say, Mr. Speaker, it's a question of selfish self-interest 
which is exemplified by the leader of this Liberal Party in 
December of 1991 when she was the only person who asked for 
an increase in her salary in spite of the rules and is the only 
person who's received a $17,000 a year . . . in her salary without 
blinking an eye, and that's not leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Construction Tender 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Labour told this Assembly that the 
opposition brought false information to this Assembly 
regarding the recent SaskTel tendering. 
 
The minister, in his usual arrogance, told this Assembly that the 
contract was awarded to the lowest bidder, Westridge 
Construction, which was a non-union company. Well you folks 
opposite know that that was just a crock of crap and nothing 
else. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I don't know whether the 
member's language is limited, but that kind of language is 
simply not acceptable in this Assembly and I ask the member to 
withdraw those words. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I withdraw those words, Mr. Speaker. There's 
no use trying to rephrase anything like that. I'll just go on with 
the point. 
 
The manager of Westridge said that his company could have 
done the job for $23,000 cheaper if he didn't have to follow the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government's union preference 
policy. He said that the extra cost is all because of the premiums 
that must be paid through the union system. 
 
Now there it is, Mr. Speaker — a 10 per cent tax on 
Saskatchewan people that goes straight to their union buddies. 
Now I'm wondering if the minister will stand up and tell the 
people of this province how this can possibly be a level 
playing-field for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, we have nothing to go 
on except the comments of the member opposite. Mr. Speaker, 
let us engage in an act of extreme generosity and take the 
member at his word and assume that the facts are accurate. And 
we have to do that. 
 
But let's engage in an act of extreme generosity and accept the 
member at his word and the facts are accurate. What are we 
saying? We're saying there's an extra $23,000 to be spread  



April 7, 1995 

 
1442 

among tradespeople who have enjoyed a very meagre, difficult 
existence over the past 10 years. And that's all we're saying. 
And I do not feel members in this Assembly should flee from 
that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me make a comment about the nature of 
this issue. It was raised yesterday by the member from 
Shaunavon who quoted a letter from the Wheat Pool, as I recall 
it, who raised this issue of fair tendering. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He left something out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, there was a part of this that was 
left out. What was left out was the last paragraph from the 
Wheat Pool, who said: 
 
 We are extremely concerned about the potential of 

escalating cost, particularly the impact of the federal 
government's approach on long-standing policies on 
transportation issues. 

 
What the Wheat Pool is saying is this is a trivial issue; there are 
some real important issues out there which you should be 
raising, instead of these trivial issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — My next question is to the Minister of Justice 
— that's if he feels up to answering a question about his 
portfolio today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister if he would 
tell me if he thought it was discriminatory to refuse to hire 
someone or to refuse to rent an apartment to someone on the 
basis of their union affiliation. 
 
Now after one of his usual glib jokes, he said to us, Mr. 
Speaker, that he would look into the matter. Well he's had time 
to look into the matter, and I'd like to know what his answer is 
today. 
 
I want to know if he's going to answer the question today or if 
he's going to do another one of his silly, childish little pranks 
and refuse to get serious about a serious matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the question period is 
indeed descending to a new low when members ask that sort of 
a question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something has struck me as interesting about this 
question period. Four years ago at this time, every single 
question which was raised by the then opposition ended with 
the phrase, why don't you call an election? I don't hear Liberals 
and Tories opposite asking that question, why don't you call an 
election? We never seem to hear that from members opposite. 
 
I wonder why that is, Mr. Speaker, on the eve of what the press 
speculate may well be the eve of an election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Electronic Library Information System Announced 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
hesitating to get into my ministerial statement with all this 
election talk, but I think I'll proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning in Saskatoon my colleague, the Hon. 
Carol Carson, participated in an announcement of the funding 
to develop a province-wide electronic library information 
system. 
 
The Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program has 
approved $1.51 million for this initiative. The province will 
provide $569,520, the federal government $249,480; and the 
local library boards will contribute $700,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, libraries have a very vital role in providing people 
with access to information. The community electronic library 
network projects will bring us closer to the vision of a 
province-wide electronic library. A vision that wherever people 
live in Saskatchewan, they will have vastly improved access to 
all information, programs, and services, available to the 
province's library systems. 
 
In the world where information is a highly valued commodity, 
Saskatchewan people must have easy, affordable, universal 
access to information. This is even more critical for people who 
live in remote areas of our province; $500,000 of the total 
project funding will be used to establish a matching grant fund 
for local libraries in partnership with other information service 
providers in the community. The matching grants will be used 
to create local library data systems and to provide the capacity 
to connect local library networks with a province-wide system. 
Funding will also be used to create an electronic union 
catalogue which will combine the listings of all books in all 
libraries in the system. 
 
The province-wide electronic library system will also include 
access to the worldwide Internet. Saskatchewan is the only one 
of two places in all of Canada that is providing Internet 
universally to everybody in Saskatchewan no matter where they 
live. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that speaks very well of this province. 
It speaks very well of the people of Saskatchewan and it speaks 
well about the advances which we are making, and providing 
the leadership for all of the rest of Canada, which this province 
is noted for. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan, I might 
conclude by saying, is very pleased to contribute to this exciting 
project which is putting us in the forefront of providing library 
services in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 7, 1995 

 
1443 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
thank the minister for sending over his statement after the end 
of question period. I'm very glad that the government is finally 
recognizing the importance of libraries after having cut the 
funding for libraries over the past three years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while it's going to be important for the people 
of Saskatchewan, in particular rural Saskatchewan, to know 
where the knowledge is available, it's going to be even more 
important, Mr. Speaker, that they actually have access to those 
books rather than just knowing that the book is available some 
place. 
 
So it's very important, Mr. Speaker, that libraries be continued 
to be supported across this province, not just with information 
systems that allow them to know something is available, but 
with the actual information being available to them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is a good move to allow this to happen but 
the provincial government needs to further support libraries, 
further than what they are currently doing. Thank you very 
much. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Liberal Party, we too would like to commend those players in 
such an important project. A special thanks and commendation 
to local library boards and in fact the federal government for 
recognizing the importance of the library system. 
 
And I feel that the federal government themselves should really 
be commended for initiating the Canada-Saskatchewan 
infrastructure program, which is the catalyst for such important 
programs, and in allowing local library boards, and I guess the 
provincial government, for partaking in these projects. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 13 — An Act 
to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a 
few comments with respect to the Bill before I ask for leave to 
adjourn, or beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
The Act being amended provides the authority for the taxation 
of non-Crown oil and gas produced in the province.  

Amendments will introduce new powers to: (1) assist in the 
collection of unpaid taxes; (2) provide for the use of an average 
price in the determination of taxes on freehold natural gas 
production; and (3) includes some modest housekeeping 
changes. 
 
Many of the amendments are similar to those being proposed 
for The Crown Minerals Act, and allows for consistency in the 
treatment of Crown and non-Crown oil and gas. 
 
The new revenue collection provisions will allow the minister 
to collect unpaid amounts from a third party who is, or is about 
to become, indebted to the delinquent taxpayer. Before serving 
a third-party demand, the minister would have to certify the 
unpaid amounts in a certificate and file it with the Court of 
Queen's Bench. Notice will be given to the delinquent taxpayer 
before attempting to recover the unpaid amounts from the third 
party. Similar provisions for the collection of unpaid amounts 
are contained in The Revenue and Financial Services Act and in 
The Income Tax Act. 
 
Now this Bill includes a provision to allow regulations to be 
made providing for the use of an average price in the 
determination of taxes on freehold natural gas production. 
Alberta recently introduced the use of average prices to simplify 
natural gas royalty calculation and reporting procedures. 
 
The department has been working with oil and gas industry 
associations to determine if administration could be simplified 
in Saskatchewan by using average rather than actual prices 
received. A decision will be made on this matter in the next few 
months. 
 
The government is now introducing the enabling legislation in 
order to implement the simplified administration process as 
soon as possible. The Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers and the Small Explorers and Producers Association 
have been consulted on the amendments. 
 
Now I understand that the Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers and the Small Explorers and Producers Association 
have been consulted on several fronts. The official opposition is 
also in the process of consulting with industry representatives 
who may be affected by the Bill. And we find that there may be 
more than we first thought. 
 
We have some reservations about the government's new 
revenue collection provisions. I'm interested in hearing if other 
jurisdictions have adopted this approach of going after a third 
party for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
 
We will be asking in committee on how many occasions this 
new revenue collecting provision could have been utilized in 
Saskatchewan in the last fiscal year, and how much money 
would have been involved. 
 
The minister states in his second reading speech that adequate 
and appropriate notice will be given to the delinquent taxpayer  



April 7, 1995 

 
1444 

before the third party is approached for the money. I note that in 
the legislation that this notice is a total of seven days. I wonder . 
. . in fact dispute that this is adequate and an appropriate notice. 
 
The matter of averaging prices is also addressed in this 
legislation, and I'm confident that after the government has 
completed its consultations that this method will likely be 
adopted. 
 
Because we have not completed our consultations on this matter 
and with this Bill, I would beg leave to adjourn debate at this 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 14 — An Act 
to amend The Crown Minerals Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My comments on this 
Bill will be similar to that of Bill 13. After we've quickly 
reviewed it, I see that it is quite similar to the freehold oil and 
gas legislation. 
 
New provisions within Bill 14 will allow the minister to use a 
certificate process which the minister claims simplifies and 
speeds up the process to obtain the equivalent of a court 
judgement for the recovery of debt. This so-called certificate 
can then be used to recover unpaid amounts from a third party 
such as the purchaser of a Crown mineral. 
 
Now right off the bat, before I've heard back from association, 
the minister asserts . . . or in favour of this Bill . . . I have a 
problem with the third party being responsible for debts they do 
not rightfully owe. We want to find out if any other provinces 
such as Alberta can serve a third party a tax bill such as this. 
 
Besides, most oil and gas companies sending huge royalty 
cheques to the provincial government, which is proven by 
financial statements from 1994 budget Estimates. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I don't imagine that there are many in the industry with 
accounts that are in arrears. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, I am waiting to hear back from the 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, the Small 
Explorers and Producers Association of Canada, the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association, and other members in the 
industry. We want to know exactly what they think of third-
party billing, just how much they were consulted on this 
legislation, and other questions in addition. 
 
In the minister's second reading speech, he said, quote: The 
Crown Minerals Act provides the legislative framework for the 
granting and acquiring of all rights to interests in Crown 
minerals. We would like to know exactly what is meant by,  

quote, acquiring all rights to interests in Crown minerals. 
 
The Bill also provides for the use of an average price in the 
determination of natural gas royalties to simplify natural gas 
royalty calculation and reporting procedures. I hope the new 
policy initiative being added to the regulations-making section 
is similar to that which Alberta recently introduced. 
 
The minister stated earlier that his department has been working 
closely with oil and gas industry to determine if administration 
could be simplified in Saskatchewan by using an average rather 
than actual prices received to determine natural gas royalties. 
He indicated that a decision on this matter, quote, will be made 
within the next few months, end quote. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the purpose of passing legislation 
previous to coming to a conclusion or a conclusion with respect 
to . . . that may be satisfactory to all parties involved. After all, 
what happens if the final decision of on-average prices is that 
it's not in the best interests for Saskatchewan? Then is the 
minister's answer too late? Well it's already law, so it might be 
too late. So we don't want to get the cart before the horse. 
 
There are many, many other questions that we have regarding 
the legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we need time to consult 
further with those affected. Therefore I would adjourn debate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1100) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister responsible for the Wascana Centre to please introduce 
the official who has joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I'd like to introduce today 
Mr. Blair Paterson, the executive director of Wascana Centre 
Authority. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, the 
first question I would like to ask is what is the real intent or the 
purpose of this Bill? I think we've been told in times past that 
it's almost an ongoing, traditional thing that this legislation be 
brought forward. I'm wondering if you could bring us up to date 
as to the purpose and the intent and the reason for the Bill being 
before the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's just a simple Bill to authorize the 
expenditure. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Expenditure of what? And what sum are you 
talking of here, Madam Minister? 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1445 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's because the Authority is under its 
own Act is why we have to bring this forward in this way. And 
what the Act essentially says, that the government should pay a 
statutory amount every year. 
 
Now what's been happening is as there's been some decline in 
ability to pay the same amount every year and a reduction in 
what flows through to the Wascana Centre Authority, the Bill is 
brought back every year to reflect those changes in funding and 
those reductions in funding. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying then, Madam Minister, is 
that Wascana Centre Authority gets all their funding through 
government, through the general revenue pool? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's three partners in the funding 
agreement of Wascana Centre Authority. There's the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the city of Regina, and the 
University of Regina. And what it really represents is all of the 
major facilities and institutions that have their home within the 
Wascana Centre area and made an agreement to be collectively 
responsible for the parks and lands and upkeep and 
improvements in the shared area of the park. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan . . . the total budget from the 
Government of Saskatchewan is $2.422 million; from the city 
of Regina, 1.132 million; and the University of Regina, 462,000 
— reflecting the relationship of the amount of park area 
represented by their interest. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
what has the funding been doing in the last little while? You 
indicated, just to . . . response just a few moments ago, that one 
of the reasons for the legislation or this Bill being brought up 
on a yearly basis is because of the redress of funding. 
 
I would take from that then that the province itself has been 
basically reducing its funding. And I'm wondering if you could 
indicate what kind of reductions would the centre have seen in 
provincial funding over the last three years. And as well, 
Madam Minister, how has that affected the U of R (University 
of Regina) and the city then, and the Wascana Centre Authority 
in general, with the reductions from the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll start out by saying that everybody 
has experienced . . . all three partners have experienced some 
reduction. The government has gone from in 1991-92 from 
2,923,900 to 2,422 in 1995-96. But I will point out for interest 
that it has stabilized. In 1994-95 and 1995-96 have been at the 
same level, so we feel now that we've been able to stabilize this 
funding at this level and hopefully look to improvements in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. In your 
discussions with the centre, I'm sure they've indicated to you 
what effects this has had. What has the centre done, to your 
knowledge, to address the decrease in funding? How have they 
addressed it? What generally you have seen in the past is the 
government has offloaded and then passed on reductions to  

other centres. 
 
Certainly jobs have been . . . it's had a major impact on jobs. It 
would have an impact in the city of Regina as far as the number 
of people employed because the Wascana Centre Authority and 
the Wascana Centre . . . For that matter, Madam Minister, 
something that I think the city of Regina has taken a lot of pride 
in, the fact that this legislature is sitting in the Wascana area. 
And certainly the park is an area you see a lot of people 
utilizing, not only in the summertime, but even in the 
wintertime as they do their running or exercises. But in the 
summertime, you see all kinds of people here. 
 
And I think it's not only important to be budget conscious, but 
it's well as important to understand how people are affected and 
realize what is happening through this funding. And I guess 
what I would like to say . . . I don't know if the government has 
any input as to how the dollars are spent, whether it's job related 
or whether there are other areas that maybe the . . . that the 
government can bring forward as suggestions, as maybe if you 
use the money in this area at this matter, you might be able to 
save a job on the other side. Is there any reflection in that part, 
and in a general way, how has this affected not only the 
funding, but the employment in the Wascana Centre Authority 
over the past three years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the main impacts of the decline 
in funding has really been in the area of new developments. 
One of the principles in the legislation was always that there 
would be continued new development within the park  you 
know, there would be new boardwalks, new paths, new 
structures within the park facility. 
 
So what has had to happen over the last few years is to really 
pay more attention to upkeep and less to new development. And 
that has had an impact on staffing. The summer total has gone 
from 141 in 1987-88 to 87 in 1995-96. And the winter, year 
around, has gone from 40 in '87-88 to 21 in '95-96. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, you have cut the staffing by close to 50 per cent, both 
summer and winter, and I believe as you look around Wascana 
Park you can see that that cut has been in effect. 
 
There's certainly in some areas, a deterioration of the park. In 
particular I'm thinking of the roadways along the western side 
of the lake over here. Not only is that particular stretch of road 
in very poor shape, Madam Minister, it's also a safety hazard — 
a safety hazard for the vehicles that are on it and even more so, 
a safety hazard for the joggers that are on it. This particular 
stretch of road is particularly winding and including . . . The 
chairman has a great concern about that because sometimes he 
does both, drive and jog on it. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I believe that is one area that needs to be 
addressed within the Wascana Park Authority, is that particular 
stretch of winding road that's in bad shape. The road itself 
needs to be repaired. But there also needs to be a jogging path 
built along that side so that the joggers have some place in  



April 7, 1995 

 
1446 

which to exercise, in which to run, without doing it on the road. 
Because vehicles, as they come around the corners on that 
particular stretch, if it's a little bit icy and a jogger is coming 
from the other direction, the jogger isn't going to win if they 
happen to be at the same spot at the same time, Madam 
Minister. So I believe there's a safety hazard there that needs to 
be addressed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the things I guess I would 
comment on, on the jogging paths, is I have jogged myself 
through there, and there are paths. But a lot of joggers are 
probably like me. They like to go as the crow flies rather than 
following the winding paths that go through the park. So there 
are paths there; it's really a question of whether people use them 
or not. 
 
The tender will be in the paper shortly for the road 
improvement, and it's now SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) who handles that area, so you will 
shortly see a tender for the road improvements there, and we 
hope they'll be completed by July 1. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, we're 
pleased to hear that, although I do have a concern on the 
jogging path over on there. I'm not sure that there is actually a 
path there for the joggers. When you look out on the grass there 
as you drive around, there are ruts in there where people have 
been running and walking, but I don't believe that there is any 
upgraded path on that particular area along the west side of the 
lake between the Legislative Building and the lake, Madam 
Minister, past the tennis courts there. So I believe that area is 
one of the areas where there needs to be some investigation and 
some improvements made in that. 
 
So, Madam Minister, since we're talking about new projects, is 
there any funds within the current budget structure to allow for 
some improvements and some upgrading, some new projects 
for the Wascana Park? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's no brand-new projects this 
year. We are looking at a longer development plan. The only 
significant work that would be done this year is promenade 
repair on the north side of the lake. I was going to mention, if 
you want to take a walk one day, we can go around the park, 
and you can point out the areas. I think there are small pieces 
missing here and there, but quite often the joggers are keeping 
to the outer perimeter, and a lot of the pathway goes closer to 
the lake. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I have 
the minister concerned for my health and wants to take me 
jogging and lose a little weight, and the Minister for Education 
wants to take me for supper and add some on to me, so I think 
the ministers here need to get together on whether I should put 
on weight or lose it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That seems clear enough, Dan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes, well I think so also, Mr. Minister. 

Madam Minister, you say that there are no new projects in the 
works for this year. There is some maintenance on the 
promenade. You mentioned there was going to be some 
possible road construction by SPMC. So there's no added . . . no 
real new projects within the system, which is what part of the 
mandate for Wascana Park is and what the budgets are for. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that's correct, and it's not a 
circumstance that we're happy about, but it's one that's been a 
condition of meeting our deficit objectives within government. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the 
changing in your budgets, what would you say the effect of 
reduction in funding has been, due to inflation and the other 
rising costs, that the centre's funding formula when it was first 
suspended in 1986-87? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would just have to venture a guess. 
Inflation's been running at about 2 to 3 per cent, so that would 
be the amount of impact. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So there's a fairly large cumulative 
effect over the years. I believe the funding formula was 
suspended in '86-87. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Since that time, Madam Minister, what 
kind of new projects have been built into the system since the 
funding formula was changed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Very little. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes, well thank you, Madam Minister, I 
guess the evidence is self-evident. 
 
Madam Minister, you talked about a . . . in your second reading 
speech, a national capital cities workshop was mentioned. Just 
how is the Wascana Centre going to be involved in that event? 
Are we going to actually have it here, or what's the procedures? 
What's happening with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The city of Regina is involved in 
hosting the next conference of course. It's the second; the first 
was held in Ottawa. And it was really because of the 
cooperation between the city and the government that the mayor 
was able to attract this conference to Regina, to demonstrate the 
cooperation that's taking place between the city, the 
government, and the Wascana . . . the university and Wascana 
Centre Authority. 
 
I think to have the kind of plan that we have in Wascana Centre 
Authority is a fairly rare and special kind of project. And so 
we're quite pleased that being only the second year of the 
conference, that they're holding it in Regina this time. 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1447 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I'd 
like to go back a little bit to the funding of the Wascana Centre. 
You've got 80-some employees in the summertime; 21, I 
believe you said, in the winter. I notice their vehicles running 
around; they've got a number of buildings within the centre 
here. What added burden on the Wascana Centre has the 
increases in the natural gas prices, the SaskPower prices, 
telephone, those other prices that government has added to all 
our lives, what impact has that had on the Wascana Centre 
Authority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We're not able to give you a specific 
figure on that, but it has been accounted for and built into the 
budget adjustments. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Would it be an estimated 10 per cent increase in their cost to the 
centre, 15, 20 per cent? What would it be? And what has the 
centre had to do to offset those additional costs because there's 
no added money into the system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm advised that under the existing 
budget it would be a fraction of a per cent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What has 
the impact been on the centre though? What have they had to 
adjust to account for those increases? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The largest amount of costs within the 
centre are labour. So really these other things, where they may 
have like what we said, a fraction of a per cent impact, they're 
really not as significant as other things would be in impact on 
total budget. Labour is really the main cost. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials for coming in today and 
for answering the questions. 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 
 
The Chair: — I will ask the Minister responsible for Property 
Management Corporation to introduce her officials to the 
members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. With me today is John 
Turnbull, general manager, central survey and mapping, SPMC; 
and directly behind me, Leslie Krug, legislative officer, SPMC. 
 
And I'd also like to mention that in the gallery with us today 
from the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors' Association are Murray 
Skelton, executive director — did you want to stand, Murray — 
and Dan Babiuk, and Ed Desnoyers, members of the new Act 
committee, and thank them for joining us today. 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome to the minister and her officials today as we go 
through the committee stage of Bill 40 and 41. 
 
I don't have a great number of questions, Madam Minister. 
Obviously this stuff is fairly technical in it's application and I'm 
simply going to refer to a few areas where I'm more curious 
than anything as to why certain things were done. 
 
One that struck me, being a farmer and being used to survey 
stakes and all that sort of thing, the definition and terminology 
of iron post in the Act. Could your official have you explain to 
us why you spent some time in defining iron post and the 
definition surrounding it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess in the old Act the term 
used was monuments, which referred to metal or wooden posts. 
And there was an intent in the new Act to really set a standard 
for what these would be like so that there was a consistency, 
and to reflect what's actually there. And really it's just a matter 
of setting a standard so that there's a clear expectation of what 
these posts are like. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I appreciate that, Madam Minister. I 
would have thought that we could have come up with 
something a little more in tune with the '90s or the next century 
rather than iron post. It just seemed a little archaic to me when 
we're redefining a Bill after this amount of time that we didn't 
sort of . . . 
 
Because yes, there are ways and means I think in the future for 
us to do surveying that will be way beyond what we've done 
today. You can pinpoint spots with a satellite today and 
determine where your position is that you never could before. In 
fact I'm probably going to invest in a computer program for my 
farming operation this spring which will use aerial photographs 
to actually give me the definite image and outline of my 
particular fields, which I will need for my registered-seed 
operation, because you have to have it down to a decimal place. 
 
But you can actually use an aerial photograph, both black and 
white and infrared, from 20,000 feet, and put it into your 
computer and actually have that image reproduced, or 
superimposed onto your field patterns, which is way beyond 
anything that we've ever done in surveying before. 
 
And I just wonder if people have thought about what processes 
will be in place in the future when we're doing things like 
surveying and defining. Because there's a cost implication. I just 
recently had a piece of land subdivided. I was lucky I was able 
to do it by metes and bounds; but if I hadn't been able to use 
metes and bounds, there was a fairly stiff price attached to 
separating 41 acres from a quarter section. And you're finding 
more and more of this happening as people become even more 
cost conscious with various parcels of land. 
 
And if we can use computer images and if we can do other  



April 7, 1995 

 
1448 

things, then it would seem that we should be prepared in the 
legislation to deal with those types of things so that we keep 
costs relative to what we're actually trying to accomplish, rather 
than inflating costs because of all the fees that go along with it. 
 
Today when you do a separation, you have to have five or six 
Crown corporations comment on whether it's suitable or not, 
and there's fees that can be charged all the way through the 
system. So an operator who says I'm going to subdivide off this 
particular parcel, for one reason or another, is then faced with a 
whole host of economic costs that might not be necessary if 
there was an easier way, through legislation, for this to be 
handled. 
 
And I'm just wondering if your officials have covered that off, 
with the changing realities of 1995 and beyond. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess the short answer is that the new 
technologies create efficiencies in establishing where the 
monuments are, but don't remove the need for the monuments 
themself. They would really be more of an aid in establishing 
those boundaries and making it, I guess, simpler to resolve 
those kinds of questions than perhaps it has been in the past. 
 
But people don't see the immediate demise of the monument as 
an on-the-ground aid to determining where property lines are. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would hope 
that there is some thought put into some of the technological 
advances that are happening. I think you'll see agriculture 
dramatically change in the next while, and if we are saddled 
with outdated legislation and cost regimes, people will not 
move ahead as quickly as they should in order to stay current. 
 
I am wondering why, in the Bill . . . it used to be there was a 
reference to the Department of Supply and Services throughout 
and in a number of sections. Those have been deleted and you 
do not refer to SPMC, which is a successor agency. And I'm 
wondering why that hasn't happened, because that is the 
government agency that traditionally would have been the one 
in those sections. Is there any reason for that? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Although there's no specific reference 
to SPMC, there is reference to the Controller of Surveys and the 
Central Survey and Mapping Agency which are agencies within 
SPMC but referred to more specifically rather than more 
generically as SPMC. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well it may be a small point, Madam 
Minister, but at some point here I think when we do legislation 
you like to make sure that the chain of command for 
responsibility is clearly outlined. 
 
Very difficult for members of the House, for the public, when 
questioning your budgetary process to not . . . I mean if you 
don't have it clearly defined of where ultimate responsibility lies 
with a piece of legislation, then some member of the public  

or a surveying company, or whoever, quite frankly runs into 
useless red tape and a tracking process that isn't well defined. 
 
And it doesn't make sense for you not to say in your legislation, 
if central mapping services have been part of Supply and 
Services for generations, if SPMC is the successor to that, that 
you would not want to have that clearly defined that central 
mapping is with SPMC and away you go — it's not with Urban 
Affairs, or it's not here, there, or the next place. And it would 
make sense to me that you'd want to do that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess in the intricacies of 
government . . . I'll do my best here. This really has to do with 
the responsibility for The Land Surveys Act being under the 
minister, myself, who is responsible for this particular piece of 
legislation. But it's not SPMC themselves that are responsible 
for it; they provide some services to it. 
 
In future SPMC may or may not continue to provide those, but 
the Act remains with the minister as opposed to with the 
department. And thereby if some change was to occur, it 
wouldn't necessitate revising the Act in that regard. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Would you explain how the Act stays with a 
minister rather than with a department? Like ministers come 
and go and responsibility . . . The minister of SPMC then is . . . 
this stays with the minister of SPMC, or the minister of what? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now again this may be a little bit tricky 
to understand, but there's a group of Acts. There's five Acts 
which are grouped under whichever minister is responsible for 
those functions that are contained within the Act. 
 
At this current time it is the minister of SPMC who is 
responsible. That's not written in stone, but the fact that the 
Acts are grouped and attached to where those services reside, 
that is the important connection between them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, I have one further question. The 
manual that's used to determine certain policies and things that 
you do — there's a reference in the Bill that the instruction 
manual from Highways and Transportation is to be moved to 
The Land Surveys Act. Yet in both of the new clauses in the 
Bill, there is still references to The Highways and 
Transportation Act. And I'm wondering why you would keep it 
in both places. If you're moving it, you're moving it; if you're 
not, you're not — I mean why the references both ways? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is really a matter of I guess 
splitting of responsibilities. The road right of ways that are 
required by the province, in the provincial highway Act they 
have to register the plans under their Act, but all the expertise 
regarding the legal survey and what not is in CSMA (Central 
Survey and Mapping Agency), and therefore the manual has 
been moved to the Controller of Surveys. The function in 
Highways is really just a registration function. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to make 
a few comments about Bill 41. First, I want to emphasize that  



April 7, 1995 

 
1449 

the Acts governing professional associations in general are very 
important for the protection of the public, the professions, and 
those directly involved in the professions. 
 
Changes indicated within Bill No. 41, we assume the purpose 
of the changes contained within the Bill are designed to ensure 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Bill 41 is next on the list to be 
called, I believe. It's Bill 40 is what's before us at this moment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This isn't The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Act? 
 
The Chair: — No. Before us right now it's the — they're easily 
confused — this is the Act to amend The Land Surveys Act. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We weren't sure either . . . 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors 

 
The Chair: — I believe the officials are the same officials. 
There's one new official, so I'll ask that the minister introduce 
the additional officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to welcome Susan Amrud, 
Crown solicitor, Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mrs Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
officials. We assumed that the purposes of the changes 
contained within Bill 41 are designed to insure that the 
association can fulfil its mandate, and in that regard, I notice the 
specific changes contained within the Bill are sections dealing 
with the educational format and the provision which will allow 
professionals to join on a voluntary basis if they so decide. 
 
As well we recognize that there are many professional 
categories within the surveyor's profession and that this is due 
to the progression of new and advanced technology, therefore it 
seems logical to give these professionals the opportunity to join 
on a voluntary basis. 
 
We see these components as important and of a non-
controversial nature and deserving of this Assembly's support. 
Through our research it has been stated to us that The Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act is designed to keep 
the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors' Association up to date and 
in a position to enter into the 21st century with an appropriate 
mandate to fulfil their role. 
 

In this regard, we have no objection and will be supportive. 
However, as it relates to the government's role in dealing with 
professional associations and the consultative process, I have a 
number of questions to put forward. 
 
Section 9(8) states: 
 
 The association shall remunerate and reimburse for 

expenses the member of the council appointed pursuant 
to this section at the rate determined by by-law. 

 
Why is the association required to pay for the government's 
appointee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As you will know, it's not consistent 
from every Act to take this approach, but part of the 
responsibility as a self-governing body is to be able to assure 
good conduct in a range of areas. And it's felt that it's to their 
benefit to have a person on their committee that will increase 
public confidence in terms of issues like their by-laws and other 
types of legal activities that are undertaken, discipline, activities 
that are undertaken by their body. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. We've been told by 
the association that the government . . . they were told that the 
government wants to keep uniformity throughout its legislation 
regarding Acts affecting professions. Therefore they were told 
that the land surveyors association would have to pay the 
government's appointee. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Rather than the uniformity being across 
government, it's uniform within the body of similar Acts that 
would be in the same kind of professional area that this is. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Can you tell me how that's determined, and 
why one area would have the association paying for the 
appointee and why others wouldn't? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is really a matter that's been 
determined on a departmental basis where the departments have 
the authority to make the decision here, so there is no 
government-wide approach to this particular question. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. I guess the question 
comes up because the association understood it to be across the 
government. And I may have to address that question 
elsewhere. 
 
Minister, the land surveyors association is concerned that you 
will appoint a person that will have to travel a long distance to 
meetings and therefore will create large expenses for the 
association to pay. What assurances can you give that this won't 
happen? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They will have a role in making that 
decision, so this wouldn't be made arbitrarily without them. 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1450 

Mrs. Bergman: — Okay. That I'm sure will reassure them. 
 
The association originally requested that the minister reply or 
respond within 60 days, and what the regulation says is 90 days. 
Why was it chosen as 90 days rather than 60? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well this is one area where we've 
achieved consistency. There is a standard of 90 days, and it's 
really thought to give the time needed for consultation. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you for answering my questions, 
Minister, and thank you to your . . . 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
questions, Madam Minister, on this. I, you know, realize that 
this is a . . . the approach that this professional organization has 
taken to upgrade themselves in their own policing, and how to 
expand a sort of public perception of what they do. 
 
I'm wondering if you could just give me briefly some of the real 
key issues that they felt necessitated a change after 30 years. 
There's obviously some flashpoints occurring with the public 
that they wanted to make sure did not get any worse that what 
they were, and if you could just give me a couple of examples 
of what those were. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I could summarize them and then if 
you need more detail . . . It would be improved by law-making 
powers, improved discipline process, complaints more clearly 
. . . more clear investigative and hearing roles, more options for 
penalties, a greater ability to deal with incompetence, and then 
adding public representation to the council. 
 
So, it's really just tightening up the whole conduct and ability to 
implement the conduct of the organization and its professionals. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Have you any indication of what that public 
component will look like? Have they given you any indication 
to the type of individual or individuals that they prefer to see 
part and parcel of the count? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Not at this time, no. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Do you have any words of wisdom for this 
group, seeing as they came to you for the legislative enactment, 
as to who should be represented by a public component? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think in light of the kinds of 
objectives they're trying to achieve with this Act, it would really 
be a matter of discussion what kind of person would be most 
useful to them in conducting that, whether it's a legal person or 
a technical person. It would really be a matter of discussion. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 53 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be read a third time 
and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I move that this Bill be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I move that this Bill be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — I will ask — this was just recently before the 
committee — are there any new officials with the minister 
today that have not been introduced previously? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think the only official that 
has not been introduced previously in the number of times 
we've been before the committee is Lois Borden, who is seated 
directly behind me, executive director of district support 
branch. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
back at the beginning of March, I believe it was March 6, I 
asked you a number of questions pertaining to number of beds 
and issues in Moose Jaw surrounding hospitals  Providence 
Place, I believe Pioneer Lodge  and you were going to get 
back to me. And I know I've sent you a couple of written 
reminders besides since then. Are you prepared at this time to 
answer those questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I do have the information for 
the member and we will provide it to him in written form right 
away. 
 
You asked the exact number of beds and how the beds were  



April 7, 1995 

 
1451 

going to work out in the Moose Jaw context. This is as of 
March 8 of this month . . . at the time of asking. There were at 
that point 355 level 3 and level 4 long-term care beds in Moose 
Jaw. On May 31, 1995, once Providence Place opens, there will 
be a minimum of 354 level 3 and 4 long-term care beds in 
Moose Jaw. I don't have them broken down in front of me here, 
the distribution, but we'll get that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you're doing 
that, would you please provide me the current staffing levels as 
of the opening of Providence Place that will correspond with 
the various units and the beds. Is that within your ability to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to be sure, we will get the 
exact numbers from the district. I'll just add to the information 
that I provided the member. I do have the breakdown here now. 
 
In Providence hospital and St. Anthony's combined, on March 8 
there were 167. On May 31, anticipation date of opening of 
Providence Place, there will be 160 long-term care plus the 28 
geriatric assessment beds. 
 
Extendicare remains the same at 127 beds over at Extendicare, 
and in Pioneer Lodge on May 8, there were 50 level 3 and 4; it's 
anticipated May 31, there will be 60 in Pioneer. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, during a debate that we had a little 
earlier, we were talking about shifting emphasis at Pioneer. 
Now you're telling me it's going from 50 to 60 when the 
indication there is that there's going to actually be a reduction in 
the number of beds and that they're going to a different concept; 
that there's a whole area there that's going to be cleaned out and 
will become a common area. How can you possibly indicate 
that there's going to be more beds there when staff and board 
members are indicating that there's going to be a total change 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just to be clear, the 50 to 60 
indicates the level 3 and 4 beds; there will be fewer of the level 
1 and 2 that have been the traditional beds at Pioneer. What's 
increasing at Pioneer are the beds, level 3 and 4, and it's going 
from 50, and it's projected 60. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, do you have the numbers there of what 
the current numbers are then? Tell me where you're going 
currently from down to this 60. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to be absolutely accurate, we 
don't have the exact numbers in the House, but we'll get them. 
And I commit we'll get them very soon. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I ask these questions, Minister, because I 
continue to have people in the community almost daily posing 
questions to me about what's going on. There seems to be . . . 
there are rumours of significant budget deficits in place. There 
are conflicting numbers of staff lay-offs almost on a weekly 
basis. It seems to gyrate around anywhere from 25 to 75,  

depending on who you're talking to. 
 
And the ongoing speculation about budget deficits, tied to the 
speculation about staff lay-offs, has meant that there's a great 
deal of uncertainty in the community, and we're rushing ahead 
pell-mell to an opening of a new facility, and all of the rest of 
this stuff is all hanging in abeyance. And I don't think it's 
particularly good for morale, number one. But it leaves serious 
concerns in the minds of the public as to what exactly they're 
going to have at their disposal when it comes to acute care and 
particularly level 3 and 4 beds. 
 
And that's the reason I asked the question, because it is very 
bothersome to an awful lot of people, Minister. And I hope that 
you can clarify in absolutely a definite way what those staffing 
positions, those budget positions, those budget deficit positions, 
and the number of beds it's going to be, so that some of the 
speculation which is just absolutely tearing the morale out of 
the community as far as the workers are concerned, is put to 
rest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I agree with the member 
when he talks about the number of rumours that exist in the 
Moose Jaw community. As he will understand, I'm regularly 
confronted with many of the same rumours — and rumours 
many of them are. And as someone wiser than I once said, a 
rumour is halfway around the world before truth gets out of 
bed. 
 
Now I will again share with the member, because one of the 
rumours that I hear on a more or less regular basis is that there 
will be significantly, significantly number of beds less in the 
new Providence Place than are currently being occupied in the 
two other facilities. I get this rumour at all times. In fact I heard 
a very dramatic rumour about that just the other day. 
 
And so I'll just again, for the record, indicate that on March 8 of 
this year there were 355 level 3 and 4 beds in the two existing 
facilities, Providence and St. Anthony's. At the end of May, 
when we expect Providence Place will be opened, there will be 
a minimum of 354 level 3. So that's in essence a one-bed 
difference there. 
 
The staffing levels, these are of course determined by the 
district and their administration. I think there has been some 
more recent clarity through the press in Moose Jaw about what 
the exact consequences of the amalgamation of the buildings 
will be, and there has been some clarification I think locally, 
about the exact numbers of people that will be laid off. Another 
group of that staff, as we know, will see some of their hours 
reduced. But I'm pleased to see that some clarity now is 
emerging around that issue in the local community, because it 
too was subject to quite a series of rumours. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the last 
time we had the privilege of being able to discuss some of the 
issues with you — and we've done it a couple of times in 
question period — we've raised the question of personal care 
homes and the requests that have come forward from a number  



April 7, 1995 

 
1452 

of areas and individuals who are looking at possibly licensing 
personal care homes. 
 
And this past week you did make an announcement . . . issued a 
press release that actually didn't have a lot of information in it. 
But now I've received a letter from you, just bringing forward 
two options that . . . your suggestion that . . . or suggesting that 
you'll be looking at, or the department will be following as they 
review the request for personal care homes. 
 
And I guess the thing I would like to raise with you this 
afternoon, I'd like some clarifications, because I know as people 
have heard the announcement, will receive the news release, 
there are a number of unanswered questions that are out there. 
 
And we'll look at the, basically the Avonlea proposal, that's 
looking at roughly a 40-bed unit; bring to your attention the 
Antler Creek care home, personal care home in the Wawota 
area, where they were approved for four beds. Because at that 
time the level of individuals in a home couldn't exceed 10 and 
the family members were six, so four was their approval. And 
they would like to increase it to eight. 
 
And I'm wondering if this announcement you're making will 
allow that process to take place. I don't know, but we could . . . 
It's an area that I think we need to discuss so we find out where 
we're going in the whole program and process of this evolution, 
if you will, in health care as individuals strive to meet some of 
the needs out there. 
 
Number one, the announcements that you made the other day, 
how will this affect the presentation of the proposal that has 
been brought forward from the community of Avonlea for a, 
and I'm just reflecting back, I believe it was a 40-care bed that 
they're looking at constructing. I'm wondering if you could 
bring us up to date. 
 
And if as well, if the department has contacted the folk from 
Avonlea regarding the changes, and to let them know and to see 
whether or not the announcement you made the other day and 
the proposals or the changes, whether they . . . how they will 
affect them; whether or not it will help them or aid them in their 
pursuit of a centre or a place that would meet the needs of the 
elderly in their community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, without being entirely 
specific to an Avonlea situation, I can report to the member that 
I know that departmental officials have been in conversation 
and in contact already with the community. 
 
In terms of providing a residential option for seniors in our 
communities that would be beyond the small personal care 
home but to look at larger residential options, and I think we've 
talked about the large option  more traditional  but also we 
want to look at what I think could be a very exciting concept. 
And that's the matter of apartment-style living but with some 
supports within a complex to add just that little extra support 
that some will feel is necessary and for some it will be 
necessary to maintain independent living on a 24-hour basis. 

Now in terms of the circumstance where there is an existing 
personal care home that may have four residents and they may 
want to expand to eight, the restrictions under the regulations 
and Act indicate that if there are more than 10 persons resident 
under the roof, if it exceeds more than 10 — and that may be a 
combination of residents being cared for plus family members 
or others — if the total number exceeds 10, then the 
institutional standards, National Building Code and other 
institutional standards, must apply, which are very stringent and 
rigid standards. 
 
So in the circumstance if there is a personal care home that has 
four clients or four residents and they would wish to expand 
that to eight; if their total number of residents under the roof 
including care-givers did not exceed 10, then that would be 
possible under the current and continuing regulation and Act. If 
it exceeds 10, then they move into the area of institutional 
standards set nationally. 
 
And so in describing the kind of residential option that would 
have more than 10, we've tried to be very clear in identifying 
the kind of very stringent requirements that are there. The first 
being the building code requirements and to meet the national 
and institutional standards. 
 
We would also, before any possibility of licensing, would want 
to see a very sound and demonstrably sound business and 
financial plan to protect . . . and some of the discussion we've 
had earlier in the House about this, I indicated our concern 
about the security of residents in the future and financial 
viability. And so we will require that a bond be posted to 
protect residents. 
 
We will want to be sure that there are safe standards, even in 
this kind of residential situation, that there are safe standards of 
operation, and that any plans be done in conjunction with the 
district boards, so that there is consultation in conjunction on 
the local level. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now, Mr. Minister, 
you've gone through about five different points — actually 
raised the scenario of two options that you're presenting to 
communities. And I appreciate the fact that you talk about 
apartment-style living because I think there is an opportunity for 
that in a community. 
 
One community in particular is the community of Kipling, that 
actually built what was a low cost housing unit kind of an 
apartment-style complex a few years ago to meet a housing 
need. It's now turned into kind of a seniors . . . it was a seniors 
low income and a senior centre. The unfortunate part is that, I 
would say personally, is that they didn't make the common area 
just a little larger and put a kitchen in it because it would 
certainly speed up and enhance the home care program that's 
there. 
 
For one thing when a home care worker comes to that complex, 
then they have a number of clients that are already there. 
They're not driving around the community and around the  



April 7, 1995 

 
1453 

surrounding area. The other thing, it would just even make the 
meals on wheels program work that much better if you had 
someone that you could hire to go in and cook that meal right 
on site. It would just make it . . . rather than, you know, trying 
to run to the hospital or the present care home and pick up 
meals and deliver them, it certainly would meet a need. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, I commend the department for looking 
at that, and taking a look at it in the broad spectrum because I 
believe that there certainly is a real option out there, especially 
as we look at the home care program. 
 
And the fact that even though you've announced, it's about three 
weeks ago now, the increase in funding for home care, the fact 
is for the demand out there, that that is barely scratching the 
surface. And this is one way of home care expanding and 
providing the services without . . . and possibly holding some of 
the costs in line. 
 
And in view of that, I just want to also acknowledge that while I 
attended a funeral of a cousin who wasn't that old 
unfortunately, yesterday I stopped by to see a step-aunt who's 
dying of cancer; and this happens to be in Gimli, Manitoba. 
And the interesting thing there I found, Mr. Minister, well she is 
in her home. The home care program in that community is now 
providing 24-hour service and care because of the fact that she 
really can't look after herself and she's deteriorated to that point. 
 
And I don't know if that type of service is available here. And I 
look at a few people even in my area, we've raised a couple 
questions regarding that. What happens when a person gets to 
the point of needing a fair bit of care, or actually basically 
24-hour care. Is it the ability for home care there right now to 
address that need? 
 
And maybe what I'll do is allow you to respond to this before I 
move into the other area a little further. Otherwise we'll have a 
lot of questions, then I'll have to get up and ask again because 
trying to remember all the questions I've put forward might be 
difficult. So maybe you'd like to respond on that, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, one of the, what I believe is 
very exciting pieces of news out of this year's budget — the 
budget that we're now under debate — is to provide to home- 
and community-based services an additional $20 million which 
will have a significant impact on the level of home-based and 
community-based services that we're able to provide. 
 
With this additional funding our districts . . . most of which 
funding now of course just begins April 1; it comes with the 
new budget — and there's a period of time when the districts 
work with their budgets to work out the kind of enhancements 
to programing. 
 
One of the areas identified in that 20 million — 20.6 million — 
was an ability to provide some 24-hour home care service. This 
will not provide for 24-hour home care on an extended period 
of time, not for months, but in circumstances where it seemed  

to be appropriate on a shorter-term basis — and this may well 
be for the kind of situation you describe. We believe that this 
money, this budget, will allow the districts to be able to provide 
that very valuable service. 
 
It is a service, too, that's often needed in an emergency or an 
emergent kind of a situation. If someone for instance has been 
released from a hospital bed, they no longer require the acute 
care, intensive acute care, but perhaps will require some heavy 
level . . . more heavy level of care at home than they would 
through the ordinary home care program, that some 24-hour 
home care could be available for the first few days and so on to 
provide to that need. 
 
(1215) 
 
Another benefit of the initiatives and enhancements in this 
year's budget, between now and July 1, we're going to be 
working with all the districts to look at ways which we can 
reduce some of the home care fees. If we took it globally, we 
expect that fees should be reduced on an average or on a global 
basis by about 17 per cent as a result of this budget. The goal 
being to make those services accessible, as accessible as we 
can, to individuals and to be sure there's no financial barrier, as 
best we can, to somebody receiving those service. 
 
And so just to go back, I think, then to your original comment, 
and I appreciate, if I may say, I appreciate your earlier 
comments about some of the directions we're moving in in 
community-based care and some of the concept of some 
supportive — residential supportive  living, but on the 
specific of home care, I will . . . I can say today it's . . . it will be 
available. It will be okay for sort of periodic nursing as the need 
is there, not over a long period of time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I appreciate the 
acknowledgement of some of the comments I made regarding 
the apartment-like style housing. It's unfortunate, Mr. Minister, 
one doesn't always like to give out some of the ideas that they 
feel could be really beneficial, especially to what individuals 
you might term your foe when it comes to the largesse of the 
political arena. 
 
But at the same time, we also like to acknowledge . . . I think 
it's the responsibility of members in this Assembly not only to 
raise points of concern but also to point out areas that you feel 
we could address some of the impact and some of the concerns, 
both in the urban and to a large extent in the rural communities, 
as to how we meet the needs of individuals in our communities. 
 
So I'm pleased to see that this initiative has been undertaken. 
And I don't think any one of us would indicate, well this is 
probably the be-all and the end-all. It's probably something that 
will develop over time, as we've seen other measures taken 
within health care. Although certainly some of the cuts to a lot 
of the hospitals in rural Saskatchewan, that's going to take 
awhile yet to conquer some of the areas of concern. 
 
When it comes to the private care homes and personal care  



April 7, 1995 

 
1454 

homes, you mentioned five areas that will need to be addressed 
or met before an individual or community is given the licence to 
then develop or build an extended care home. 
 
You mentioned demonstrating feasibility with a sound business 
plan, meet all building code requirements, post a bond to 
protect the security of residents, meet standards for safe 
operation, and work in consultation with the district health 
board. 
 
I guess a couple of questions come out of that. Number one, 
was a bond necessary prior to this being brought forward? 
 
And number two, how does this fit in line with the working of 
the personal care home or the private care home that is put 
basically in place at Yellow Grass that Carol Krieger is now 
operating? Would a lot of these suggestions here already be in 
place and have been addressed by that care home? 
 
And as well, what consultative process was undertaken before 
these recommendations were brought forward? Did you talk to 
people who have . . . not only in the health field, but in the 
private sector care home business, about these suggestions? 
And was there a unanimity amongst individuals in developing 
and working with the department in developing these 
proposals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there has not been a process 
of any bonding or requirement of a bond or posting of a bond to 
this point. It is something we do see as important for the 
protection of those who will make their homes in the . . . if any 
are licensed — that those who would make their homes would 
have this protection. 
 
Those which exist, the larger personal care homes, have been 
simply already sort of grandfathered or grandmothered into the 
current circumstances, so no new restrictions would be applied 
retroactively. These will apply to those who would make new 
application. 
 
And in terms of consultation, in October last year there was a 
large consultation; I think about a hundred different 
stakeholders or stakeholder groups brought together. The views 
of that consultation were not unanimous. Some did not feel that 
this would be the appropriate way to proceed, and I know that 
there is some debate, so I wouldn't want to suggest that there's 
been unanimous, by any means, unanimous consensus on these 
issues. 
 
Consultation has gone on in this House with meetings with 
individuals, through a fair bit of correspondence that I've 
received as minister from the public. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, regarding the bond, what size . . . or 
what is the department foreseeing may be constituted the size of 
a bond that could be required? And does the department . . . I 
shouldn't say does the department . . . it would seem to me that 
a bond may be an area that would be somewhat restrictive to 
any community or any individual attempting to build a private  

care home. That might just be the thing that breaks the camel's 
back on whether a project proceeds. All the other requirements, 
they might be able to fit into fairly easy. 
 
And so I'm just wondering what you're anticipating would be 
the size or how would that bond be achieved? How would you 
look at making sure that bond is in place? Is it a something that 
becomes a monetary burden? Well what specifically are you 
looking at to address that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we've not settled precisely. 
We'll be looking at a posting of a bond that would cover the 
operations for a period of somewhere between 6 and 12 
months, simply to provide that level of consumer protection to 
the individuals who might be there. 
 
Now I think the process of consumer protection bond is related 
very closely to the process of demonstrating the feasibility and 
the business plan. If the feasibility is there and a solid business 
plan, I don't think the bonding would be a big issue. If there's 
not a feasible business plan, then I think it's going to be very 
difficult to get a bond. So what we're looking at is a period of 
operations of about 6 to 12 months. 
 
Mr. Toth: — That's quite true, Mr. Minister, and I was going to 
raise that one question: if all the other conditions are met and 
now the fact when you put a proposal forward you're also going 
to have to face the fact that . . . establishing a bond. What I 
would like to know and I think the public would like to know as 
well is, what do you anticipate the cost of that bond then being 
to the . . . because that's going to have to be included in a 
proposal that is brought forward. 
 
And as you indicated, that you really haven't established that 
yet, but you must have an idea of what type of a cost would be 
incurred by a group or an individual as they make a proposal 
and as they look at beginning to operate a private care home — 
what this additional condition would mean to their proposal and 
to running that facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this I think will vary 
significantly on the proposal that's being made. To cover the 
costs of operations in a 6 to 12 month period and therefore to 
offer that high level of consumer protection — and because 
here we're very often talking about seniors, we think that 
consumer protection is a very important issue — the size of that 
will of course depend on the operational budget which will 
depend on the numbers of people, the levels of service that 
might be offered in this residence, and sort of the overall 
overhead that they're going to undertake. 
 
So I'm afraid I can't give you a very specific answer. I think 
each application that may or may not come forward will be 
different, given the kinds of services that would be provided 
within this kind of residential option. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I realize that it's difficult to look at 
a project in general, but would there be a rough idea of what it 
may be per patient or per bed in a care home. Like you may  



April 7, 1995 

 
1455 

have a proposal come forward for a 15-bed unit, you may have 
a proposal coming forward for a 25- or a 40-bed unit, and on 
that basis it may be difficult and I can appreciate it would be 
difficult to determine what that level of bond would be. But do 
you have an idea of what it may be per patient? And maybe you 
could explain that a little more when you're looking at it. Per 
patient, how is that bond established? 
 
Let's say a private care home is up and running, and they're 
charging a patient a fee of $1,150 a month — and I don't know 
if that's feasible; I'm just throwing out a number. Is that bond 
established based on the charge, the fee that that patient would 
pay for that service on a monthly basis. Or is that based on the 
actual cost of the service? How is that bond established and 
would the department have an idea of what they might perceive 
as being the actual cost per patient? 
 
Because a community or an individual placing a request or 
putting forward a proposal will need to know these types of 
numbers to determine what their actual cost is going to be at the 
end of the day, so they can do their business plan before they 
determine whether or not they would proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, the bond 
. . . and again it will be related to the business plan. The 
feasibility plan would show what the overhead costs are going 
to be, what the monthly resident charges would be. And we 
want this bond in place. 
 
It's essentially insurance. It's essentially consumer protection so 
that if, even with the best business plan in the world, something 
goes wrong and the community ownership or the individual 
ownership has to cease business, that there be that bond in place 
to protect those seniors — and they most likely will be seniors 
— for a period so that the operational cost can be borne for a 
period of at least six months, perhaps six up to twelve. 
 
So it is related, as you say, to what ongoing costs would be to 
maintain the residential care for those resident in the personal 
care home. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, maybe we 
can pursue that a little more as we get more details or as you 
have more details about the program and as we get into it. 
 
A question I would have, Mr. Minister, regarding this 
announcement made and the letter that you sent me  and I 
appreciate that  regarding the conditions: now once the 
conditions are met or a proposal comes forward and basically 
meets all the requirements of the conditions you've laid here, 
who makes the decision then to proceed or to allow . . . I guess 
first of all you'd have to proceed with the licensing. And then 
you would proceed into that community, or that individual then 
would proceed if they don't already have a house that's large 
enough and they want to refurbish to accommodate individuals 
. . . some would be looking at building structures. 
 
Who gives the permit or the final approval or notice to proceed? 
Is that the board? Is that a local . . . the district health board  

decision? Or does the department as well have something to say 
regarding construction of personal care homes across this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I understand the process, 
we've laid out the criteria in broad strokes, that we've talked 
about it today. Once those criteria will have been met, if they're 
all met . . . and I would not want to mislead the member, these 
are very stringent criteria. Again I refer you to the building code 
standards to meet those criteria in the planning of a facility. 
They're very stringent standards. 
 
In the circumstance that all of the criteria have been met — and 
this would be working with the combination of the community 
or the owner and the department — if we've reached that stage, 
part of that discussion will have involved the district. The 
districts will not have the authority or responsibility to licence. 
That will remain with the Department of Health. But as part of 
the criteria, we would want to have conversations and 
consultations with the districts because we want them to be part 
of the discussion. 
 
Now at the end of the day, if all of the stringent criteria are met 
for this kind of residential option, then a licence would be 
issued by the department. Now I assume there would be some 
municipal . . . other perhaps municipal zoning issues and 
perhaps municipal building codes and so on that would need to 
be worked through on a local basis. 
 
But our essential role is to license and then, as follow-up to the 
licence, to continue an ongoing process of inspections and 
regulation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So really what it boils 
down to, it boils down to the department basically issuing a 
licence to allow for a personal care home to operate. Without 
that licence, that personal care home doesn't proceed. 
 
If a district is in favour of the personal care home as . . . Now 
you mentioned there will be consultations with the district 
while . . . And I would take it this is while you're looking or 
reviewing an application that comes in to license, because I 
would think that you would certainly want to have the district 
involved in approving of the project as well, rather than the 
department issuing a licence and finding out afterwards that the 
district isn't in favour of it. 
 
But if the district itself feels that this would be beneficial to the 
district and they're more than willing to allow and to proceed, 
what level of weight would the department look at in that 
licence as well? Will you take the support from the district into 
some of the considerations given regarding the licensing, in 
view of the fact if all the requirements and the conditions 
you've laid out have been met, to at the end of the day grant the 
licence to proceed with that personal care home? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we haven't sort of weighted  



April 7, 1995 

 
1456 

the various criteria. We haven't given any particular weight, 
value to any of their criteria. 
 
Obviously if a district, for whatever reason, had some strong 
objection, we would want to be very conscious of what that 
objection was and why they would raise it. On the other hand, if 
a district is very supportive, then that will also be taken 
certainly into consideration. 
 
But let me say, a district may be supportive or even very 
supportive, but if the business plan on the other hand 
demonstrates non-viability or only short-term viability, then that 
certainly wouldn't outweigh the other. Or if a district was very 
supportive but the national building codes weren't being 
adhered to, well obviously that wouldn't take the weight. 
 
We haven't given them weight. You're absolutely right that we 
want the districts to be a part of the decision, and in fact we 
would want in fact those who would be proposing any kind of 
new development like this to really work with the district first 
before making a formal application to the department. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the 
discussion we've had this morning and the recommendations 
that you've come up with and the conditions that you've brought 
forward as we look into the future and the licensing of personal 
care homes . . . and I'm going to raise the one of Avonlea 
because certainly they've been working at it for quite awhile. 
The individual they've contacted to come and work with them, 
Carol Krieger, has a couple homes up and running. 
 
The question I would like to know is based on the criteria now 
laid out for the licensing of personal care homes, and if . . . I 
mean rather than an if, how long do you anticipate it would be 
before a community like Avonlea, if they meet all the 
conditions based on your recent announcement, would be 
granted a licence? When could it . . . and I'm not saying that . . . 
I'm not really asking you to say, well Avonlea can expect it on 
such a day. The only reason I'm bringing their proposal forward 
is because I'm familiar with it, and you are. 
 
I'm just saying, how long would it take for a community to 
receive a licence and be able to proceed with construction of a 
personal care home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as the member will 
understand — and it is understandable, of course — the 
Avonlea group have not put together a formal proposal in this 
interim period. Now they would be able to . . . I think it will 
take them I'm sure some time, looking at their own 
circumstances and these kind of criteria to work through a 
proposal. 
 
It will take us a number of weeks yet to formalize and finalize 
all of the regulations. I would hope they would be in place at 
least by the end of May. Once that formalized package of 
regulations is put in place reflecting these criteria and a 
proposal comes forward, it shouldn't take an extended period of 
time for the Department of Health to work with the regulations  

they'll have and the proposal that comes in. We would certainly 
be talking weeks, rather than months, to work through a 
proposal. 
 
One, of course, one of the most, from our point of view, I think 
one of the most significant issues is the feasibility, the business 
plan, the viability issue, which relates to some of the national 
building codes  and so on. 
 
So we'll want to take sufficient time in working with any 
proposal that's brought forward, particularly around the issue of 
the feasibility and the business plan. We'll want to take 
sufficient time to be confident that anything that might be 
licensed would in fact have every hope of a long-term future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask if you could at 
least give your assurance that the department will do everything 
in its power to have the regulations established and laid out as 
quickly as possible and, if not before, by the end of May. You 
had indicated that may be a possibility. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, we need to — and for groups and 
individuals out there — we need to have some guidelines set. 
Otherwise what will happen is this will just drag on and drag on 
and drag on, and we're still waiting for regulations. 
 
And I think it's obvious from some of the information you've 
sent to us just recently, that a lot of discussion has already taken 
place on this matter. And the department no doubt has a pretty 
good idea of how they're going to address and bring forward the 
regulations to address these concerns and set forward the 
regulations to meet the needs of personal care homes. 
 
And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can at least 
commit to this Assembly today that the department will do 
everything within its power to basically set a guideline for itself 
or time period, time frame, so that we can get on with the 
process of dealing with the requests that have come in or will 
be coming in from the province regarding personal care homes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I've learned in earlier 
conversations with the member, not to say soon. But I want to 
assure all members that yes, the response to the member's 
question is that we'll be working through these as quickly as the 
wheels of government can grind and get them in place . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the regulations are very 
important. I think all members will recognize that what is 
perhaps more important is the long-term viability of any 
proposals that come forward. 
 
Some of the proposals that have come forward in past have not 
demonstrated any willingness to meet National Building Code 
standards which makes it simply and virtually and of course 
impossible for a licence to be issued by a provincial 
government. And meeting those National Building Code 
standards are very stringent, and they're very expensive, which 
has significant impact on business viability and the business 
plan. 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1457 

These are really some of the very, very key issues that we're 
going to have to work with any proponent around. But when it 
comes right down to the regulations, I'm confident that my 
suggestion at the end May is more than adequate to have them 
in place. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to your 
officials again, Mr. Minister. 
 
When government departments began the process of budget 
preparation last fall, you must have had some kind of direction 
from the Department of Finance in how to go about planning 
your budgets. 
 
Could you tell me please, what those directions from Finance 
were, including what the spending areas were that you were 
instructed to look for spending cuts or efficiencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And welcome to the member to the 
process of estimates this morning. She will know, from having 
been in the House now for a couple of years, that a year ago we 
announced some two-year planning for the Health budget cycle 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, it's only been a year; 
why does it seem like two, Mr. Chair? 
 
However, from her reading I'm sure of press and other sources 
outside of the House, she will know that we set out a two-year 
plan in terms of some of the health care spending. And so it was 
known and we'd announced that there would be in fact a 1.6 per 
cent increase as part of our two-year plan on the institutional in 
'95-96. 
 
So that is understood, and has been understood by the 
Department of Finance and the Department of Health that over 
a two-year cycle that was part of the plan. 
 
Then how it works around government now is that the 
Department of Finance will ask of every department, including 
the Department of Health, to identify their areas of need in 
terms of budgeting or programing need; and then consultations 
continue between the Department of Finance, the Department 
of Health, every other department of government, refining and 
defining of . . . ultimately a draft of a health budget is provided 
and a draft of the total provincial government budget is 
provided. And then it becomes the responsibility of members of 
Executive Council to work through the process of determining 
budget. And then in our government that process then moves 
into the entire caucus to work through the process of setting the 
provincial budget. 
 
All of this under the umbrella of the fiscal plan which we 
announced prior to and at the time of forming government, that 
our intention has been to restore some financial stability and 
sanity to the expenditures and the revenues of government to 
bring this province to a balanced fiscal position. And so all of 
that falls within the overall umbrella of what we've achieved, 
and that's the balanced budget circumstance. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you for a description of the process  

for me. Were you instructed to look for specific spending cuts 
or efficiencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the department was not 
directed by the Department of Finance to undertake any areas of 
cutting. We are directed and all of our departments are directed 
in the same manner, and that's to seek out and find any 
administrative or overhead efficiencies or savings that we can 
find. 
 
And I may say the Department of Health has done some very 
good work in that regard in trying to find those efficiencies and 
those overheads and those administrative savings wherever we 
can find them. And so that has been the direction and remains 
the direction to all of our departments, including the 
Department of Health. 
 
In this year's budget, as you will know, there are no significant 
cuts in programing. In fact the programing is growing in some 
small ways to meet the needs of the programs. Our district 
board budgets each, this year, have seen a small — it's variable 
for most of them -- small, but at least some pattern of increase. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Just out of curiosity, how much did that 
increase have to do with the devolving of the department's 
workers to the district boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I will provide for the member 
the global figures. We could provide these, in fact, district by 
district, because there is a variance because we're now funding 
on a needs based funding formula. So there is some variance in 
the percentages, district by district. 
 
But on the global basis, in district board funding which is the 
prime vehicle of providing services to people outside of 
physician care, there is  as I've said  and was planned a 1.6 
per cent budgetary increase for all of the districts, factored by 
the funding formula. If you then add to that the new resources 
we're providing for community and home-based services — 
that's the $20.6 million — that moves the total increase up to 
3.5 per cent in funding. And then if you add to that the effect of 
the exact shift of the funding that we were spending through the 
department for community services, the public health, and so on 
that have been transferred, that money just moves laterally to 
the districts. Then the increase would be accounted as a 10.9 
per cent increase. 
 
(1245) 
 
But you will note that when we're speaking publicly, we do not 
suggest that there's been a 10.9 per cent increase in funding to 
health service in the districts because a fair, significant chunk of 
that is in fact the monies that have transferred with the 
programs — public health and mental health and so on. 
 
So in essence the overall increase this year in district funding 
on the base budget is 1.6 per cent. With the new community and 
home-based funding it would be 3.5 per cent. 
 



April 7, 1995 

 
1458 

Mrs. Bergman: — I'm curious as to this devolved amount. Is it 
7.4 per cent, the cost of the devolved workers? I'm curious as to 
why it's not . . . as you say, we didn't increase it 10.4 per cent. 
But indeed you did increase that funding 10.4 per cent in order 
to cover those workers which you've claimed credit for getting 
rid of in the department itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes. I think what I'm saying here to the 
member is that I mean some may be prone in the political 
sphere that we all live in to go about trying to claim that we've 
increased district board funding by 10.9 per cent. That would be 
an unfair and an unwise claim. 
 
Neither are we claiming . . . Even though it would be literally 
true as the member points out, it would be literally true, but it 
would be unwise to claim that somehow there's been a 10 per 
cent expansion in funding which would therefore mean a 10 per 
cent expansion in service. 
 
What is happening here, of course, is that services that have 
been provided and funded directly by the Department of Health 
are now being provided and funded by the districts. And so in 
terms of the overall budget, it's a level figure. It's a level figure, 
but the provision is now by the district rather than by the 
department. 
 
What has not been a level figure in this year's budget is the 1.6 
per cent increase which was announced a year ago to the 
districts. And then with the new community and home based 
resources of $20 million that increases it actually to 3.5 on the 
total global. And again I repeat that it will vary district by 
district because with the needs-based funding formula that 
inserts some variables and variances in the actual amounts. 
Now I can say this, that every district board has received in this 
year's budget some increase. But some of the increases are 
larger than others. None of them could be described as 
extremely large. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me 
how that 1.6 per cent increase was determined a year ago in this 
budgeting process you're talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Okay on this . . . I think, if I have the 
member's question right, it was how was the 1.6 determined a 
year ago? It in essence represents the cost of a negotiated salary 
increases, as you know, through the public process of contract 
negotiations and so on. There were some small, small salary 
increases. And so the 1.6 is destined to cover the salary 
increases, benefit increases that will also accrue there, inflation 
— inflation factor, particularly in long-term care — community, 
and home care. So that essentially is the 1.6. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. You discussed the global 
increase. Could we get a copy of those individual board 
increases as well and how those percentages are distributed in 
those increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there is a certain factor of 
time here. We've just come into the new fiscal year. All of the  

health district boards have now been provided — or their 
administration has been provided — with exact budgetary 
numbers for this year. 
 
Our concern is that there may be some of our district boards 
who have not yet had the opportunity, as board members, to 
work with their administration to be aware of those exact 
numbers. And so I'm hesitant today, Mr. Chair, to make public 
all of the exact numbers here in the House until I'm absolutely 
confident that all of our district boards have had an opportunity 
since April 1 or late in March to actually see and work with 
their numbers. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, we're confident that that process has all 
worked through, we'll be sure to provide for the member or 
table them here in the House, if we're still here, that information 
. . . Because it's public information but we want to be sensitive 
to the processes within the government and within our districts. 
 
I can share with the member that . . . Well I don't have numbers 
attached. But the majority of the boards this year will receive 
increases between 2 and 4 per cent. Another fairly large group 
of them will receive increases over 4 per cent, and a few will 
have increases between zero and 2 per cent. Here, I'm just being 
provided the more accurate numbers. 
 
Here are the exact numbers. Four of our districts will have 
increases of less than 2 per cent; 16 of the districts will have 
increases between 2 and 4 per cent; and 10 districts will have 
increases that are greater than 4 per cent. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do those figures 
include the devolved workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, they do not. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Okay, and I appreciate what you're talking 
about. How long does this process take, and when are we likely 
to be able to have access to this information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, our best estimate at this point 
is that if we're back into Health estimates, perhaps next, at the 
end of next week or earlier in the following week, maybe a little 
after Easter, but it's that kind of time frame. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's very 
prompt. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Estimates document shows a drastic change in 
the number of full-time positions in your department from 
1,845 to 783 as a result of the devolution. Could you explain 
how the devolution process is going? For example, is it 
complete? Were there problems in any other things that help 
give us a picture of how it's proceeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I can report to the member 
and the House today that in essence the transfer of the 
programs, the employees that deliver those very valuable 
programs, is complete. That the transfer did happen on April 1.  



April 7, 1995 

 
1459 

That there have been agreements signed in every one of the 
districts. There are ongoing committees in place to ensure . . . 
this is still a period of transition, and there are the ongoing 
committees in place to ensure any issues that may arise are dealt 
with. 
 
I do want to say that I think from our perspective as legislators, 
we should extend congratulations and compliments to the 
people who worked so hard, not just in the last few weeks but 
over the course of the last year in preparing for this very, very 
significant change. And that includes the workers themselves 
who have been involved in this in some ways unsettling of their 
lives, and yet they will know that none have had to relocate and 
that in essence their employer has changed and now they have 
an opportunity to work more closely with other providers to 
provide an integrated service in their districts. But the workers 
themselves have worked very hard over the course of the last 
number of months to ensure this transition occurred as 
smoothly as possible. 
 
I'd want to congratulate and compliment officials within the 
Department of Health who endeavoured to keep up very, very 
good and open lines of communication throughout the process, 
and equally, to extend congratulations to SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) and the district boards 
who have worked very hard to see this process happen. 
 
In many ways, this has been a very, very significant and historic 
event — a major transfer of programs that have traditionally 
been delivered by provincial government to the district model. 
And so I can report that the transfer is complete and has been a 
very smooth process, and any issues that may arise, the 
committees are still in place. 
 
The House Leader, I believe, Mr. Chair, is prepared now to 
move adjournment of the House. I want to just take this 
opportunity and then leave an opportunity for the member, just 
to thank again the officials from the Department of Health for 
their service to this legislature this afternoon and for their 
ongoing service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would also like to 
thank the members of the department for their valuable service. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:59 p.m. 
 
 
 


