






















































February 28, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 28, 1995 

 

 
501 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of some Saskatchewan Wheat Pool members 
in my constituency requesting that a membership vote be held 
regarding proposed changes to the Pool structure. The prayer 
reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to require the directors of the 
Pool to seek the approval of the Pool membership by a 
vote before the proposed changes are enacted by the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have more 
petitions for you from my constituency. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people on this petition are from the 
Lafleche-Assiniboia area. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions to 
present on behalf of the people from the Maple Creek area of 
the province. These all come from the town of Maple Creek 
except for a few from Hazlet. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'll be happy to table these on behalf of the people from my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been  

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the legislature 
a group of young people from the YMCA (Young Men's 
Christian Association) mentor program. 
 
The mentor program is a pilot project funded by Youth Services 
Canada. And Regina is special in that it's one of five centres — 
Lethbridge, Fort McMurray, Medicine Hat, and Sault Ste. Marie 
— who have a program like this, working with youth at risk 
providing tutoring, social and recreational activities, and life 
skills enhancement. 
 
The pilot project does end March 31 and they're of course 
hoping it will be refunded again. They work with the public 
school board and each work with 5 to 30 kids each in the 
schools where they're assigned. 
 
I'd like you to join me in thanking them for their work and 
welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Through-put Elevator in Unity 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to finish the other half of my statement I started. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was mentioning the confidence the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool had in the area around Unity. Also, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to the attention to the 
members that there's another high through-put elevator with 
condominiums going up in Unity. It's called Northwest 
Terminals. And after losing the Crow, I think these 
condominiums become more and more important to the farmers 
as a place to store their grain while they can maybe sell it on a 
local area. 
 
Also, in this new terminal, they will be able to clean the grain to 
offshore standards, Mr. Speaker, which I believe is something 
that the farmers have been more or less asking for for a long 
time. 
 
So thank you for your time, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted you to  



February 28, 1995 

 
502 

know that we're really progressing out there in the Unity area. 
 

Peak Manufacturing Hiring 18 Permanent Employees 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Battleford area, 18 
local people now on social assistance will find permanent jobs 
at Peak Manufacturing. Their success is due to the Department 
of Education's Future Skills program. Upon completion of four 
weeks in the classroom and four weeks on the job, the 18 will 
become employees of Peak. 
 
In the classroom, participants will acquire a basic knowledge of 
carpentry, electrical and plumbing work, first aid, safety, and 
good work ethics. This will be followed by four weeks of 
working alongside Peak employees as apprentices. In addition 
to the original eight weeks, six trainees will receive special 
training for the fibre glass section of Peak. The program not 
only benefits those who have found work; Peak Manufacturing, 
which has had difficulty finding skilled labour, will benefit by 
obtaining 18 new and enthusiastic workers. This program will 
help Peak meet the demand of booming sales. Mr. Speaker, this 
is an example of how partnerships are working. At least five 
government departments have cooperated with private industry 
to create lasting employment. 
 
I wish to congratulate Peak, their 18 new employees, and all 
those involved. Truly, Mr. Speaker, our efforts to help people 
work, are working. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Freedom to Read Week 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
do Margaret Lawrence, Frederick Phillip Grove, Mark Twain, 
the Koran, the Bible, Shakespeare, Salman Rushdie, Taslima 
Nasrin and many other ancient and modern writers have in 
common? 
 
The answer is obvious and deplorable. Each, at one time or 
another, in one place or another, has been censored, kept from 
the hands of readers because some putative authority, who 
"knows better" believed that words in the wrong minds are 
inherently dangerous. 
 
Some, like Mr. Rushdie and Ms. Nasrin, are literally in danger 
for their lives because others would deny their right to 
independent thought. To counter this dark impulse to deny the 
rights of the mind, a trend which unfortunately is always with 
us in society, this week has been declared Freedom to Read 
Week in Canada. 
 
The purpose of this week is to draw national attention to the 
issue of censorship. Freedom to Read Week is sponsored by the 
Book and Periodical Council of Canada and locally it is 
promoted by the Saskatchewan Writers Guild. It is a sadly 
astonishing fact that we cannot match in equal measure, 
scientific and technological progress with moral and intellectual 
tolerance. 

To use the old phrase: we can put a person on the moon, but we 
squirm about letting a Canadian student read The Diviners, by 
any measure a classic of Canadian writing. Intellectual freedom 
is still a concern here as well as abroad for writers, for teachers, 
for readers, and for lawmakers like us. 
 
Tomorrow in Regina the writers guild will host a meeting to 
mark this week. Authors John Gray and Elizabeth Philips will 
read from their own work and from writings banned or 
challenged in Canada. Mr. Speaker, the freedom for which we 
stand on guard includes freedom of the mind. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rocanville High School Science Fair 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd just 
like to take a moment to acknowledge the work and efforts of 
the students and teachers of Rocanville High School in 
Rocanville. Last night I had the privilege of judging their 
science fair competition, and it was very interesting and 
intriguing to go through the different displays. 
 
One display I remember judging, Mr. Speaker, was a young 
individual had decided he'd been taken up with all the 
commercials that are suggesting that Quaker State is the best oil 
that a person could use in their vehicle. So he got a number of 
different oil products, and he set up a mechanism where he 
could determine what the lubricating value of each of the 
products was. At the end of his experiment he found that 
actually of the oils he had, Shell XL was the best oil and 
Quaker State was the poorest. And I think as you looked at it, 
the cheaper oil actually in his experiment turned out to be the 
best. 
 
Another one was, a couple of young boys, a salesman had come 
by their yard and was trying to sell them insulation and 
suggested that if they had a reflective barrier on either side it 
would be more appropriate insulation factor. So they did some 
experimenting. The result was, Mr. Speaker, that they came to 
the conclusion having a reflective barrier on either side of the 
insulation really is no value whatsoever. 
 
And these were just two of a number of the different projects. 
So I think it was very worthwhile. I want to thank Dennis 
Thiessen for inviting me to come and judge at their fair, and I 
wish the students and teachers well as they continue this annual 
event. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Esterhazy Lions Club Benefit Dance 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have all heard 
of personal accounts of how various groups, organizations, and  



February 28, 1995 

 
503 

individuals have touched the lives of many Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Well I have another example of a community organization 
which is making a difference in people's lives in my own riding. 
I had the pleasure of attending a benefit dance on Saturday 
which was organized by the Esterhazy Lions Club. The benefit 
dance was held to raise money for the families of two children, 
Kayla Boehmer and Melissa Fyfe. 
 
Kayla was born with severe medical needs that have kept her 
family busy since her premature birth in 1992 and Melissa was 
diagnosed with a cancerous brain tumour in 1993. These two 
children have received, and are receiving, medical treatment, 
but now their families are faced with travel expenses and non-
reimbursable medical costs. That's where the Lions Club 
decided to step in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to report that 400 people attended the 
benefit dance and the Lions Club raised over $11,000 to help 
these families with their expenses. Many local businesses and 
individuals donated time and money to ensure this worthwhile 
cause met with success. 
 
I know these families are grateful for the contributions that have 
been made by everyone in the community and surrounding area. 
Congratulations to Esterhazy Lions Club which has certainly 
lived up to its motto, "People Helping People." Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Largest Reunion Planned in Norquay 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today and to 
pay tribute to a community in my riding, Norquay, which on 
August 5, 6, and 7, 1995 will host Saskatchewan's biggest 
reunion. The Norquay community ventures office has been busy 
contacting former residents of the community, relatives, and 
friends in the anticipation of a large turn-out at this reunion. 
Neighbouring communities of Pelly, Hyas, and Stenen have 
also joined in to make this event truly a community event. 
 
This reunion is a community project and one that the entire 
town can take pride in hosting. The involvement is widespread, 
including groups, organizations, and individuals from the local 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this reunion demonstrates the commitment our 
communities have towards preserving our heritage, and the 
town of Norquay and the organizers of this reunion should be 
congratulated for their hard work in putting it all together. And 
what they are doing, Mr. Speaker, they can take comfort in, 
recognizing the fact that they're preserving a bit of the past — 
something that is not only important to our seniors but 
important to people of all ages. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Rink for Town of Southey 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to pay 
tribute to the people of the town of Southey. On June 4, 1994, 
the skating rink in Southey burned to the ground, leaving the 
town of some 750 residents devastated and unsure where their 
youngsters were going to be playing hockey. 
 
At no surprise to me and anyone else that knows the people of 
the town of Southey, the community has rallied together and 
have replaced it with a $1.3 million metal rink. On November 1, 
the first load of metal arrived at the site. And I am pleased to 
say that they started playing hockey in it on February 15, which 
is quite an accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because of the high tech of the building, it had to be built by 
professionals. Most of the people couldn't grab a hammer and 
help out as they did in the 1950s, building the old rink. But that 
didn't stop a lot of the people from pitching in whichever way 
they could. Fund-raisers and donations have raised almost 
$200,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate all 
the people of Southey and district on their accomplishment, and 
to say: job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crow Benefit Elimination 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I notice 
that you saw my eagerness to participate in the debate this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Minister, yesterday's Liberal budget was supposed to be about 
fairness. And as we've all heard, the Liberal leader in this 
province said the budget was fair. She said the cuts to 
agriculture affected all regions equally and that anyone who 
was expecting anything more out of the Crow benefit was 
dreaming in technicolor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess that means virtually every farm group and 
farmer in the province was dreaming in technicolor, according 
to the Liberal leader, because they have been unanimous in their 
condemnation of the elimination of the Crow and in the manner 
in which it was done. 
 
Mr. Minister, what specific action will you be taking to let the 
Liberal government in Ottawa know that the elimination of the 
Crow benefit is unacceptable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the  



February 28, 1995 

 
504 

member opposite for the question. As you will know, we've had 
meetings with farm groups, with leaders of rural and urban 
municipalities, and we will be asking this House to set aside its 
partisan loyalties and to all join with us and to talk about the 
fact that this federal budget did not meet the essential test of a 
budget: the test of fairness. 
 
Is it fair to say to Saskatchewan farmers, you have lost your 
subsidy 100 per cent while eastern farmers are cut 30 per cent? 
Is it fair to say to this region, which depends so heavily on 
agriculture and transportation, we're making massive cuts in 
both, and we have no plan for agriculture, no plan for 
transportation? Is it fair, in Canada, to say that one of the 
essential understandings of Confederation was that the Prairies, 
as a land-locked part of Canada that has an export-based 
economy, needs a national transportation system? Is it fair for 
the federal government to turn its back on that commitment? 
 
What we're saying to this legislature is, set aside your partisan 
leanings, join with us and say to the federal government: people 
of Saskatchewan are willing to do their part but they also 
believe in fairness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would once more direct my question to the Minister of 
Agriculture, and I would appreciate if he would get on his feet 
and answer this question. 
 
Mr. Minister, just last week you were going around the 
province bragging about the good deal that you had negotiated 
for Saskatchewan farmers; how Saskatchewan farmers would 
be relatively well off because you had a new safety net deal 
signed with Ottawa. 
 
Well is this the deal that you negotiated, Mr. Minister, that 
we're hearing about — a 30 per cent cut in safety nets and 
complete elimination of the Crow benefit? Well you're some 
negotiator, Mr. Minister. The only thing that could have 
possibly been worse, if we would have had the Liberal leader 
negotiating for us in Ottawa. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why were you bragging about the deal you 
cut with Ottawa last week, only to be condemning it this week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite is right about one thing, I think. With the Liberal 
leader dreaming in technicolor, it would have certainly not 
gotten us a good deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deal that we cut with the federal government 
with regards to safety net did not include the Crow. We were 
not able to get us a deal on the Crow. We stood with the two 
prairie governments, with all the farm leaders, with all the farm 
groups asking for at least $7 billion pay-out. We got 1.6 billion, 
which is less than one-quarter of the value, the present value of 
the Crow benefit — less than one-quarter. And the Liberal 
leader says we're dreaming in technicolor if we expected more  

than that. I think that's . . . 
 
On the safety net issue, we are protected from the 30 per cent 
cut in safety nets for two to three years, for the length of our 
agreement. So in that respect we will do better than other 
provinces who do not have an agreement who will end up 
getting their 30 per cent cut. 
 
On the Crow we made every effort. I met with the federal 
Minister of Agriculture. The Premier met with the Prime 
Minister. The Finance minister met with the federal Finance 
minister. Our Deputy Premier met with Marcel Masse. We met 
with every minister and every person we could to put across the 
point for prairie farmers. We just were not able to get that 
across and we are going to continue to put that point across. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
wanted 7 billion, you deserved 7 billion, you got 1.6 and you 
want to know the reason why? I'll go through some reasons 
why. How much credibility do you really have when you go to 
Ottawa on behalf of the Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Minister? 
The federal Liberals have unilaterally broken a historical 
contract with every Saskatchewan farmer. Where do you 
suppose they got that idea from, Mr. Minister? You broke the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contract; they broke 
the Crow contract. The Liberals may be taking a hack-and-slash 
approach to western agriculture, Mr. Minister, but you gave 
them the knife, probably the machete. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday's elimination of the Crow is a result of 
you setting the precedent. The NDP (New Democratic Party) 
said it was okay to attack farmers when you broke the GRIP 
contracts. And now the federal Liberals and the provincial 
leader are following suit. Only the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party has been consistent in its defence of 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that the Liberal attack on 
agriculture is at least partially due to your own making? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the members 
opposite for the question, and I hope they're prepared to listen 
to the answer. We make no apologies for the way we've handled 
agriculture in this province. We came out with a plan — a long-
term plan  as to where we're taking agriculture. We have put 
money into each of our budgets to implement that plan. For 
example, we have an $18 million agri-food equity fund in this 
budget. And if the Tories want to spend this question period 
pointing fingers back and forth, it was the Tories in Ottawa who 
started cutting the Crow benefit. 
 
What I'm trying to say today to the opposition is we have a very 
serious situation in this province. The local newspaper probably 
said it best: devastated. The president of SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) said: devastating. 



February 28, 1995 

 
505 

What we have to do is set aside this bickering, stand together, 
and say the essential test of a budget is fairness. This is simply 
not a fair budget for farmers, for people in rural communities, 
and eventually for people in urban communities, because they 
will be hit as well. Join with us and say, we're willing to do our 
part but we expect fairness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We're not the only 
people who are concerned about the Crow. Our caucus 
continues to receive hundreds of letters through the “Mr. 
Premier, I want to know” initiative. Many farmers who have 
responded to us have been concerned about the disappearance 
of the Crow, and even before the announcement by the federal 
budget yesterday. 
 
Here is one example of the question. It comes from Allen 
Onyskiw from Kelvington, and it very simply asks: Mr. 
Premier, I want to know what you plan to do about the farmers 
losing the Crow. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, what we plan to do is 
we plan to work together just as we did with our own budget 
difficulties here. Work together with other members of this 
community — the opposition parties, if they'll set aside their 
partisan loyalties  members of the local communities, SARM, 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association); 
members of the agricultural community. We plan to sit down; 
we plan to map out in detail to the federal government why this 
is simply not a fair way to treat farmers. We plan to also make 
the argument that when farmers and others on the Prairies 
export their commodities to other parts of the world, this doesn't 
just help us; it helps all of Canada. We plan to work together 
with these groups and to not let Ottawa off the hook. They 
cannot abandon their responsibility to put in place a national 
transportation system. They cannot abandon their responsibility 
to have some long-term plan for agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
important to note that the federal government is not the only 
ones to blame for the predicament that we are in in agriculture 
in Saskatchewan today. And my question addresses this fact, 
and it comes from Patrick Santo from Whitewood. 
 
Mr. Premier, remember when you came to office in 1992, the 
agricultural industry was in dire straits. You and your friends of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool organized a massive farm rally, 
and you were going to send a prairie fire to Ottawa. Then for 
your part, you successfully broke contracts with us, doubled the 
price of gasoline, raised the taxes on diesel, increased 
everything from electricity, telephones and natural gas to taxes. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you sleep at night knowing that you have 
caused such anguish and misery to farm families, in farm  

families’ lives? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, these are changing and 
challenging times, and we all have to be prepared to accept 
change. But what people should expect of their government in 
changing and difficult times is a plan. What we did is we 
travelled around this province, talked to farm leaders, farmers, 
farm groups, came up with a long-term plan, a vision for 
agriculture, as we did with budget, as we did with health. And 
what we've done each and every year is gone down the road to 
implement that plan. What I would say to the member opposite 
is that we have responded to change. We have put in place a 
plan, and that plan will go a long way to provide security for 
farm families in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gun Control Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to 
the Premier comes from Philip Hewitt of Carlyle, and it reads: 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why the only thing we ever hear 
regarding new gun control legislation is we can't do anything. 
Isn't it time you started to listen to popular opinion? After all, 
we gun owners have been rallying and petitioning for a long 
time. At least try invoking the notwithstanding clause. Your 
jobs are on the line. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As my predecessor in office pointed 
out both eloquently and intelligently, the notwithstanding clause 
is not available where the issue is within the jurisdiction of the 
federal government. It's not a remedy that's open to us. 
Constitutional challenge maybe, but the notwithstanding clause 
is clearly not available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from W.L. Leurer from Regina. My question is 
in regards to this gun control that the federal government is 
doing or proposing. My question is, how far the Justice minister 
is prepared to carry out his protest of this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well I have stated in prior question 
periods when a similar question was put, I think by the same 
member actually, that the policy remains unchanged and we 
continue to oppose the expense of this Bill. We believe that the 
expense, primarily to the provincial government actually, the 
expense is all out of proportion to whatever modest benefit 
might accrue. So we continue to oppose the national gun 
registry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Agriculture Funding 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like 
all Saskatchewan people, I am deeply concerned about the 
effect of the changes to the transportation subsidies announced  



February 28, 1995 

 
506 

in the federal government, on farm families. 
 
And it's most interesting, I mean there is no question at all that 
rural Saskatchewan has been hard hit. It's also very interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, that there's no acknowledgement that the $17 
billion paid by the federal government in agriculture for the last 
six years, everyone knows that that's not sustainable throughout 
time, and that GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
was requiring certain changes. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have a history of 
overcoming partisanship on matters of importance to this 
province. A recent example is the Moose Jaw air force base 
where members of all political stripes and indeed citizens 
worked together to protect a piece of Saskatchewan heritage — 
something which no one has said thank you for, that we have it 
saved. 
 
What is crucial now is to develop a united Saskatchewan 
approach to how the payments are made and how the $300 
million of agricultural transition funds is going to be 
administered. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Agriculture. I know the 
Minister of Finance has no confidence in her Minister of 
Agriculture, but I do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I wish the member would put 
her question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — My question to the Minister of 
Agriculture: will the minister join with me — and I do extend 
this invitation to the opposition as well — to meet with the 
federal minister as soon as possible, in order for us to attempt to 
do what your government was unable to do, and that is to 
ensure that Saskatchewan gets its fair share? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite astonished. 
After saying yesterday that this was a regionally fair budget and 
that farmers who were expecting reasonable and fair 
compensation were dreaming in technicolor, the member now is 
standing and saying, well we should go to Ottawa after the fact 
and cut the deal, and never mind our concerns about the 
fairness of the deal we're being asked to cut. 
 
What I'm saying to the member opposite is she needs to re-
examine the facts. She needs to examine many of the facts in 
the budget, by the way. After standing in this House, talking 
about income tax projections question period after question 
period, the federal government missed its income tax 
projections by $3 billion. Will she today argue that they haven't 
created jobs? 
 
What I'm saying to the member opposite is, join with us, the 
other agricultural groups, the other leaders in the community, 
and tell Ottawa this simply isn't fair. They need a plan, a long-
term plan that is a fair plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
most interesting that this Minister of Finance says 
Saskatchewan's been hit so terribly hard when her colleagues in 
Ontario say, we are extremely unhappy, that Ontario's received 
the most discrimination — the same with her colleagues in 
British Columbia — and yet people in the Toronto Star are 
talking about the complete hypocrisy of that NDP government 
since they put hundreds of thousands of workers out of jobs by 
their job-killing taxes, their labour initiatives. In fact, to quote 
here: They have done everything except tax dirt. 
 
Madam Minister, indeed yesterday and according to people 
across Canada, it does appear to be regionally disturbing to 
absolutely everyone and no one did believe that the $7 billion 
would be received in this fiscal climate in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with yesterday's federal budget 
announcements, the federal Agriculture minister announced that 
the Farm Credit Corporation would be reducing the cost of 
rental agreements as a result of changes to transportation 
subsidies. 
 
But the province must do its part, too, Mr. Speaker. Hundreds 
of thousands of acres in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I've let the member 
go on for quite some time. I wish she'd put her question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — My question to the Minister of 
Agriculture: will the minister follow the lead of the Farm Credit 
Corporation and agree that the Ag Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan will lower the rental cost to farm families and 
give its share of the payment replacing transportation subsidies 
to the renters who are working the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to hear 
the Liberal leader suggest that we meet with the federal 
Minister of Agriculture. I certainly have met with the federal 
minister a number of times, and I'm arranging a meeting with 
him — I believe I have a meeting on Saturday morning with 
said minister. We'll certainly be talking about Crow issue and 
how we mitigate and whether there's any hope in reversing 
some of the very devastating effects of this budget on rural 
Saskatchewan and on farmers. 
 
We do not know how the payment is going to be made in detail, 
Mr. Speaker. We don't know whether it's going to go to the 
Royal Bank or to farmers in B.C. (British Columbia) who have 
left the province or whether it's going to flow through to farm 
operators. 
 
We have no idea of how much money we're getting for our 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) land or 
any other detail and certainly that's one of the things that I'll be 
talking to the federal minister about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 28, 1995 

 
507 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, much 
of the land owned in Saskatchewan is owned by this 
government, by ACS, and by lending institutions. For the 
payments replacing transportation subsidies to be administered 
fairly, it is absolutely essential that these institutions do their 
part in renegotiating rental agreements. 
 
These payments must be passed on to farm families. And the 
province, this Government of Saskatchewan, has the legislative 
authority to ensure that this happens under its jurisdiction over 
property and civil rights. 
 
My question to the Minister of Agriculture: can you today 
assure this House that you will meet with the financial 
institutions, as well as ACS, give a directive to ACS, to urge 
them to renegotiate these rental agreements, lower them, and 
that you will commit to bringing this legislation forward if 
necessary, requiring them to do so if they don't agree to do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, this is taking an 
interesting turn. I suggested to the federal Minister of 
Agriculture that they pay this payment out to producers and not 
to landowners. I don't know where you were when he made the 
decision that it should be paid out to landowners. 
 
It's interesting that you're in the House suggesting how I clean 
up the problem that the federal minister has created by his 
decision as to how to pay out a paltry $1.6 billion. Certainly 
we'll be discussing with the federal minister how it should be 
paid out. We're still going to be suggesting that we don't think 
1.6 billion is enough, and we're not even prepared to talk about 
how to pay it out until we have one more go at trying to 
convince the federal government that that is not enough money 
to adjust to the loss of our freight rate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Centre Escape 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few 
questions I'd like to ask the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, last night two more young offenders escaped from 
the North Battleford youth centre. And during this escape, they 
assaulted and handcuffed a youth centre worker and also stole 
two cars. And the worker has subsequently been hospitalized. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you give us a report on this latest escape 
and on the condition of the worker who was injured? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of the Minister of Social Services, I can advise you of 
this: that two youths did escape from the Battleford's youth 
cottage at approximately 1:15 a.m. on February 28. The youths 
restrained and assaulted the night supervisor, stole the keys, and 
escaped in two vehicles taken from the cottage. The staff 
member is currently in hospital under observation. I'm advised 
that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) are  

investigating the incident and have not yet advised the 
department of the arrest of either of these youths. 
 
I should also tell you that the youth cottage is an 8-bed open 
custody unit located on the grounds of the Saskatchewan 
Hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the response. Mr. 
Minister, every time that I've raised this in the past, you've 
brushed if off and said the situation was under control. And 
every time we suggested that somebody may eventually get 
hurt, you said or the minister said, there was no danger. You 
have consistently refused to acknowledge a problem at that 
centre and now a worker has been hurt. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you acknowledge that there is a security 
problem in the centre and go to work immediately to correct the 
problem before someone else gets hurt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm not sure if the member is aware that 
there is a difference between closed custody facilities and open 
custody facilities. The youth in question left an open custody 
facility; open custody facilities do not have locked doors and 
residents are required to attend work, school, or treatment as 
part of community life. 
 
This is an open facility, an open custody facility. These young 
people were not in secured custody. They were able to leave at 
any time during the day unadvised and, as the minister has said 
to you on other occasions, this is a facility that the department 
is working with to overcome some long-standing issues. 
 

Federal Agriculture Funding 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Agriculture and is pertaining to the $1.6 billion 
that replaced our Crow benefit yesterday. I want to know what 
your stand is, Mr. Minister, when it comes to who should be 
paid: the producer, or the landlord, the owner? And where do 
you stand . . . do you believe that the banks, which includes 
Farm Credit and ACS and the banks, who do you believe and 
what does your government believe who should be receiving 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, we 
suggested in this government that they should continue to pay 
the payment to the railroad. We suggested that they, to get 
around the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
agreement, they could domesticate the subsidy. 
 
Obviously this was not about a GATT agreement because what 
we're doing is eliminating and there was absolutely no 
requirement under GATT to eliminate the subsidies. So 
obviously this was budget driven and GATT was a 
smokescreen, and that's why they didn't want to change the  



February 28, 1995 

 
508 

payment, keep paying it to the railways. 
 
Now we have a real dilemma and a real problem as to how to 
pay that out fairly to producers, whether it's on a cultivated acre, 
a seeded acre basis. Will it be fair to producers in my area? Will 
it be fair to the producers in the member's area? Will owners get 
it? Will the Royal Bank get it? There are a whole bunch of 
unanswered questions. And I haven't seen a detailed proposal 
from the federal minister as to how he plans to pay that out, and 
there certainly will be a big problem in trying to pay this out 
fairly. And I guess that is a dilemma that's brought about by the 
actions of the federal Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
orders of the day, I rise pursuant to rule 42 to ask by leave of 
the Assembly to engage in a debate, Mr. Speaker, regarding the 
cancellation of the Crow benefit and how this move by the 
federal Liberal government will affect Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARM, SUMA, Wheat Pool, many other 
organizations in Saskatchewan, are reeling at the news of the 
cancellation of the Crow benefit and a small, one-time pay-out 
of $1.6 billions. And this decision is devastating to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that priority should 
be given in the House today to discuss the implications of this 
move. So I make that request, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 
 

Federal Crow Rate Cancelled 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to all members of this legislature for recognizing the 
importance of what happened in yesterday's federal budget, the 
importance and the significance of the actions taken by the 
federal Liberals, and the repercussions that are reverberating 
through Saskatchewan even as I speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will give you the gist of what I intend to be 
talking about by reading the motion at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
and it will be seconded by the member from Morse, my 
colleague here: 
 
  

 That this Assembly join together in condemning the 
federal government for being grossly unfair to and 
ignoring the needs of western provinces in Canada by 
cutting grain transportation subsidies by 100 per cent 
and offering a minimal $1.6 billion one-time pay-out to 
landowners, and that as a result of this decision, land 
values in Saskatchewan will drop. Moratoriums on 
closing branch lines will end. And ultimately, this action 
will have a dramatic and devastating effect on 
Saskatchewan as a whole. And further, following 
adoption of this motion, that the verbatims of this 
debate be forwarded to the Prime Minister and the 
federal Minister of Agriculture for immediate attention 
and consideration. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will be moving this at the conclusion of my 
remarks, which will be relatively brief, Mr. Speaker, because 
there is a very pointed message in what happened in the federal 
budget. Ostensibly, the federal budget was designed to be fair. 
Everyone, I believe, in all of Canada recognizes the financial 
turmoil that exists in Canada and the pressure which the federal 
government was under — in fact, Mr. Speaker, the pressures 
that every provincial government is under in an effort to 
maintain fiscal integrity within their own houses. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, certainly the official opposition in the 
Saskatchewan legislature does not condemn cuts, does not 
condemn spending less money by the government. In fact I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, that I would be very sure of this — that 
my colleagues would join me in commending the federal 
Minister of Finance in the cuts that he has made. But I also 
think at the same time, and by extension, we would condemn 
the manner in which it was done because there is no doubt in 
my mind, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt in my mind — I say to 
my fellow colleagues in this legislature — that western Canada 
and Saskatchewan in particular were ill-done by. 
 
We don't mind carrying our fair share of the burden, but I think 
the line was transcended beyond fairness to a point where the 
Saskatchewan economy now in general, and again the farmers 
in particular, are being asked to carry a burden that is beyond 
fairness. 
 
When we take a look at what the impact of losing $560 million 
is going to have in western Canada in particular, it's quite 
devastating. But when you consider that about half of that will 
probably be earmarked for Canada . . . or has been earmarked in 
the past for Saskatchewan — that impact is something that has 
the agriculture community and the business community quite 
frankly reeling. 
 
We see headlines in the papers that say simply: 
"DEVASTATED Budget leaves farm leaders reeling", a 
headline out of the Leader-Post. Another headline that I'm 
having here is: "Agriculture hit hard". 
 
Now I'm going to summarize a lot of my remarks, and as 
question period brought out some of the ideas that I had in 
terms of where the Liberals are heading both provincially and  



February 28, 1995 

 
509 

federally — federally particularly. And then we have an 
apologist sitting in this House apologizing for the moves that 
the federal Liberal Party has taken and saying that it is all fair, 
that it was just. It is not just, Mr. Speaker, simply because 
Saskatchewan depends on vast volumes of produce to be 
shipped to market — vast volumes. 
 
And right now I believe, and it's a ballpark figure, the average 
farmer will pay about $10 to have a tonne of grain shipped to 
port. Under this new scenario we could well be looking at 40 to 
$50 a tonne shipment. And, Mr. Speaker, that's on a product 
that may be worth — barley, $91 a tonne; wheat, 140, 130. You 
take $50 off simply for transport and where does 
Saskatchewan's competitiveness in the world market go. It's 
extremely important, Mr. Speaker, to recognize this fact. 
 
We have at the same time a scenario now where the Crow rate 
is gone, the historical Crow rate which I believe was started, 
when? In the 1896, somewhere in that neighbourhood. It's a 
historical part of doing business in Canada. 
 
One thing I agreed with with the provincial Finance minister 
when she says that this is not a subsidy to Saskatchewan 
farmers only, because all of Canada — all of Canada — gains 
and benefits when the Saskatchewan economy is vibrant. It is 
an investment, Mr. Speaker. And so for them to now say that 
what we have done, what we have cut, is fair, that boggles my 
mind. It is not fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you take a look at the other components in agriculture, what 
do we find? We find that the supply-managed industries have a 
cut in the first year of 15 per cent in their subsidy — 15 per cent 
the first year, 15 per cent of that the second year. Now, Mr. 
Minister, we had a 100 per cent cut — we had a 100 per cent 
cut. Now why would that be? I'm not against my neighbours 
getting the subsidy on the supply-managed milk industry. In my 
constituency I have about one-third of all the dairy farmers in 
the province of Saskatchewan, so I'm very, very sensitive to 
their needs and to their wants, Mr. Speaker. So I grant them 
that. 
 
But let's take a look at why would the federal Liberals cut the 
supply-managed industries so minutely in comparison to the 
devastation wreaked upon Saskatchewan. Well where are the 
supply-managed industries? Who controls them? Quebec comes 
to mind. Ontario comes to mind. That is where the power base 
is. That is where the lobbying occurred with the Liberals, in 
Ottawa and in Toronto and eastern Canada. It's a simple, very 
straightforward answer, why was Saskatchewan hard done by. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I notice that in some of the articles here we 
see the Liberal leader saying that nobody really expected $7 
billion. That was unrealistic, and technicolor dreaming is not 
something that is advisable. And she says no one really 
expected that much money. 
 
Well let's take a look what Leroy Larsen, president of 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, has to say. He said, I am really 
disappointed; I didn't expect anything quite this severe — the  

president of the largest farming group in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so if you take a look at how this is going to be 
implemented, that's another thing that I have some concern 
about because right now my impression is that it's going to be 
paid out to landowners — to landowners, Mr. Speaker, not to 
producers. We on this side of the House have always been in 
favour of changing the Crow  not its elimination  changing 
the Crow so that the benefits would be paid directly to the 
producer. 
 
And the NDP over there have their own philosophical agenda, 
and that's fine. At least we both knew where we stood. They 
wanted to go to the big, bad railroads. We wanted to go to the 
individual farmers and the producers where it would do them 
much good. 
 
But that was a fight that we'd always had here, Mr. Speaker. 
And on our side we used to have the expression, when you had 
election time, was: well what's a good topic for an election? 
Well go in April and go on the Crow. I think every member of 
this House has heard that expression. And we used to say that in 
'86 and even in '91 — go in April and go the Crow. But 
unfortunately now, Mr. Speaker, we can't say that any more 
because there is no Crow left. 
 
Now if we're going to pay this remainder out, this 1.6 that we're 
being offered, how is it going to be paid? To the landowner. 
Well who are landowners first of all? Landowners — I own a 
little bit of land, not very much. I rent it out, but according to 
this, I'm going to get it, not the person who farms my land. 
 
Who else owns lands? Well what about the big bad banks? 
There's a lot of banks, Mr. Speaker, that have a lot of land, 
acquired a lot of land recently. So they're going to get the direct 
payment. 
 
What about ACS? I don't know, maybe the minister when he 
gets up and has his comments could tell us how many acres 
ACS is in control of. I don't think it's that much. It may not only 
be more than about 5 to 6,000 acres of direct control that is 
being leased out on ACS. 
 
But what about FCC (Farm Credit Corporation)? The federal 
corporation also owns land. And they are going to be getting a 
direct injection of cash into their operations; not where it's 
needed. Not that it's not needed there, but certainly the producer 
himself will have no say. It may be reflected in that in a couple 
of year’s time as new agreements are written up and so on. But 
anyway the leaseholders and so on are out in the cold. 
 
Now the . . . oh I don't want to say I told you so, but I can't 
resist making this comment anyway. Because it was in the latter 
years of the Mulroney government, I believe, that an attempt 
was made to do away with the Crow by the Mulroney 
government. And we had the same debate at that time as we had 
just recently. If the Crow goes, what is the compensation? What 
is the compensation? And there was a one-time pay-out made, I 
suggested, and I'm quoting now from the Leader-Post here that  



February 28, 1995 

 
510 

says: 
 
 Several years ago, the former Tory government offered 

to buy out the subsidy for $11.2 billion, but the Prairie 
wheat pools weren't interested . . . (in $11.2 billions and 
now they're being shafted to the tune of having to accept 
$1.6 billions, Mr. Speaker.) 

 
So we could go on, but what I want to do is leave an indelible 
imprint upon the federal Minister of Agriculture who was 
supposed to be from Saskatchewan, who's supposed to be from 
this Regina area. And we find that the knives have come out 
and I believe his constituents and the people of Saskatchewan 
have felt the thrust and the cut of that knife in a most unfair 
way. 
 
Now I could go on on some of the finer details, Mr. Speaker, 
but in the interests of time, my colleague from the constituency 
of Morse is going to pick up that theme and express some ideas 
on that. But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, that concludes my 
remarks and if the member of the government side wants to get 
up at this time, I will give them that opportunity now. 
 
And I do move . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you to my 
colleagues who were getting excited here. I want to read the 
motion once more for the record. I move, seconded by my 
colleague from Morse: 
 
 That this Assembly join together in condemning the 

federal government for being grossly unfair to and 
ignoring the needs of western provinces in Canada by 
cutting grain transportation subsidies by 100 per cent 
and offering a minimal $1.6 billion one-time pay-out to 
landowners, and that as a result of this decision land 
values in Saskatchewan will drop, moratoriums on 
closing branch lines will end, and ultimately this action 
will have a dramatic and devastating effect on 
Saskatchewan as a whole. And further, following 
adoption of this motion, that the verbatims of this 
debate be forwarded to the Prime Minister and the 
federal Minister of Agriculture for immediate attention 
and consideration. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to join this 
debate and support the motion that's introduced. Mr. Speaker, 
the last decade has been a very tough decade on Saskatchewan 
farmers and farm families. And rural communities have gone 
through some extremely tough times with weather problems, 
with low prices, and they've struggled to adapt and change and 
try to maintain those communities and the farms and the values 
that we so treasure and which make up the backbone of this 
province. 
 
When we came to power, as a government we had to make 
tough decisions, did our very best to alleviate the problem for  

Saskatchewan farmers. We brought in the program, a six-year 
leaseback program, which saved thousands of farmers from 
losing their land. We obviously had to make budget cuts. We 
had to be within our means of support. But at all times, Mr. 
Speaker, we put agriculture as a priority. 
 
To this day this government spends in excess of 10 per cent of 
our budget on agriculture in this province. It would have been 
very easy, Mr. Speaker, for a government to take money from 
agriculture and put it into social programs, where we made 
some very, very tough decision as well. But we chose to support 
basic, fundamental support for agriculture in this province 
because we felt that in any country and in any province, and 
particularly a country like Canada and a province like 
Saskatchewan, agriculture is of utmost importance as an 
industry. 
 
It creates jobs; it creates economic development. It is 
responsible very much for our values and our lifestyle and it's 
an industry that we felt had to be supported at a level. We 
weren't able to save every farmer. And certainly, as the Minister 
of Agriculture, I have talked to more farm families who are 
losing their farms and going through some very painful periods, 
more than I care to remember, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1430) 
 
But we did have a plan; we did come through for our farmers. 
We went out and talked to farmers; we talked to rural 
communities. We came up with a strategy called Ag 2000. And 
to the credit of the people of rural Saskatchewan and to the 
farmers, they — not us — have implemented and begun to 
implement that strategy, have begun to create some jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan, have diversified, have made some very tough 
decisions, and have used great innovation and hard work in 
order to survive. 
 
Now we have a federal budget which cuts very much into 
agriculture. We think, to begin with, that agriculture should not 
be a priority. If you read the budget speech, they talk about 
large cuts in low priority areas, which means that the federal 
Liberals view agriculture as a low priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think that's wrong, that it should not be a low 
priority; it should be a high priority. Canadians have always 
enjoyed a cheap food supply, a plentiful food supply, have 
enjoyed an awful lot of economic activity and jobs as a result of 
the agricultural industry. 
 
Agriculture is certainly one of our bright spots. We have huge 
opportunities going into the next century. And for any country 
to cut back on agriculture, we think is the wrong place to cut — 
particularly to cut agriculture more than you've cut other areas 
of government. And beyond that, we feel this budget cut 
western Canada and Saskatchewan more deeply than it cut the 
general agricultural budget. 
 
So to begin with, we've taken too large a cut in agriculture; and 
secondly, we've taken a very large, disproportionate hit in  



February 28, 1995 

 
511 

agriculture in western Canada and particularly in Saskatchewan. 
As the member opposite pointed out, the Crow benefit, 
something like 56 to 58 or 55 per cent of that comes into 
Saskatchewan. So when you cut, that huge cut impacts . . . more 
than half of that comes right out of Saskatchewan's farm 
pockets. And therefore we don't believe that that is a wise cut or 
a fair cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, beyond that, and any cuts that are made need to be 
made with a plan, with a new plan and a new vision. Mr. 
Speaker, we are not opposed to dealing with deficits and debt. 
This government knows all about deficits and debts and the 
tough decisions that have to be made. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we made cuts, we had a plan and we 
came through with it. We had a plan in health care. We had a 
plan in agriculture. We had a plan in economic development. 
And what we don't see, what we don't see in the federal budget 
in the agriculture, is any sort of a plan. 
 
We see elimination of an historical benefit — one that, as the 
member opposite has pointed out, was a part of Confederation, 
was a part of our vision of a nation from sea to sea. The natural 
trading patterns very much in this country would run north and 
south. We decided to be Canadians, to be a country that was 
tied together east to west with a railroad. We had a national 
dream. And, Mr. Speaker, that has been destroyed by this 
budget. 
 
And worse than that, Mr. Speaker, not only has the dream been 
destroyed, there is no replacement dream. What we see is huge 
cuts. Less than one-quarter of the value of the benefit is being 
paid out — 1.6 billion is less than one-quarter of the present 
value of the Crow benefit. And there's no vision to replace it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don't see a plan to rationalize and make the 
system more efficient. All we see is cuts in the budget, slash 
and burn, and something will rise out of the ashes. Don't worry; 
there will be efficiencies. Mr. Speaker, something will arise out 
of the ashes. Part of what will arise out of the ashes will be 
more farm families losing their farms, more farmers going 
broke, more small communities folding up and blowing away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of that has been taken into consideration. 
Nobody has studied what the effects of this are going to be. 
There is no vision. Certainly some transportation will now start 
to flow north and south. Any country that depends on some 
other country's transportation system to move basic 
commodities to market is asking for trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at some point we will be shipping some grain 
south. We will have to. We'll do what's cheapest. If Canadian 
taxpayers are not prepared to support our farmers, then our 
farmers are not going to carry the Canadian taxpayer. We are 
going to move our grain the cheapest and the fastest way we 
know how. 
 
Some of that will undoubtedly be through a foreign country. 
When the foreign country says, whoops, sorry, we don't want  

your grain this week, then we are going to have huge problems, 
which is going to create even more uncertainties for our farm 
families. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, this Crow benefit, we treat it like . . . we 
look at it like treaties with first nations, like the French 
language and culture rights that they got out of Confederation. 
We very much feel that this is part of why we're in this country. 
It's been a part of our country. A national transportation policy 
is essential to this country, and we have seen this blown away at 
the expense of Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan 
communities. So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I will close my 
remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
certainly like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of this 
motion because I believe it's truly an emergency. 
 
I find it a little strange coming from the opposition benches 
though, being that it was the PC government that first cut the 
WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) by 10 per cent, and 
then of course the Liberals cut it by another 5 per cent, reducing 
the WGTA benefit to $560 million. 
 
I really believe that the Liberal government believed that they 
were set up for . . . the farmers were set up for the complete 
removal of the WGTA benefit. But I tell you now that the 
farmers . . . you underestimated the farm community in this 
province and the farm community will pay you back in the 
polls. 
 
As of August 1 of this year, this province will begin to pay the 
full rate for shipping their grain. This is equivalent to reducing 
the average farm net income by up to 50 per cent. Now, the 
member of Shaunavon, could you take a 50 per cent cut in your 
net income? It's very devastating to our farm community. And 
so I just want you to understand that. 
 
It's a heavy blow to that farm sector struggling to overcome 
some of the very bad times that we've had in the last few years 
in agriculture in this province. Just as we're turning around, 50 
per cent of their net income could be gone. 
 
Imagine this lost income on the communities of Saskatchewan, 
towns like Shaunavon and towns like Tisdale and towns like 
Sturgis. Think of that lost income to the stores in that 
community. You know every store, every garage, will be 
affected. 
 
Combine that cost with branch line abandonment and increased 
trucking and road maintenance and the problems become even 
larger, as I'm sure you're aware. The farmers of Saskatchewan 
and the province as a whole are paying a heavy price for the 
federal budget. 
 
You know much has been made by the federal Finance minister 
about the fairness. You know, we know, that there had to be  



February 28, 1995 

 
512 

cuts and there had to be changes, and some programs had to go. 
But we've said always that fairness had to be first. Regional 
fairness. And there must be a plan. But we see neither fairness 
nor a plan. 
 
We talk about fairness. The WGTA is completely gone and yet 
the dairy subsidies are reduced by 30 per cent. The Maritime 
subsidies, transportation subsidies are gone, but on the other 
hand, 60 per cent is put back into their highway infrastructure. 
Is that fairness? 
 
Over the last decade, Saskatchewan producers have adapted 
with massive changes in what they grow and how they grow it. 
They have diversified, they have changed their crops, and as 
Minister of Highways and Transportation in this government, I 
have grave concerns about the lack of direction by the federal 
government. 
 
Cut first and then plan after. I think that's backwards. I would 
suggest that they should have planned first and then look at 
what they could cut or what they could change to meet that 
plan. You know maybe the old transportation plan was not up 
to date, and perhaps we need a new transportation plan for the 
21st century. But let's have the plan and then let's make 
adjustments accordingly. 
 
The impact of the WGTA on transportation is very interesting. 
The government has not planned any type of vision as to where 
it wants transportation to go. One grave concern is allowing a 
speedy abandonment of light steel and low volume branch lines. 
It eliminates notice and conveyance provisions for expedient 
abandonment. 
 
I want to mention some of the communities that will be affected 
by this — Zenon Park, Arborfield, Big River, Holbein, 
Carragana, Porcupine, Gray, Henribourg, Paddockwood, 
Grayson, Fulda, Middle Lake, just to mention a few. 
 
I want to speak a bit about Arborfield for an example. 
Arborfield, at the end of their light rail line, has an alfalfa 
processing plant. What is it going to mean to that plant? They 
were planning a large expansion, and now no expansion. Do 
they have to move, or do they have to close the doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the effect that the changes to the WGTA, 
and in fact now the speedy abandonment of light rail lines, will 
do to rural Saskatchewan. It eliminates restrictions on incentive 
rates and you can imagine the impact of that. It ends port parity, 
route parity, and the CN adjustment. Provisions will be built 
into the rate-making that will meet railway costs but not 
producer costs. That's also very interesting. 
 
It provides no assurance for competition through running rights. 
They say, well that will come later. Provides no measure to 
ensure the viability of the existing future of short-line railways. 
There's no firm plan on compensation for farmers and 
municipalities that will face the extra costs. There is $300 
million in adjustment package for producers or railways or 
somebody or something. And we're not quite sure about that. 

When do farmers make their plans? Farmers make their plans 
now. They're making their decisions for this spring now — and 
they have to do that. If the federal government was planning to 
terminate the WGTA and deregulate grain transportation, they 
should have at least let the farmers know what the 
transportation would look like so that they could plan. 
 
And if you knew, if the Leader of the Third Party knew, she 
should have certainly been telling the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan so that they could plan. 
 
I represent an area of the province, Mr. Speaker, which will 
bear an even greater burden of these changes to the WGTA. 
Our communities in north-east Saskatchewan are more 
dependent on branch lines than most others. We are further 
from ports. For communities like Chelan and Bjorkdale and 
Arborfield, like I mentioned earlier, and Zenon Park, this is bad 
news indeed. 
 
Costs are being transferred from the railways and the federal 
government directly onto the farmers' backs. These costs are 
well in excess of any buy-out. Costs are being transferred 
directly onto municipal and provincial taxpayers. 
 
If the federal government was intent on eliminating the Crow 
benefit, they should have taken a longer view. They should have 
assured that efficiencies are built in to the system before they 
add the cost to the producers. I'm not talking about efficiencies 
for the benefit of railroads, but efficiencies that would cut the 
shippers' cost, the producers' costs, the costs for the farmers. 
 
The estimated savings to the railways of branch line 
abandonment would be about fifty to a hundred million dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, but it would add millions in shipping costs and 
road costs to producers and municipalities. This is not 
efficiencies; this is just a transfer of costs. 
 
(1445) 
 
The position of this government, Mr. Speaker, is standing for 
the interest of the producers. My department has been working 
with SARM and SUMA and farmers to study the possible 
efficiencies. We have been working on regional transportation 
strategies to develop new ways that municipal governments and 
my department could coordinate their plans. We have worked 
on projects like road-railer to provide options for short-line 
railways. 
 
But how can we react to the budget announcement? How can 
we react to what the federal government is going to do when we 
don't know what they're going to do? It's very hard to provide a 
provincial strategy when we don't know what the rules are 
going to be. It's not good enough for the federal government to 
simply offload the WGTA onto Saskatchewan and walk away 
from their responsibilities. 
 
We are calling on the federal government to take its 
responsibilities about farmers seriously, to consult with the  



February 28, 1995 

 
513 

farmers as our government has done, and lay down its plan, you 
know, that meets the needs of the producer. The Liberal leader 
says farmers are dreaming in technicolor. After these changes, I 
doubt if they could even go to the theatre. 
 
I wonder if she's talked to Mr. Sinc Harrison from SARM and 
Leroy Larsen from the Wheat Pool and Mr. Westby from 
SUMA. I know the article in the paper that the member 
opposite mentioned, they say farmers are devastated. They 
asked for a very reasonable $7.2 billion pay-out that would 
stabilize agriculture at a time that it needs stabilization. What 
did they get? $1.6 billion. 
 
I wonder what the member from Shaunavon, what does he say 
to the producers in his constituency? Does he say or does he tell 
them that they're dreaming in technicolor? 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the federal 
government consider fairness first as we did. And I would ask 
them to give us, give the producers of the province of 
Saskatchewan, give the municipalities and the communities, 
their vision of transportation to the year 2000. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you a little story. There 
were three fellows standing talking. The doctor said, my 
profession was the first here on earth because as you know a rib 
was taken from Adam and Eve was made, and so doctors were 
certainly the first profession on earth. The engineer said, no 
you're wrong. There was chaos everywhere in the universe, 
chaos everywhere. And an engineer had to put it all together. 
And the Liberal politician stood up and said, well who did you 
think created the chaos? 
 
Well the chaos, the chaos is in western Canada and the chaos is 
with farm communities; farmers, communities, and 
municipalities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
with interest that I rise today to speak on this rule 42. And not 
only on my own behalf, but on the behalf of many people with 
whom I've been speaking on this issue. 
 
Canadian agriculture is in fact entering a very interesting phase 
in its long history. And Saskatchewan's agriculture industry has 
a very proud, proud history of adapting to the challenging 
international market-place over and over again. 
 
I happen to believe that Saskatchewan farmers are the best in 
the world and that we're in a fortunate position of having the 
resources, the capability, and the resourcefulness, to meet any 
challenges that will emerge. 
 
It is truly disappointing that with the fiscal situation facing all 
of Canada that changes had to occur in many, many different 
regions of our country. It is also unfortunate that because of 
international trade agreements, that there are changes that have 
come about in Canada directly as a result of things happening  

in other places in the world. 
 
And I happen to believe that most people in Saskatchewan, 
most farmers in Saskatchewan, would far prefer that they not 
require any subsidies of any kind ever. These are profoundly 
proud people. They would simply like things to be in place so 
that they could get the right kind of price for their commodities. 
 
I think that we are quite prepared to rise to the challenge. I do 
wish that there were more than $1.6 billion. I do wish that that 
had been able to be done differently. 
 
And I think it most interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at again the 
myth that is being created by this government. At no time did I 
say that farmers were dreaming in technicolor about their $1.6 
billion. 
 
What I said was, and in response — and they quite know it — 
did I think that they were going to get $7 billion. I said, no 
farmers believed that they would be getting $7 billion. Not one. 
 
People in this province happen to understand across the nation 
what is facing the Canadian economy and they actually want the 
federal government to take the bull by the horns and get this 
province and the nation in a proper, proper fashion, able to be 
able to meet its financial obligations. 
 
It's very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that part of what they're going 
to try to do is to present things that are not factual to the people 
of the province. 
 
Indeed it is $1.6 billion as a one-time pay-out, and I think that is 
too low. Indeed it is going to be triggered as a capital gains 
rather than taxation, and that means that $1.6 billion, because it 
is not taxed, is going to be $2.2 billion. 
 
Do I think $2.2 billion is enough, Mr. Speaker? No I don't. I 
don't think that this equating $2.2 billion is enough either. What 
is interesting is that the upfront value of this actually exceeds 
any long-term phase-out. And that is something that would be 
most interesting to hear from the Minister of Agriculture and 
the Finance minister, who have been in constant consultation 
over this, which I find curious that they all stand up and act as 
though somehow they didn't know anything upon anything that 
was coming down. 
 
Now I believe that there would have been a great preference in 
some kind of phase-out. That's not what people believe who 
wanted to come and do investments in this province. They 
wanted a one-time payment. But I do believe that in some 
instances it might have been better to have a phase-out. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed fact that because of GATT, that was 
not possible. 
 
What would have had to have happened, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there would have had to have been a change to the method of 
payment that would have been GATTable. In other words, 
when people were consulted . . . and there were many who were 
consulted. In fact one group was made up of the following:  



February 28, 1995 

 
514 

SARM; the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; the Manitoba Pool; the 
UGG (United Grain Growers Limited); the Alberta Pool; the 
Alberta Association of Municipal Districts and Counties; the 
Union of Manitoba Municipalities; the western Canadian wheat 
growers; western barley growers; Keystone Agriculture 
Producers; Unifarm, Alberta; Canadian dehydrators association; 
and western Canadian flax growers. 
 
This particular group of producer organizations had been 
consistently advocating in a united voice that certain things be 
reached. What was most interesting, of course, was that they 
didn't want to have some new scheme of method of payment 
worked out when it was going to have to be phased out anyway. 
 
So the one-time pay-out was something that was considered to 
be preferable to changing the method of payment over a short 
term. It is indeed tough. It is very, very tough that people of this 
province are going to have to deal with, the farm families are 
going to have to deal with, a $1.6 billion pay-out and it's going 
to landowners, Mr. Speaker. Most of us, in fact, we have been 
in agreement, unlike the members opposite, we have been in 
agreement that this should have been a payment to producers. 
 
But it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in order for this to be 
non-taxable, in order for it to be considered a capital gain, that 
it had to be paid to landowners. And farm land will indeed drop 
in value. Farm land will indeed drop in value, so the rationale is 
to pay landowners for the decrease in land value. 
 
It's very, very interesting today, Mr. Speaker, to note that they 
really don't want to listen to one particular aspect. In fact the 
Minister of Agriculture, who is rarely allowed to answer 
because the Minister of Finance doesn't want to allow him to . . 
. the Minister of Finance didn't want to answer a very basic 
question. Today the Farm Credit Corporation indicated that it is 
a landowner and it will be receiving payment as a landowner 
and it will pass on what it receives to those who are renting 
from them; that they can either use those monies to purchase 
land or they can use those monies as a reduction in leasing the 
land. 
 
Now I would like to know, when we have the Ag Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan being run by this province, and 
they have more than a million acres of farm land in 
Saskatchewan, why is it that they won't stand up and say they'll 
do the same thing? Why didn't they lead by example this very 
morning? Why wouldn't they have done that before the Farm 
Credit Corporation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why is it that they didn't come out today and say, because we 
are in charge, we in fact are in charge as a province of property 
in civil jurisdiction to re-open any rental agreements if 
institutions refuse to do so, why wouldn't they come out on 
record today and say, we'll do that, Mr. Speaker? If there's any 
lending institution in this province that won't agree to pass on 
these benefits to producers, to those who are renting the land, 
why wouldn't they stand up today in their place and do what 
was in the best interests of the producers in this province? 
 

But they aren't even on record for doing it. They wouldn't even 
respond. The Minister of Agriculture wouldn't even be able . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think there has to be some 
respect for members to be able to speak in this House and I 
think all members should recognize that. The constant 
interruption is simply not called for. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find 
it most interesting the people who want to participate in this 
debate. I'll be most interested in their comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is interesting to look at the following things in our province: 
that the group that is the largest landowner is FCC with 1.5 per 
cent. Of course the province of Saskatchewan ranks in there 
too, Mr. Speaker — .4 per cent for the credit unions, .6 per cent 
for the lending institutions. Thirty-five per cent of land in 
Saskatchewan is rented, Mr. Speaker, and the biggest single 
landowner is FCC. And today it went on record to do the right 
thing. What I would really like to see is the courage of this 
government to put itself on the line and say that it will do the 
right thing as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of faith in Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, land prices are going to 
go down. Land prices are going to go down. And what FCC 
indicated today is they're going to pass on that lessened amount, 
in other words rental fees should be dropped, leasing fees 
should be dropped. It should cost less money for people to be 
able to rent that land. I think that's proper, and I would find it 
most interesting if in fact the members of the official opposition 
don't agree with that stand as well. 
 
Our challenge, any challenge of a government in Saskatchewan, 
is not to get caught up in arguing over internal squabbles as the 
rest of the world passes us by. It's going to be most interesting 
to see what this government has done to place Saskatchewan in 
the best possible position, given these current circumstances. 
 
We have known and known and known — this does not come 
as any big surprise to anybody, Mr. Speaker, least of all the 
Minister of Agriculture and the Premier and the Finance 
minister of this province. I mean where have they been, if they 
didn't think that this was going occur? 
 
And what have they done to place us in the best possible 
position in terms of value added in this province? Why wouldn't 
they want to join with us today and with the official opposition, 
to whom we extended an invitation, when they say they want to 
remove partisanship? Why wouldn't they join with us so we 
could go and make a pitch for the most substantial part of those 
dollars in order to have value added in this province, in order to 
be able to adjust to the best of our ability, in order for 
independent people to buy short-branch lines in this province 
with that $300 million, in order for rural municipalities to ask 
for money so that they in fact could improve road conditions for 
more trucking? 
 
What are they doing to assist this province in being more  



February 28, 1995 

 
515 

innovative, in attracting businesses here who would be 
unwilling to come here if it hadn't been for changes to the 
WGTA? It's most interesting, Mr. Speaker; we'll see in about a 
week or 10 days how they feel, if in fact a certain industry 
comes to this province. 
 
And there'll be one reason why it does, in the multi, 
multimillions of dollars, one reason. Because it'll now make it 
worth its while to come here to create hundreds of jobs and 
hundreds of millions of dollars in being able to process some 
things in the agriculture industry. It'll be most, most interesting 
to see what happens if in fact they try to line up and take some 
credit, Mr. Speaker, when in fact we will know the reason why 
they will be coming here. 
 
Our internal challenge, Mr. Speaker, is to create an environment 
wherein our producers and our industry have the economic 
environment which allows producers and the industry the 
opportunity to take advantage of what the world presents to 
them. We cannot compete in the world economy if our own 
house is not in order. We cannot compete if our economy is 
burdened with huge debts, with a weak currency, with 
unmanageable interest rates, and large, unaffordable 
government bureaucracy which we neither need nor can we 
afford. We cannot afford to put our heads in the sand and hope 
the rest of the world waits for us to catch up. 
 
(1500) 
 
And Mr. Martin's budget is a good first step in creating an 
environment that we need as a nation in order to be able to 
compete in the new economy. Canadian agriculture too must be 
ready. And it is the role of governments to do absolutely 
everything possible to help our producers to adapt to the new 
global realities and to be able to meet any challenges that come 
our way. 
 
It is expected that the Government of Saskatchewan is ready 
with a plan to help our farmers to adjust to this new 
environment, and I'd like to see it. Surely the Minister of 
Agriculture has not been standing idly by, thinking that there'd 
be absolutely no changes in agriculture policy. 
 
In fact I challenge the Minister of Agriculture to table his plan. I 
challenge him to table the vision of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, of how the government will deal with these new 
realities. They knew for months that this was going to occur. 
What have they got in place? 
 
I challenge the Government of Saskatchewan to show the 
people, the people of this province, just what measures it has 
taken with the federal government to ensure that the interests of 
Saskatchewan people have best been served. I challenge the 
government to table its plan to deal with the measures outlined 
in the budget. And I know that this particular Minister of 
Agriculture and his officials have met with the federal 
government to discuss these matters prior to the budget. 
 
I also see and I know that the Premier has met with the federal  

colleagues, and surely the Premier has a plan of action to deal 
with the matter, apart from his normal political grandstanding. 
 
What is the plan that the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Premier of this province have? To do what they did in 1980 and 
run around saying, save the Crow, save the Crow? It didn't help 
them in the 1982 election. And I think they're very much 
misreading the people of this province if they think that we're 
going to buy that all over again. 
 
What actions have they taken to ensure that the interests of 
Saskatchewan have been well served? It would be interesting to 
see the notes on that, Mr. Speaker. What actions have they 
taken to ensure that the federal government measures, in all 
sectors facing Saskatchewan, are equitable, fair, and 
reasonable? They're the Government of Saskatchewan. If they 
don't think they can do that job, there are some of us who think 
we can. 
 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, they have not been sitting around just 
planning their political posture of what was shown this 
morning. That's the best they can do, Mr. Speaker, the very best 
that they can do? Well it's not good enough. The Liberal caucus 
absolutely does not believe that's good enough for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Surely they have a plan that just goes beyond 
their own political position. 
 
The farmers of this province are not interested in this 
government's political posturing. The farmers of Saskatchewan 
want to know what they've been doing, Mr. Speaker, for the last 
few years to ensure that their interests are best represented. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier should be willing to step aside if 
he can't in fact table in this legislature the things that he has 
been doing to ensure that the farm families of this province 
were going to be treated most appropriately in this budget. If he 
hasn't done it, then perhaps we can find others who will. 
 
Now we haven't yet had the opportunity to review in detail 
absolutely every single measure of this federal government. But 
I am indeed meeting on Friday with the Minister of Agriculture, 
the federal Minister of Agriculture. And I pose once again, I 
pose once again that perhaps these individuals would like to 
attend with us. I extend an invitation to the Minister of 
Agriculture; he can meet, in fact, a day earlier. I've extended an 
invitation to the opposition to do the same. 
 
What I find most interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the hostility that's 
taking place here. It's very curious coming from people who 
have devastated rural Saskatchewan. The headline in the 
newspaper today says, "'Devastated.'" Let me tell you what the 
people of Saskatchewan have been telling me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me talk to you about people who are afraid to continue 
living in their homes where their family before them lived and 
their family before that lived. They are afraid to live in rural 
Saskatchewan because of the havoc wreaked on health care by 
this particular government. Ask the people across Saskatchewan 
what it feels like to have fewer and fewer  



February 28, 1995 

 
516 

opportunities, opportunities to be able to remain in one's 
community if you're a young person, to be able to work in 
agriculture when 18,300 jobs have been lost under this 
government's administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ask whether or not they agree that the country could have 
continued to sustain $17 billion of monies going to agriculture 
from the federal government in the last six years — $17 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. And they act somehow like this should be able to 
continue. Why didn't they offer suggestions? Not the status quo 
but things that would deal with today's reality, the things that 
farmers across this province have been dealing with in spite of 
these folks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us in this Assembly have a responsibility to 
represent the best interests of Saskatchewan people, and the 
time for political arguments is long gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm compelled to actually talk about a New 
Democrat is a New Democrat is a New Democrat. What I find 
most interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that in Ontario yesterday it 
states this in The Toronto Star: 
 
 And you couldn't help snickering at . . . (the Ontario 

Minister of Finance's) stern avowal that by 1996 this 
budget would kill 90,000 jobs. 

 
 "By 1996, (this is the quote) 90,000 people in this 

province will not have jobs in this province because of 
this budget," he told a . . . press conference. 

 
 You can't help thinking the reason the New Democratic 

government was able to come up with that figure so 
quickly is because they've got the formula down pat. 
After all, they've had so much practice killing jobs that 
they must have the mathematics pretty well figured out. 

 
 Here's a government that has bludgeoned to death the 

hopes and aspirations of hundreds of thousands of 
workers with job-killing taxes and labor initiatives, and 
they're complaining about the federal Liberals who are 
mere pikers when it comes to forcing people on the 
unemployment rolls. 

 
It states, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Ontario's New Democrats have increased taxes by $4 

billion since they came to power, with increases on 
everything from fishing licences to court fees. Heck (it 
says), this is the government that tried to tax dirt and 
that has so mismanaged the province's economy (to the 
point) that our credit rating has become a laughing 
stock. 

 
Well I guess a New Democrat is a New Democrat is a New 
Democrat, Mr. Speaker. Most interesting, the comments that 
have come out of the New Democratic Party of Ontario, the 
New Democratic Party of British Columbia, on this particular 
federal budget, Mr. Speaker. They both think that they've been  

treated worse than any other place in the country, just as this 
particular government thinks that this place has been treated 
worse than any other place in the country. 
 
It is also most curious, Mr. Speaker, to have listened to the 
Premier of Ontario in his comments about the federal budget. 
They were identical, word for word, to what came out of this 
Premier's mouth on Sunday on national television. 
 
Now I wonder who's talking to whom. Maude Barlow used the 
same words; the Premier of Ontario used the same words. Who 
isn't thinking for themselves, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I challenge this government to table its plans. They should be 
tabling their plans to deal with the measures that were outlined 
in yesterday's budget. And what we are prepared to do as 
Liberals is to continue to do what we have been doing and 
letting people know what we think is in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan. And yes, to take an opposition stand to the 
federal Liberal Party if they think that what they've done is 
unfair. 
 
Yes, we did think it would be dreaming in technicolor for this 
country to be giving $7 billion, given the fiscal situation, to this 
province. But we don't think $1.6 billion is enough. And we do 
understand the things that were done to try to increase this 
dollar amount. 
 
We are prepared to do what is necessary to work in conjunction 
with people in this Assembly, outside of this Assembly, to try to 
do what is necessary to do right by the farm families of this 
province. And we don't want to simply bring people together 
for political posturing, Mr. Speaker. We'd far rather find 
solutions to real problems. 
 
We go on record today for supporting . . . we do not condemn 
the federal government, but we do support any move that will in 
fact bring greater fairness to the people of this province in their 
adjusting to this very serious change that will cause 
extraordinary challenge to farm families in this province. We 
want to be part of the solution, and therefore we will support 
this motion. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I've had 
the pleasure on many occasions rising in this House before to 
speak, and it's always been a pleasure. But today, Mr. Speaker, I 
cannot say this is a happy occasion. I'm saddened, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have to rise in this legislature and debate such an issue. 
An issue that is definitely, as the headline in the Leader-Post 
suggests . . . devastated our farmers, and devastation has been 
rained on them by the federal Liberal government in yesterday's 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of being in my constituency 
yesterday, and quite purposely, I made the opportunity of being 
in a number of coffee shops at the 3:30 mark and soon 
thereafter. And farmers were tuned in to hear the budget 
because they had suspected that they were going to be asked to 
play a part in the deficit reduction of this country. 



February 28, 1995 

 
517 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, farmers in my constituency told 
me time and time again that they feel that they are certainly 
citizens of this country and they want to play a role, they want 
to do their bit in retaining some financial stability to Canada. 
But never, Mr. Speaker, in their wildest dreams did they think 
they would be sold down the creek by the Liberal government 
in Ottawa in the way it has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $1.6 billion financial compensation to the 
Saskatchewan farmer. Not all that, Mr. Speaker, comes to the 
Saskatchewan farmer; only some 56 per cent of it, or something 
like $900 million in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that works out 
to some place in the area of $20 an acre — a one-time pay-out, 
a one-time compensation package. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party suggests that it is a lot more than 
1.6, that it's as much as 2.2 — if you take into consideration the 
tax benefits, etc., etc. Well, Mr. Speaker, not too many farmers 
in my constituency have tax problems. Their problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply survival. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
announcements of yesterday has condemned many of them to 
financial death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party has 
just suggested to us that FCC is going to do the fair thing — 
FCC is going to pass on their portion of the money to their farm 
clients. But are they, Mr. Speaker? Let's take a close look at 
this. 
 
They're saying that their farm clients can benefit from this one-
time pay-out by receiving reduced lease rates. No money, but 
reduce the lease rates. Well, Mr. Speaker, even reduced lease 
rates, in view of the increased freight rates, is not going to allow 
many of my farmers in my constituency to stay on the land. 
 
(1515) 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party says the second option that farmers can use is they can use 
this money towards the purchase of land. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
many farmers in my constituency are leasing land they used to 
own — they used to own. But because of the financial 
conditions of agriculture, they have been forced to turn that 
land back to the FCC in an attempt at some debt reduction. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, does the Leader of the Liberal Party believe 
that this contribution of some $20 an acre is going to be enough 
to offer those farmers the opportunity to buy back that land, in 
light of the fact that they know that their revenue is going to be 
slashed next year by 50 per cent? I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. I 
doubt it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's absolutely correct, Mr. Speaker. If there has been 
anybody in this legislature or anybody in Saskatchewan who 
has been dreaming in technicolor as a result of the federal 
Liberal budget, it has certainly been the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberals. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it absolutely blows my mind in how 
anybody who pretends, at least pretends to have the interests of 
the Saskatchewan family farms and family farm families at 
heart, can find anything credible to say about the federal Liberal 
budget as far as it affects Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
It can't, Mr. Speaker. If you at all have a shred of humanistic 
feelings in your soul for farm families out there who have been 
struggling, who've been struggling for 10 years as a result of 
lack of proper planning by the former Conservative government 
and by the present Liberal governments in Ottawa, and now to 
have pronounced on them this death sentence that means that 
they are going to be forced out of agriculture, forced out of 
agriculture in a most undramatic way because not only are they 
no longer going to be able to survive, but when they do exit the 
industry there's going to be no incentive out there for anyone to 
pick up their holdings and give them a fair return on what assets 
they've been able to accumulate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people have been left to drift in the sea of 
uncertainty with virtually no hope of any meaningful 
compensation, of any meaningful support from the federal 
Liberal government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it clearly indicates, as a long-time friend and 
neighbour and farmer colleague of mine in my constituency, in 
my home community of Danbury — Ben Musey — mentioned 
to me on Sunday in anticipation of what might happen in this 
Liberal budget. He suggested to me at that time, Mr. Speaker, 
that his 50 or 56 years on this earth, and all of them spent in 
Saskatchewan and all of them spent in Canada, he has learned 
one thing and he admits he's learned it the hard way — that 
there is a difference between Conservative governments and 
Liberal governments. Not much difference, but a difference. 
 
I asked him: Ben, what in your opinion is the difference 
between a Liberal government and a Conservative government? 
He said, quite simple, Ron. He said a Conservative government 
will skin you from the top down and a Liberal government will 
skin you from the bottom up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't surprise me at all that virtually 
every farm in Saskatchewan, as a result of this budget, as a 
result of lack of action by the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, and 
by the results of the remarks of the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party, knows that every farmer here has been skinned 
and left out to dry. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I find it a 
pleasure today to rise and join in to this debate. But there's a 
few things that are somewhat disturbing about this entire 
debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is when I watched 
question period earlier today, we had the Minister of Finance 
rise in her place and on several occasions refer to the need to 
have all-party unity and approach a lot of these issues, you 
know, with a great deal of . . . well to join together and make 
sure we accomplish what's best for Saskatchewan people by  



February 28, 1995 

 
518 

working together. 
 
And yet when I read the motion, when I take a look at the 
motion that was brought forward by the official opposition, I 
note that it doesn't really have the same flavour that the 
government was trying to put forward this morning. And 
knowing probably full well that they knew of this motion 
coming forward yesterday, I'm surprised that they wouldn't have 
got some of their flavour into the official opposition's motion. 
 
Because I look at some of this stuff, you know, condemning the 
federal government and all the doom and gloom in the motion 
itself — land values dropping and all the problems that are 
going to arise at closing the branch lines. I find this to be very 
presumptuous on their part. And really, it was in the Leader of 
the Liberal Party's questions today that we asked the 
government if they wouldn't perhaps work in cooperation with 
us and the official opposition. We'd be more than glad to do 
that. 
 
Of course the Finance minister refused to answer those 
questions or to accept that offer. We will say this, is that the 
offer remains as it is. We're more than prepared. The Leader of 
the Liberal Party is more than prepared to sit down with our 
federal counterpart, the Minister of Agriculture for the province 
of Saskatchewan, the official opposition, and try and work this 
through for the best of all the people in Saskatchewan, as it 
was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in your own riding in Moose Jaw. 
 
There was all three parties joined together, I guess one year ago, 
to see what could be done in saving the Moose Jaw air base. 
And I do believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that because of that all-
party unison and cooperation that actually it really led to the 
saving of that air base, and again this year. And that's what 
we're asking for the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan, is 
that perhaps we can once again join together and not come 
forward with so much confrontation, but join together once 
again for the farmers of Saskatchewan, for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my remarks 
I'll be moving an amendment to the motion that will perhaps 
still keep with the flavour of what the government and the 
official opposition would like to have here today, and ourselves 
as well, speaking out for the citizens of the province but in fact 
doing it in such a way that we're not creating confrontation with 
in fact the federal government to whom we are trying to ask for 
more things of. So at the end of my remarks, I'll get into the 
amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, you know, really I'm amazed at the position of the parties. 
When they stand up and put their positions forward, it becomes 
confusing to myself and, I guess, most people in the province. 
Because for one thing, we know that it was the Conservative 
Party, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that for some years, to try and win 
favours at election time, to try and win votes, actually got 
people very dependent upon subsidies, in not only this province 
but other provinces, and in Canada as a whole. And now for the  

Conservative government to be standing up and letting on like 
they're speaking for the people, it really flies in the face because 
they are the ones that have always been talking about having a 
subsidy-free environment in which the farmers and the business 
people could compete. 
 
And really there are some aspects . . . there's a lot of what's 
happened in the federal government's budget that allows this to 
happen. So I mean obviously they're speaking out of both sides 
of their mouth. 
 
Now I recall over those same period of years when they were 
bringing forward a lot of these things to make farmers 
dependent on programs, it was the government across that 
actually tried to out-bid them on many occasions. In fact I recall 
the home improvement program that the Conservative 
government came out with. Well on the other side of that was 
the New Democrats of the day coming out with the 7-7-7 plan. 
And I think they arrived at that because there was only seven 
members in the House at that time for the New Democrats, and 
I guess that's the only reason they could have jumped at that 
number. But once again, they were bidding for the vote. 
 
And also at that same time, I remember there was a Mr. Allen 
Engel, he was the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and 
the member from Elphinstone, they were touring the province at 
that time. They thought they had the Conservatives on the 
ropes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they come out with a cute little 
slogan: we're going to have cash on the dash. And I know that 
you remember that one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just by the smile 
upon your lips. 
 
But in fact it was the New Democrats of the day that were 
continuously saying, what we have to do is pressure them to get 
more billions out of Ottawa. Well let's sit back and take a look 
what this has really done. 
 
At this point we have a federal deficit that is absolutely a 
monster. And at some point we knew, I guess, all members of 
the House, everyone in Canada knew that this had to be dealt 
with. At this point, I think if you take a look at the federal 
budget overall, it's exactly what was needed for Canada. There 
are some specifics that are going to be painful, and that's what 
we're talking about here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What can 
we do on some of the specifics of the budget that perhaps will 
ease some pain or change some of the stuff that's happening. 
 
But yet, I take a look at the New Democrats and in fact they're 
standing up talking about how terrible the federal government 
is. I can only think, isn't that like the pot calling the kettle black. 
Here's a government that since they've been in power, October 
1991, have used retroactive legislation on numerous occasions. 
They used it against the farmers. And I'll tell you if you think 
the farmers, if you think the 14,000 farmers that were in the 
rink in Saskatoon are going to forget what you people have 
done, I'll tell you they're not. They're not going to forget for a 
moment. You people have used retroactive legislation against 
the farm families of Saskatchewan, and it's going to cost you at 
the polls. You bet it is. 



February 28, 1995 

 
519 

You know, since they've made the changes to the GRIP 
program, Mr. Speaker, and all the changes, the negative 
changes to the crop insurance program, they've stood in the 
House and they've given several speeches, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
on how . . . And in fact they've come out with an Ag 2000 
booklet, a nice glossy booklet on how they want to take the 
farmers in Saskatchewan and take them somewhere . . . well, to 
be more self-reliant, diversified. I should have brought a copy 
of the book in here. But it's exactly what the federal government 
is saying today, and they're having to do it because international 
trade rules are saying that things have got to change. 
 
And yet your own booklet, and your own Ag 2000 booklet is 
going to fly in the face of what you're saying here today. You're 
saying that people should be more self-reliant. And then you 
come in and you want to bring in motions that are saying, no, 
no, no. We want more subsidies. There's nothing wrong with 
lots of subsidies. We're just going to go ahead and break 
governments . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That isn't a subsidy. It's what held 
Canada together. It's going to change the whole face of Canada 
and Saskatchewan. It's no subsidy; that was an agreement and 
confederation. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you could have 
this member hush up a little, I'll continue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I take a look at crop insurance 
there's another one where this government has really fallen 
down. They have made the changes to crop insurance. They 
have pulled away from supporting the farmers of Saskatchewan 
to the point where we now have 70 per cent, 70 per cent of the 
farm acres in Saskatchewan are uninsured. And it's because of 
the changes of GRIP, and it's because of the changes of crop 
insurance. And I notice in this budget that you just brought 
down, that you've just brought down, you've cut another $8 
million out of the crop insurance budget. 
 
You know what that tells me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they 
expect, their own projections are telling them that there's going 
to be a lot less people involved in the program. There's going to 
be a lot less acres insured than last year, and those 70 per cent 
figures were from last year. But they expect yet another drop. 
 
And I asked the agriculture Minister one day . . . I saw him out 
in the hallway, and I asked him, you know, are you not aware of 
the fact that we could have a serious drought here this summer. 
So I said, what I'll do, I'll warn you right now that in fact, if you 
don't make some positive changes to the crop insurance 
program to try and fix some of the mistakes that you have made 
in the past, that this is going to come around to haunt. It is 
really going to come around to haunt. You're going to bankrupt 
farmers. It's people that are really left to . . . not the market-
place. I mean these farmers in Saskatchewan, they're innovative. 
I'll tell you, if anyone can make it in tough times, it's them. 
 

But one thing they can't control are things like the weather, the 
government. The government is worse than locusts on them. 
But there are things that is beyond their control. So what they've 
asked for is not subsidies. I don't hear people saying we want 
subsidies. Now this is what you're telling us today, but I don't 
hear people say, no, we have to have some subsidies. 
 
What they say is leave us alone. Leave us try and become the 
best business people, agri-business people, that we can be. But 
make sure that there's some basic programs in place to ensure 
that we can exist, given there's factors that are beyond our 
control. You took those . . . 
 
(1530) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. It appears that we have 
a motion before the House that members are very excited about 
wanting to be involved in, and I'd ask members to take their 
turn and enter their remarks on the record and allow the 
member for Shaunavon to make his remarks undisturbed. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
bringing them to order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. We also don't need the speaker 
to be commenting on the ruling of the Chair. I'll just ask the 
member for Shaunavon to proceed with the debate. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy, Deputy Speaker, I 
believe it is. 
 
However, to carry on further, Mr. Speaker. This government 
too, when I look . . . You know, here they are today saying that 
they're out there for the farmers; they really want to do as much 
as they can. And if you take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 
budget, under Ag and Food, you will notice that once again 
administration has been going up. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the programs are going down. Crop 
insurance is down; they've eliminated the FeedGAP (feed grain 
adjustment program). . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I'm wondering if it 
might be appropriate for the member to address the motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the member wishes to raise 
a point of order, and I've been listening to the member for 
Shaunavon. I believe he is in the general subject area of the 
motion and he understands the motion. And I will ask . . . 
Order. I will ask the member for Shaunavon to guide himself by 
the wording of the motion. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
that's what I will do. That's what I'm trying to do, is address the 
viability of Saskatchewan farmers and what's happened over the 
past several months or a few years. 



February 28, 1995 

 
520 

And in fact even last Friday, and I raised it in the House, the 
fact that since 1991 we've lost 18,300 jobs in agriculture alone 
right here in this province. And I would like to know what that 
government is going to do in regards to those 18,300 jobs. You 
can't on one hand make all these arguments that you want 
subsidies for farmers without knowing somewhere where 
agriculture as a whole is going. And really that's what I'm 
saying. 
 
Now I know that . . . I guess you could get into some semantics 
and play games. And I think that was another thing I found 
disappointing today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I heard our 
provincial Minister of Agriculture stand in his place and say 
that they actually had a solution. And what they would do, they 
would domesticate the subsidies. 
 
Well, you know, I think if you were to actually go out into rural 
Saskatchewan and ask the people, well is this what people 
really want; is this what you want; do you want us to play 
games with the semantics of subsidies? They're saying, no we 
don't need the subsidies. What we need is a level playing field. 
What we need is access to markets. What we need is to be the 
best that we can be. 
 
To play games with subsidies — they're just missing the boat. 
You're not with it at all. In fact a little forward thinking would 
have solved a lot of the problems. 
 
Last night the Minister of Highways was in and I was 
questioning him on what his department — and we're talking 
about departments with lots of staff; millions and millions of 
dollars of budget — what have you planned? As a long-term 
plan what are you doing? What have you decided that . . . You 
know, this is coming down, there's international trade rules that 
we all knew about, we knew this was going to come to this at 
some point in the very near future, so what has your department 
done to forward plan? 
 
I mean surely the Minister of Transportation would have 
somebody. Because I noticed in that budget that policy and 
planning — I think it was subvote 6, policy and planning — 
increased salaries and full-time equivalents, staffing has 
increased, but yet on preservation and maintenance, that 
decreased. So I can only assume that they've hired more people 
to do some policy work. It's right in their own documents. 
 
So I'm asking, what have you done — what have you done, 
knowing full well that there's going to be some changes to the 
WGTA? Well his answer was, well we haven't done anything 
because Ottawa didn't tell us what to do yet. 
 
Well I'll tell you something. The farmers are going to tell you 
what to do and they're going to tell you real soon. If you can't 
take your own department and do a little planning and do a little 
forward thinking, and knowing full well that something was 
coming at you — same with the Minister of Agriculture. They 
like to stand up in the House and say, well we haven't heard 
from Ottawa. We've got over half the farmers in Canada right 
here within our provincial boundaries. Shouldn't you show a  

little leadership? Shouldn't you? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, changes to the WGTA is not a 
surprise. They knew they were coming. Everyone knew they 
were coming because of the rules of GATT, because of the 
international trade rules. You can't send your Economic 
Development minister all over Europe, Mexico, Cuba, asking 
him to fly with a bunch of staff all over the world to do some 
trading, and then not respect trade rules. Obviously. 
 
Now there's a few things that are of great concern to us. And as 
the Liberal leader mentioned earlier, it'll be how this all affects 
the short lines, the branch lines, how the $300 million of 
transitional money gets paid out. And that offer is still there. If 
these other two parties will just work with us, meet with the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, perhaps we can work through 
this for the best interests of the farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think enough has been said on this issue by me, because I see 
so many of the members opposite are getting nervous and of 
course wanting to get up and speak on this. So at this point, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I will move an amendment to the motion, and 
the amendment is as follows. It's moved by myself, seconded by 
Anita Bergman, Regina North West . . . the member from 
Regina North West, sorry. I apologize for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member from Regina North West: 
 
 That all the words after "that" be deleted and the 

following substituted: 
 
 In light of the elimination of the Crow benefit, this 

Assembly make an all-party representation to the federal 
Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food in support of all 
Saskatchewan farm families, asking the Minister to 
ensure that the effects of eliminating transport subsidies 
on branch lines be minimized and that the federal 
government assist in the promotion of diversification 
and value added processing. 

 
I so move. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that's a bit of a bizarre amendment in light of 
the facts, I think. It's almost as bad as the johnny-come-lately 
Tories standing up for the Crow. Quite amusing, but maybe 
never too late. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I listened to the Leader of the 
Liberal Party and the last member who spoke, it reminds me of 
one of my favourite old sayings: if you throw a stone to the dog 
and the dog barks, you know you hit the dog. And that's exactly 
what this motion has done to the Liberal Party today. They were 
yelping over there, trying to put on a bravado front, trying to 
run at the Saskatchewan government, when they know all the 
while this hurts very deeply not only the Liberal Party, but every 
man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I know that I give 
the Liberals credit for having intestinal fortitude. Because I can  



February 28, 1995 

 
521 

remember back a number of years ago, when the present 
Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale, was working for the then 
minister of Transportation, Otto Lang, as a ministerial assistant, 
started the process, followed by Mr. Pepin, a Liberal. 
 
And then of course we had the 10 years of Tories that really 
wanted to do it, but they couldn't quite get up the nerve to do it. 
So they just kind of chinked away at the armour and reduced, 
Mr. Speaker, reduced the Crow benefit year after year after 
year. 
 
But then here comes good old Mr. Goodale, charging back, 
coming to finish the job they started 20 years ago. And it only 
took him a year to do it, to destroy the infrastructure support 
system in Canada and Saskatchewan that feeds our nation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I find it vile that the members of the Liberal 
Party might stand up today and support Mr. Goodale, who's the 
real problem. Can't you imagine, I'm listening to the radio this 
morning, and I heard Mr. Martin saying, oh, that Mr. Goodale, 
he's a tough person to bargain with. 
 
Well can't you imagine Mr. Goodale with Mr. Martin in a 
headlock? Mr. Goodale says, they need 7 million; no, get a little 
lower; they need 7 million; no, we'll only give them 1.6 billion, 
rather . . . 7 billion. This tough negotiator, Mr. Goodale, 
wrestling Mr. Martin down to $1.6 billion from 7 billion. Great 
guy, great defender of agriculture, great defender of farm 
programs in Canada. Can't you imagine it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, at least I give the Liberals credit for 
having intestinal fortitude, because they in a one-year period, 
finished off what the Tories tried to do in 10 years but couldn't 
do because they didn't quite have the “you know what I mean” 
to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion . . . I read the motion talking about the 
100 per cent cut, the $1.6 billion. I'm surprised the Leader of 
the Liberal Party and her member from Shaunavon barely 
touched upon it. But you know what they talked about? — 
Moose Jaw, CFB (Canadian Forces Base) Moose Jaw. 
 
Well I'll tell you, it's grasping at straws — that's a good thing. 
But I'll tell you we're going to be sick of hearing about CFB 
Moose Jaw because that's the only good thing they got to talk 
about. 
 
And is that going to help the farm families? Is that fair to 
Saskatchewan, fair to the rest of Canada? When our 
transportation rate gets cut to zero and the other components of 
agriculture in Canada, in eastern Canada especially, only get 30 
per cent cut, I think it is not fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another point that they put forward is, well, GATT 
made me do it. It's like the devil made me do it, only GATT 
made me do it. Well I ask the member from Shaunavon and his 
leader to stand in their place and show me where in the GATT 
agreement it said that this subsidy had to be eliminated 
completely. Period. Where did it say that? When they say  

GATT made me do it, Mr. Speaker, that is not the truth. 
 
It's a clearing of the smokescreen they've been putting over this 
province for years and years while trying to . . . and as the 
previous government, Conservative government, did, because 
they wanted to get at their economic recovery through the farm 
community in western Canada — a land-locked community that 
relied on an old agreement that made producing grain in this 
country viable because of our distance from port. That's what 
they did. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members opposite, I want 
to ask Mr. Goodale, I want to ask Mr. Goodale about the banks. 
In the budget they said the banks were going to get . . . have to 
pay about a hundred million dollars. They were going to get 
those big, bad banks — a hundred million dollars between all 
the banks in Canada. You know what that would amount to? 
Not very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But listen. When they go to make the payment to the farmer, or 
to the landowner rather, not the farmer, to the landowner, let's 
take a couple of questions. The banks alone have about 700,000 
acres. They're the landowner. So if you equate about $20 an 
acre to 700,000 acres, that's what? — $14 million. 
 
(1545) 
 
Is that money going from the taxpayers of Canada to the banks? 
Not to the people who need it to produce the product. 
 
And what about section 178 of the Bank Act, Mr. Speaker? 
Under section 178, this payment could automatically go to the 
banks without the person who actually is farming the land even 
knowing about it. 
 
What about all the agreements that lenders have made farmers 
sign as they've gone over the last number of years, where they 
say any payments coming to the producer or the owner goes to 
the bank. Add that on, Mr. Member from Shaunavon. Did you 
think of telling Mr. Goodale these things if he consulted you 
and your leader? And if he did, why didn't he do something 
about it? Because first of all there was no plan. 
 
So my point here, Mr. Speaker, is maybe this is another 
smokescreen — the hundred million dollars taxation on the big 
bad banks slipped through the back door, through section 170 
of the Bank Act, through the 700-and-some thousand acres that 
the banks own, and through signed agreements that the banks 
have made farmers sign — that they will get any payment 
coming from government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They cut a deal. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — They cut a deal. Precisely. As my colleague 
from Lloydminster said, I think there could have been a deal 
cut. 
 
But the point is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why? Why would a 
Minister of Agriculture who is from Saskatchewan, despite the  



February 28, 1995 

 
522 

fact that he worked for the minister of Transport who began the 
process under a Liberal government many years ago, why 
would he would want to take this away, this advantage, this 
natural advantage away from the farm families of 
Saskatchewan? The agreement was put there specifically, 
specifically to aid the farmers in getting their grain to market. 
 
Now the only reason I can answer that question . . . the only 
way I can answer that question, Mr. Speaker, is that our 
Minister of Agriculture, and I'll say our Liberal Minister of 
Agriculture, from Saskatchewan, has copped out. Wasn't strong 
enough to stand up to Mr. Martin when Mr. Martin says, well 
I'm going to cut the budget. But I'm going to cut 30 per cent in 
eastern Canada, but I'm going to cut 100 per cent in western 
Canada. When the Minister of Agriculture, who's from western 
Canada, didn't have the gumption to stand up and say no, that is 
not fair. 
 
And I ask the member from Shaunavon and the Liberal leader 
why they weren't there. 
 
And now they come to this House, Mr. Speaker, they come to 
this House say, oh join with us and we'll march to Ottawa hand 
in hand and we'll go tell Mr. Goodale and we'll go tell Mr. 
Chrétien that they've done a bad thing. Well johnny-come-
lately, I think, johnny-come-lately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've been in this House now for a number of 
weeks. We've not heard a peep out of the Liberal Party on what 
potentially could have come in this budget — not one word. 
But after the fact, after the fact, they come charging to the fore, 
saying well let's go to Ottawa. That's very, very, very 
hypocritical. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go into some of the impact of 
what's going to happen here when the WGTA ends on August 
1, 1995. Just think about it. 
 
I'm a farmer. My neighbours have their seed, a lot of their seed 
plans . . . seed bought or their plans made. Now this has thrown 
that into chaos. They're going to have to go back and say okay, 
what am I going to do? This is going to end. Do I have to, you 
know, change my seeding intentions? Do I have to again go and 
spend money on buying new seed because I have to change my 
intentions; spending more money? That's a possibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this allows for the speedy abandonment of light 
steel and low volume branch lines — just bang. It eliminates 
notice and conveyance provisions to expedite abandonment; 
speeds up the process. This is in one foul swoop, Mr. Speaker, 
the most devastating change that rural Saskatchewan has ever 
seen. And I said that, and we have said that, for years and years 
and years that if this were to happen, it's going to change the 
face of Saskatchewan so rapidly that it's going to make your 
head spin. 
 
It eliminates restriction on incentive rates. Eliminating 
restriction on incentive rates leads to confidential rates. 
Confidential rates where the producer . . . or the shipper and the  

railway will enter into an agreement and no one will know what 
the rate is. So what that does, it directly influences the price of 
grain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are issues that the majority of people in 
Saskatchewan have known for years will be devastating to the 
rural economy. And the good old Mr. Goodale, the 
Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture for the federal 
government, a good old Liberal, he destroyed them. 
 
This ends port parity, road parity, and CN (Canadian National) 
adjustments, something else that's been predicted. Provisions 
will be built in to rate-making that will meet railway costs they 
say. Well the last time I checked, I never really did know what 
the railway costs were because they won't expose the costs. So 
this says provisions will be built in to meet railway costs. Who's 
to say what the costs are? 
 
Under review regulated system, no one will know what the 
costs are. It will be, pay what I ask you to pay or don't move 
your grain. And this provides no measure, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure the viability of existing or future short lines. This will be 
a straight dump onto the backs of the province again, on the 
backs of short-line railways. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to end off by saying . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I want to keep going by saying . . . This 
morning the Liberal leader was out in the hallway talking to the 
press. And you know, Mr. Speaker, some things I believe and 
some things I don't believe, and I didn't believe this until I read 
it. Now the Liberal leader was asked a question about 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, their appearance at a news 
conference with SARM, with SUMA, and with the Premier. 
 
Now I don't care what anyone thinks of the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool or SUMA or SARM or their leaders — everybody's 
entitled to their opinion. But in that scrum, that press scrum, the 
Leader of the Liberal Party insinuated that the president of 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was bought, was bought by the 
Government of Saskatchewan in a trade-off for passage of a 
Bill that is in Saskatchewan Wheat Pool's interests. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, everyone is entitled to their opinion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This is the new politics. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — But for a leader. . . This is the new politics, 
exactly, as my colleague says. Can you remember, this is the 
new politics? For the leader of a provincial public political 
party to stand up and accuse the leader of the largest farm 
organization in Canada of being bought, begs the question of 
integrity — begs the question of integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have seen her talk about civil servants like that 
time and time again. I've heard her talk about other people in 
the communities. But, Mr. Speaker, this is the depths, the 
bowels, of no integrity. I can't believe that to be true, but it is, as 
I read it. 
 



February 28, 1995 

 
523 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end up by saying that this amendment to 
this motion, I will not be supporting. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Will not be supporting, simply for one thing: 
there is no integrity in the Liberal Party. There is no integrity, 
and any motion . . . amendment that they put forward, even if it 
may look like it might be right, there is no integrity so I will not 
accept. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a few 
moments to respond to the amendment proposed by the Leader 
of the Liberal Party. Mr. Speaker, to have listened to the 
member who is representing the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, to 
listen to the Liberals on this federal budget debate, Mr. Speaker, 
would leave anybody in this province rather puzzled to try to 
figure out whether they're standing on their left foot, on their 
right foot, or turning around, or whether they're trying to run 
and hide, or whether they're trying to go forwards or backwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you just read even the first portion of the 
amendment, it says, in light of the elimination of the Crow 
benefit. Right there they admitting that . . . and admitting it . . . 
either they should be admitting it with shame that the Crow 
benefit is gone. 
 
Where were they in the last month before this? Where were they 
in the month before this talking about the Crow rate? Now all 
of a sudden they want to get back in the tent with the people 
that have stood for the Crow rate, for the keeping of the Crow 
rate. Now they want to get back into the tent because they know 
the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan 
are dead against them, that they feel that they have been 
abandoned by the Liberal Party. They want to get underneath 
the tent and say, well let's go back together and plead to the 
federal minister that somehow he might not be so tough on us. 
And at the same time, try to divert some of the cost over to the 
provincial or to the local levels. 
 
They cannot get away with that, Mr. Speaker; it's simply not 
fair. Somehow or other the Liberal leader and her new disciple 
over there wants to get back on track with the Saskatchewan 
farmers, and we will not allow them to do it. We are not going 
to support this motion. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader had her opportunity to 
make comments to Mr. Goodale. We know now that that failed; 
we know that Mr. Goodale failed; and we're going to vote 
against this particular amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:59 p.m. until 4:04 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 
 

Haverstock Bergman McPherson 
— 3 

Nays 
 

Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 
Anguish Johnson Atkinson 
Kowalsky Cunningham Carson 
Mitchell Penner Upshall 
Hagel Koenker Lorje 
Lautermilch Crofford Murray 
Hamilton Draper Serby 
Sonntag Flavel Roy 
Cline Scott Kujawa 
Stanger Kluz Harper 
Keeping Jess Langford 
Neudorf Martens D'Autremont 
Toth Britton  

— 38 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think today is a 
very interesting day in the light of agriculture and the role that 
the federal government has played in providing their budget 
yesterday. 
 
The interesting thing that I think occurs is that this discussion 
has taken place over the last 30, 35 years in how the Crow 
should be paid to producers. And so many times we have talked 
and we've debated about how it should be done, and many 
times we have disagreed on how it should be done. But there is 
one thing we have not disagreed on, and it is how much should 
be paid to producers in the province of Saskatchewan or in 
western Canada for what the Crow value was. 
 
And I have debated this issue with ministers of Agriculture 
from across the province and nationally. I have debated this 
issue on many occasions, and I have come to the conclusion 
that this is, in my view and I believe in the view of grain 
producers in the province of Saskatchewan, an entitlement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what we have, what we have today is an erosion of that 
entitlement, an entitlement that went back for at least 80 years, 
Mr. Speaker, to a benefit that accrued to western Canada that 
was, I believe, an entitlement. An entitlement, Mr. Speaker, was 
an agreement that was reached between the agriculture 
production and producers in western Canada as a national 
policy in the early 1900s. And now we have the federal 
government of today throwing it out the window. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is very, very serious. In terms of an 
economic benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, the value of 
the Crow is a significant negative, Mr. Speaker, and we are 
going to suffer for this for a long time. And that is why we have 
to begin to do some very serious thinking about what we do in 
the future. 
 
Now I don't believe that people in Saskatchewan or in Alberta  



February 28, 1995 

 
524 

or in Manitoba ever wanted to have the value of the Crow 
eroded. They were in disagreement about how it should be paid, 
but not that the erosion of the Crow should take place. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have, in this province, seen 
that. We've seen it happen by a Liberal Minister of Agriculture 
from the city of Regina from the province of Saskatchewan. We 
have seen an erosion of the Crow and the value of the payment 
to western Canada. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is a 
serious indictment on that minister, and I believe that that is 
something that we should never ever allow the people of this 
province to forget. 
 
We have had, Mr. Speaker . . . we are being forced now, Mr. 
Speaker, to do things in five months that have been discussed 
over the last forty years. We are going to have to do a number 
of very serious things. And I made a list of them here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The first one we're going to have to do is we're going to have to 
rationalize our rail line in the next year or so. That's what's 
going to take place. We're going to rationalize our rail line in a 
way that, Mr. Speaker, is going to cause serious devastation in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And it's going to impact in local 
communities all over the province. 
 
The second thing we're going to have to do is rationalize 
variable rates in this province. And do we have any 
commitment on the part of the federal Minister of Transport or 
the federal Minister of Agriculture where this rationalization is 
going to have any kind of sense? Have we had any indication, 
either from this government in the province of Saskatchewan or 
in the federal Government of Canada, where the rationalization 
of the regulatory body that's going to control and monitor the 
rates of transportation for western Canada? No we have not. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the second thing that we're going to 
have to rationalize in the next six months. 
 
The third thing that I believe we're going to have to rationalize, 
Mr. Speaker, is the community costs. We are going to have 
social changes in this province, the like of which we have never 
seen before. The people moving into Canada and the people 
moving into Saskatchewan in the early 1900s was a change in 
the social structure of this country and of this province. And 
today, Mr. Speaker, we are going to witness a serious social 
change, and we have no idea which way it's going to go. 
 
The fourth thing, Mr. Speaker, that we're going to have to 
rationalize at a serious cost to the people of Saskatchewan and 
particularly to the major grain producers of which we are 
shareholders, Mr. Speaker, is the elevator system. That is 
another thing where we're going to have to rationalize in the 
next six to eight months in order to understand what we're 
going to be doing, and how they're going to operate with a basis 
of different rates for different communities in this province. 
 
The fifth thing, Mr. Speaker, that we're going to have to 
rationalize through the Government of Saskatchewan, through 
the municipal governments, is our road cost. We're going to  

have to seriously look at how those are going to be impacted by 
the very changes that we're talking about here — very, very 
significant, I believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Down in the south-west we had transportation of grain into the 
United States over the past year, and there has been serious, 
serious problems with the road network into the United States 
because of the major transportation impact that was there. 
 
The sixth thing, I believe, is we're going to have to rationalize 
some of the agreements that we have with United States. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, we have only a tip of the iceberg. What 
we're going to do is we're going to say, well we're going to 
control the amount of grain that moves east and west and not 
allow it to move south, because south is cheaper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're going to have to have a serious look at how 
we rationalize agreements with United States, because if 
farmers on the southern part of Saskatchewan or the prairie 
basin have to deliver their grain to Churchill, Thunder Bay, or 
Montreal, or Prince Rupert, they're going to decide which is the 
cheapest. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, has to allow us an opportunity to deliver 
to United States, which for us is going to be cheaper. It won't be 
for the northern communities, but it definitely will be for the 
south. And we need to have some assurance that there is going 
to be some reasonable rationalization of that. 
 
Number seven, Mr. Speaker, we're going to have to rationalize 
an economic opportunity in this province the likes of which 
we're only on the doorstep. And I want to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the members of this Assembly, these things are 
not things that have been thought out by the federal Minister of 
Agriculture and I don't believe they have been thought out by 
the provincial Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Rationalizing the economies and economics of the things that 
are going to have to transpire in manufacturing and processing 
in this province are, I believe, not even thought about or 
contemplated, and $300 million that he has in a transition fund 
isn't even going to come close. Because I don't believe that the 
volume of dollars paid that would have been $7 billion into the 
agreement of the Crow and its value to Saskatchewan — that 
would have had difficulty compensating in making 
manufacturing go in the province of Saskatchewan. This is 
going to be devastating. 
 
The eighth item, I believe, that's going to have to be rationalized 
in this whole debate, Mr. Speaker, is the pooling of the cost of 
the transportation of the grain from Thunder Bay to Montreal. 
We have no idea, Mr. Speaker, on an annualized basis what that 
cost is to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
I don't believe that we need to have any time . . . I don't believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that we need to have a Liberal cabinet minister of  



February 28, 1995 

 
525 

Transportation and Agriculture decide for us what that should 
be. And, Mr. Speaker, if we don't have a way that we can access 
all of the world markets by all of the transportation methods 
that we have available to us, we are going to be forced, Mr. 
Speaker, forced to transport our grain through the Lakehead. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to cost anywhere from 140 to 
250 millions of dollars to the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is over and above the 
cost of the Crow loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've outlined eight different rationalizations that 
are going to have to occur. And if you asked this of anyone, Mr. 
Larsen or anyone in Sask Wheat Pool, or you ask anyone in 
UGG, I think I would only have touched the tip of the iceberg, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have had very, very serious concerns about how it should be 
done, Mr. Speaker. And I believe what we should have first and 
foremost entrenched in the things that we were going to do is 
established what we were entitled to, Mr. Speaker. And we have 
fallen very far short of what we're entitled to in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This isn't even what Saskatchewan farmers 
should be entitled to. This is probably, Mr. Speaker, what the 
Manitoba farmers should have been entitled to, and we should 
have had twice as much as that, and that would have been a 
very significant benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I will be supporting this motion 
as a part of the reason for being here and for doing the things 
right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan need 
to have an opportunity to have the Minister of Agriculture of 
Canada listen to them, the Minister of Transport listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I don't believe they have. They've 
unilaterally made decisions, and I don't think it's the right thing 
to do. 
 
I could go on and talk about how the provincial government set 
the tone for the federal government to do that. They took away 
the GRIP contracts from farmers, and what did the federal 
government do? They said, well if the provincial government 
can take away GRIP from farmers, then maybe they wouldn't 
even mind us taking away the Crow. 
 
And so what we have had, Mr. Speaker, is one thing after 
another give a significant negative impact to the people of 
Saskatchewan. What they also did, Mr. Speaker, was they took 
away the premiums that had been generally entitled to by the 
farmers; they took that away from them too. They took the 
provincial share away and then the federal government said, 
okay, me too. And what have we got? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they took $300 million out of that premium and 
now we're getting a transition fund from the federal government 
of $300 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, that's our own money. That 
is our own money. And that was owed to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and now all of us in western Canada have to 
share that. That's the type of Liberalism that we have in Canada  

today. And that is why I will be not supporting the decisions of 
the federal government in doing what they're doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, this motion talks about the 
kinds of things that are important for the people of 
Saskatchewan, its impact, and I have only touched the tip of the 
iceberg in relating to this Assembly on how the people of the 
province feel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting this and hoping that 
everyone will have the courage to support it, including the 
Liberal members of this legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
for your time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to speak at length, although this 
motion certainly justifies a great deal of discussion and debate. 
But I think much of what I had intended to say has already been 
said by members on all sides of the House. 
 
Yesterday's budget, Mr. Speaker, was indeed a budget which, 
for western Canada and Saskatchewan in particular, can be 
categorized as a budget of high unfairness and high uncertainty, 
particularly because of the motion which has been presented by 
the members opposite. It is an unfair act to do away with the 
Crow rate and to do away with it in the circumstances in which 
the Liberals have done. 
 
All the while in the negotiations with farm organizations and 
governments who were pleading with them, basically, that the 
Crow rate should be retained, the government took the position 
in Ottawa that if it was to go, as a bare minimum there would 
be a buy-out of $2.5 billion. It was stated, Mr. Speaker, by all 
the farm organizations and individuals, by governments, that 
2.5 billion was a fraction of the value of the Crow rate 
estimated to be about $7 billion. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, we have woken up to the cold 
reality of a new day in Saskatchewan where the Crow rate is 
gone 100 per cent in exchange for $1.6 billion, not $2.5 billion, 
which amounts, Mr. Speaker, to less than one-quarter of the 
total value of the Crow rate. Less than a quarter of the total 
value of the Crow rate. 
 
The Premier of the province of Alberta and this government 
have had our differences about the issue of the method of 
payment on the Crow rate. But the one issue which I think it's 
safe to say most western Canadian people of all ideologies 
subscribe to, is that if the Crow was to be done away with, there 
needs to be a compensation figure to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan which is commensurate with the loss to the 
region. And that figure is in that order of $7 billion. You can 
therefore imagine the shock, the sense of dismay, the high sense 
of anxiety which is attached to the announcement of yesterday 
that the figure is $1.6 million. 



February 28, 1995 

 
526 

Mr. Speaker, this transportation subsidy is gone as of August 1, 
1995. In exchange, farmers will receive, according to the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, about $20,000 on average. 
Those are going to be paid only to the landowners, as is 
currently articulated the policy. That'll be it. And we will see 
from this, Mr. Speaker, a high transition, as my friend, the 
member from Morse, talked about — a transition in the 
reorganization of rural western Canadian life. 
 
From rail to trucking with the commensurate costs of larger 
trucks, the additional burden of highway systems and 
infrastructures, the trading patterns of rural Saskatchewan 
dramatically affected as branch lines in the consequence are 
going to be eliminated. And eliminated not in the best interests 
of rural Saskatchewan, but eliminated in the interests of the 
railway companies. 
 
And to add insult to injury, we're now seeing the national 
dream, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian National Railways, up on the 
privatization block on top of all of this. Somehow, it is argued 
by the federal government that if you can do away with the 
Crow and privatize the CN, and when the CN becomes now a 
private, for-profit corporation, that in that circumstance the 
farmers are somehow going to be spared anything but the 
highest of rates in a situation with reduced lines, a profit 
motivation, and a disruption to our towns, villages, and our 
cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue which affects all of Saskatchewan. 
This is not a farmer-only issue. This is an all-Saskatchewan 
issue. This is a working person’s issue. This is a business 
person’s issue. It will change the map of Saskatchewan, this 
unfair decision handled in this way, change it in ways in which 
we cannot foresee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this motion needs to be passed and passed 
unanimously by the members of the House, to cut across 
ideology, to say to the Prime Minister and to the federal 
government: you have time to change your direction. We urge 
you to change your direction. We urge you to reconstitute the 
situation, at least until there's an opportunity for fair 
consultation. And I think it's a motion which would assist all of 
us in government and in opposition to try to convince our 
colleagues in Ottawa of the unfairness of this act of theirs. 
 
I said there was another aspect to this decision as well, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say a word about it. It is highlighted by huge 
uncertainty. Mr. Speaker, if it remains as articulated, the 
farmers face an enormously uncertain future. 
 
First of all, the new system kicks in on August 1, 1995. Can you 
imagine the potential of the glut leading up until August 1, 
1995 as farmers try to take the last remaining weeks and 
months’ benefit of this Crow? What happens however if the 
pay-out, even at the relatively low — not the relatively low — 
at the very low figure of 1.6 billion, isn't paid until some several 
months after August 1, 1995? We have the spectacle of people 
who are having to deliver under a rapidly changing 
transportation system and not even having that on average  

$20,000 of money in their pocket while doing so. This is 
another form of uncertainty and unfairness. 
 
But clouding all of this and making it so uncertain, Mr. 
Speaker, is the whole issue of the ground rules for the pay-out 
of the $1.6 billion. These ground rules are very, very unclear, to 
put it mildly. Announced by the federal Minister of Finance, the 
sum is to be paid exclusively to landowners. We know the 
situation in Saskatchewan. There are people who are 
landowners who farm the land and we know that there are 
landowners who do not farm the land, who have lease 
arrangements with other farmers. Many of these lease 
arrangements are not entered into by way of written agreement. 
Many of them in Saskatchewan are entered into by verbal 
agreement, by a handshake, the terms and the conditions of 
which are made amongst neighbours and between neighbours. 
 
We know as well that many of the institutions, such as FCC, 
ACS, these are landowners too. Banks, railway companies, 
large real estate companies, are landowners. How in the world 
is this confused methodology of the buy-out, even assuming 
that one would accept it in principle, which I do not, how in the 
world is it to be administratively effective? This is the 
uncertainty and the turmoil in which Saskatchewan farmers and 
all the people of Saskatchewan have been now placed. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this is high uncertainty, coupling with the 
unfairness, the basic unfairness that I talked about with respect 
to the people of this province and western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close on this thought. The Crow rate has 
been a part of Canada for decades. It has been described as part 
of the Confederation bargain. It has been said that the Crow rate 
was part of the bargain which saw the western provinces enter 
into Confederation. 
 
It was part of the bargain that when the Fathers of 
Confederation foresaw in their wisdom the need to build a 
railway line straight from the centre of Canada, the eastern part 
of Canada to the west coast of Canada, they saw not only the 
need to build a transportation system, they saw the need to build 
a country. 
 
They went through scandals. They went through political 
upheaval. But an eventual result was that the national dream 
was fulfilled and we did have that rail ribbon of steel tying 
Canadians together from the east coast to the west coast to build 
an economic and social unit called Canada, a unit which was 
separate and different from our friends to the south called the 
United States of America. 
 
And we built our farms and we built our settlements, in 
exchange for which the railway companies received large grants 
of land tracts and mineral rights and other benefits and 
privileges as part of the Confederation bargain. That was the 
deal. That was what western Canadians bought into when they 
bought into the national dream. 
 
Now one could argue that perhaps what the Fathers of  



February 28, 1995 

 
527 

Confederation in 1867 built has now been undone through the 
passage of time. I don't fully subscribe to that view, but none 
the less everything changes. 
 
(1630) 
 
If that argument is to be accepted, the very least that was 
incumbent upon the federal government was to come up with a 
new national transportation policy, Mr. Speaker, which would 
have built or generated a new national dream for the 21st 
century. Something upon which we could carry forward that 
torch, that vision, of a united Canada east to west — or as the 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) says, from sea to 
sea to sea — one which may cost us a little more economically 
but one which in fact keeps us together as this great northern 
half of the North American hemisphere, this country called 
Canada, a new national dream. 
 
I've argued that the politics of the 1990s is the politics of public 
debt. We know that. We know the federal government has a 
debt problem. That's a problem for all Canadians. We know 
that. All of us believe that we've got to do our share in tackling 
the national debt. But the politics of the 1990s in dealing with 
public debt does not require a knee-jerk response which in 
effect says, we're going to throw the baby out with the bath 
water. It requires us to cut the suit to match the cloth which is 
available. It might take a different form. It might take a 
different shape. But whatever it does it requires this — as I said 
in my remarks during the course of the budget debate — to 
protect the core values of what it is to mean to be a Canadian, 
what it means to be a Canadian. This is fairness, this is equity. 
It means regional equity. Our transportation subsidy as of 
August 1, 1995 is gone 100 per cent. 
 
I won't trouble the House about comparisons on other regions 
and the fact that they did not receive the same kind of fate, but 
that is the fact. If we are asked to share the burden for the 
public debt, surely the onus is fairness as the member has said. 
Surely it is in the principle that amongst regions there is a 
community, a sharing, an inter-regional cooperation that we 
help each other out, just as we do as individuals. 
 
We have built medicare. We have built the railway system. We 
have built the transportation system. We've built our wheat 
pools. We build our communities on that system of sharing and 
giving. And if the public debt requires some new vision, some 
new plan, we're not beyond the task of rising to the occasion. 
We are indeed capable as Canadians of dreaming that dream of 
the new 21st century transportation system and the new Canada 
of the 21st century. 
 
To me, Mr. Speaker, this decision taken by the Minister of 
Finance is in a sense yet another — I cannot speak of the other 
issues of the federal budget because it would be out of the 
scope of the resolution — but another example of the undoing 
of the ties that bind this great country together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the privilege, I had the honour, 
to be at a joint press conference where, cutting across ideology,  

the president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the president of 
the Saskatchewan rural municipalities, the president of 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, elected 
individuals each one of them, joined with the Premier of this 
province and said publicly to the people of Canada, we must 
right this injustice. We ask you, Minister of Finance, and Prime 
Minister, and Saskatchewan and Canadian people to put your 
political biases aside to right this injustice. That is an act of 
statesmanship, Mr. Speaker. That is an act of nation building. 
That is an act of province-nation building that those leaders 
exhibited today. 
 
That's what this motion is about. This motion is asking us to do 
the very same thing. And, Mr. Speaker, given the history of this 
country, given the concerns that we have for our farmers and 
for our communities and our towns and our villages and our 
cities, given the need that we must have a national 
transportation Act, given the fact that this is the elimination of 
the National Transportation Act — say what you will about it; 
that's what it is — given the necessity for us to dream the dream 
of keeping this great country together and strong and vibrant 
and healthy to the 21st century, we must pass this and pass this 
unanimously. 
 
I call on the members to do so, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:36 p.m. until 4:39 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen Thompson 
Wiens MacKinnon Shillington 
Anguish Johnson Atkinson 
Kowalsky Cunningham Carson 
Mitchell Penner Upshall 
Hagel Koenker Lorje 
Lautermilch Crofford Renaud 
Murray Hamilton Draper 
Serby Sonntag Flavel 
Roy Cline Scott 
Kujawa Kluz Harper 
Keeping Jess Langford 
Neudorf Martens Goohsen 
D'Autremont Toth Britton 
Haverstock Bergman McPherson 

— 45 
Nays 

 
— Nil 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 



February 28, 1995 

 
528 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I think I can save the Assembly 
some time, Mr. Speaker. Questions 10 to 39, which appear as 
items 1 to 30 on the list, we will be converting to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 
Members opposite are asking a question about next fiscal year. 
We can hardly answer that in five days, even as efficient as we 
are. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 10 to 39, questions for return 
convert. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I missed the Speaker's comments. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 10 to 39. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Motions for return (debatable), that's 
correct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Return (debatable). 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would table question no. 40. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Now I can further save the Assembly 
some time by stating that items . . . questions 41, 42, 43, which 
appear as items 32, 33, and 34 are also converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 
Once again members opposite have asked the question about 
next fiscal year. As efficient as we are, we cannot answer within 
five days questions about the next fiscal year. 
 
The Speaker: — Items 41, 42, 43, motions for return (debate). 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I believe with the concurrence of all 
members, Mr. Speaker, we'll call it 5 o'clock, and begin rule 16 
debate at 7, rather than interrupt members opposite in their 
presentations. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



February 28, 1995 

 
529 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 467 of Hansard No. 16A, February 27, 1995, 1:30 
p.m., left-hand column, third paragraph, “The Chair” should 
read “Hon. Ms. Atkinson.” 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
[Note: The online version has been corrected.] 


