






















































April 3, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 3, 1995 

 

 
1315 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 27 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, and to make a 
Consequential Amendment to The Municipal Board Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This evening, Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure and privilege to have an opportunity 
to discuss for a few minutes Bill No. 27, An Act to amend The 
Urban Municipality Act, 1984, and to make a Consequential 
Amendment to The Municipal Board Act. 
 
Now let me start by saying, Mr. Speaker, that we have a few 
objections to this Bill, but not to panic because they are few. 
Nevertheless, they are important. So while we don't have a 
whole lot of objections here, there are a few things that we will 
want to be discussing with the minister. 
 
We need to, I guess in the circle of municipal affairs, be very 
much aware of the need to get input from the people out in the 
community, especially those things that concern our 
municipalities — urban and rural. 
 
The fact of the matter is that these groups all are very well 
represented by very significant organizations that take a great 
deal of interest in what we do in this Assembly, and we're very 
fortunate that that is a fact. It is therefore incumbent upon us 
that we take just a little time to let them have an opportunity to 
study these things to make sure that their interests are properly 
covered in these matters. 
 
Now many of the amendments are quite technical or 
administrative in nature as we have studied through this 
particular Bill and I will not dwell on these other than to say 
that they appear to streamline significantly the process of local 
government. And that, of course, is something that we are 
anxious to have as much as anyone else and maybe more than 
most. We believe in less government and more streamlining and 
the ability for people to handle their own affairs basically, and 
fundamentally, in in terms of how a government direction 
should go. It does surprise me that this government is 
attempting to go that direction in any part of its administration, 
but if it is, so be it, and we're glad of that. 
 
There are some particular aspects of this Bill that our caucus 
would like to comment on. In general, we agree with the 
government that municipal government should have more 
flexibility and responsibility for setting their own revenues. In  

other words, although we don't encourage any level of 
government to look at more ways to tax us as a people, we do 
agree that in many cases a user-pay system may well be more 
appropriate and may even lessen the tax load to the average 
taxpayer in the long run. And I will just go into that just with a 
little more detail in order to make sure that our position is quite 
clear and not ambiguous or misunderstood. 
 
Now the reality is that if what we are trying to do in this Bill . . . 
We are, I hope, trying to have local people raise their own taxes 
to supply their own goods and services. In other words, the 
people at the local level are going to pay for what they want to 
have done. They're going to be electing the people locally to 
administrate this and to make those decisions. 
 
Now obviously, in the democratic process, if those decisions 
aren't proper then those elected people will soon not be elected 
any more. And that's a good, answerable and accountable way 
to have things done. And what it means then is that if you do 
tax at the local level, you have a closer ability for people to 
monitor the process and to keep an eye on the process, to 
monitor how much their taxes are going to be and exactly what 
that money's going to be used for. 
 
They don't have to come to Regina and argue with somebody 
that they've never seen before, maybe never even heard of 
before, and argue their point that taxes are too high or that the 
monies are being spent on the wrong things and then get some 
song and dance about how, oh well, it all went into general 
revenue and we don't know for sure which part of your taxes 
went into the pot or which part's coming out and who's doing 
what or who's spending it where. 
 
And you get all these run-arounds and confusions that are built 
into the system at this upper level. So at the local level you have 
more accountability and you have more ability for people to 
decide whether or not the monies are being properly spent. 
 
So we like that concept and we do believe that it is, in the long 
run, more accountable to the extent that people will say no to 
frivolous things on their own and you will actually see a 
reduction in the tax load in the long run. 
 
We also recommend the government keep on working in this 
direction of streamlining, because we do believe that less 
interference from the top levels of government will provide a 
happier population as a result of being able to handle things 
themselves. 
 
We also commend the government for providing protection for 
liability for fire-fighters, particularly local volunteer 
fire-fighters. And apparently that is built into this Bill and we're 
looking forward to studying that just a little bit further. Because 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, while this appears to be a good idea 
in principle, we did have a lot of complaints from fire-fighters 
throughout the province over the past, oh about three to four 
months now, where the folks were saying that the way things 
were being set up for them with all of the new regulations and  



April 3, 1995 

 
1316 

all the rules and everything, that they were going to have some 
significant problems in being able to keep fire-fighters working 
at the volunteer level in our society in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So we are, we're taking a real hard look at that. Fire fighting is 
an important and often dangerous line of work, as you well 
know, and I think we all too often take these outstanding 
individuals for granted. And, Mr. Speaker, we don't definitely 
want to have that happen and we do definitely want to keep 
them around, and in our society, and able to function. 
 
So the part where we are going to relieve some of the liability 
from the fire-fighters themselves is probably overdue and we 
likely should be doing something along that line. But we will be 
consulting with some of the mayors and councillors in the 
towns, and we'll be consulting with some of the fire-fighters 
themselves, some of the fire chiefs in our larger communities as 
well as smaller towns to make sure that we are on the right track 
in this area. 
 
Now in smaller towns in particular these services are often 
performed by local volunteers whose only reward is to serve 
their community, and oftentimes a thank you and a pat on the 
back is all they'll ever get. And very often they do save 
buildings, save lives, and contribute tremendously to the peace 
of mind of folks as they sleep in their beds at night, knowing 
that there is somebody that's willing to get up and come and 
help them if they get into a problem with a fire or something 
like that. 
 
Now obviously the threat of legal action against fire-fighters 
would tend to dissuade anyone from going into this line of 
work, either on a volunteer or a professional basis, and so it's 
quite clear to us that if you're going to be facing the possibility 
of being sued when you go out to try and help your neighbours, 
you're obviously going to be a little reluctant to go. And we 
definitely don't think that people should be discouraged from 
helping out their neighbours and their friends because they 
might accidentally fall into some kind of a legal trap. 
 
So we're quite willing to take a long, hard look at this and see to 
it that things get changed in the right direction. The idea of 
suing fire-fighters, as I've mentioned, Mr. Speaker, is 
particularly disturbing when you think about the local 
volunteers. Now here you have someone who puts himself in 
danger, and he's doing that simply to help out his community, 
and then of course his thanks might be that he or she would be 
sued for their efforts, and we really don't think that that's a good 
idea. 
 
Now with this kind of threat hanging over the heads of 
fire-fighters, it would be easy to see a day when many 
communities wouldn't be able to have any kind of fire 
prevention services at all. Quite simply, either you'd have to 
hire people and have them adequately insured, or else you 
would end up with nobody there. 
 
So we think that's kind of a motherhood kind of an approach 
and we're going to look into that. So again, we do support the  

measures that both acknowledge and protect the fire-fighters. 
 
There are, however, some elements of this Bill which I must say 
disturb us as we looked at it. For starters, I was astonished to 
hear the minister, in her second reading speech, pat herself on 
the back for all that her government has done for municipalities 
when in fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair to say that through 
many years of offloading there has never been a government 
that has done more harm to municipalities in this province than 
what this administration has done. 
 
And I can particularly go into details of the fact that we no 
longer even have a Department of Rural Development. We now 
just have one great big conglomeration of municipalities which, 
thanks to the hard work of the individuals out in rural 
Saskatchewan and in small town Saskatchewan, has continued 
to work to some extent to help people to get things done. But 
the reality is that we don't have very much done for 
municipalities. 
 
We even have cases in the last few days where people have 
been asking for emergency help to get their roads opened up 
and to get gravel into them because we've had a rather difficult 
spring out in some rural areas. And of course that all goes back 
to the fact that local governments have not had the ability to get 
the job done over the past couple of summers, when this kind of 
work needs to be done in order to be prepared for a bad spring. 
 
I was particularly amazed to hear the minister refer to her 
government's so-called accomplishments with SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency). Now I won't 
go into the entire debate from last year over the government's 
very destructive measures in this area, but I certainly would not 
call that something to be proud of. 
 
And certainly we're going to be hearing more about SAMA this 
week, as I understand there are some SAMA meetings 
scheduled in the city in the next few days. So we will be 
definitely listening to those folks who are coming into the city 
to discuss these matters. 
 
But the reality is that we've had some near fiascos in the area of 
assessment. And of course SAMA is the assessment authority, 
and we've had a collapse of the system in the cities, and we've 
had almost a revolt of the system in rural areas, and I'm 
surprised that the process managed to even survive at all. 
 
Now these years of abuse and neglect that our municipalities 
have been suffering are reflected somewhat in this Bill. And we 
think that we need to take a look at possibly introducing some 
amendments to the Bill and to get things back to some sane 
order before we go on with passing it. 
 
Now thanks to this government's offloading, our major urban 
centres are in a position where they need to borrow more 
money, more often, and more quickly. This Bill does allow for 
that and we're wondering if we don't have to put a little more 
safeguards into the potential to have the provincial debt 
increased overall by downloading that debt onto municipalities,  



April 3, 1995 

 
1317 

and especially into our big cities where we are seeing more and 
more temptation to run deficits in order to continue to give 
people the services that everybody seems to think they have to 
have, and we definitely think that we have to have some 
safeguards there. 
 
It would be easy enough for us to fall into a situation like New 
York city, where as a city it ran such a tremendous debt by 
itself, without even being a part or answerable to the state 
apparently, that they were significantly threatening the economy 
of the entire country. And that can happen in big cities, but it 
certainly can happen in Saskatchewan if you have a lot of small 
towns and communities that end up in that same situation. So 
there are good and there are bad points in this Bill that need to 
be considered. 
 
Now similarly, the changes allowing user-pay services are 
clearly also caused by the desperate straits in which this 
government has put the municipalities, Mr. Speaker. The 
desperate straits of course are easy to understand when you 
know that funding has been cut every year up until this budget. 
And even this year, without the budget cutting the monies going 
to the municipalities, they were cut anyway as a result of a 
built-in feature of last year's budget where it was triggered this 
year from last year's budget. So you built in two years of 
downloading into one budget so that you could have the budget 
this year looking nice with nothing mentioned about it. 
 
And the hope of course was that everybody'd forget about it and 
not notice it. But I can assure this government that the people in 
rural Saskatchewan and in small town Saskatchewan have seen 
it very clearly. And by the look of the major newspapers, I think 
that the two big cities in this province have noticed it pretty 
significantly in the last little while as well because they are now 
seeing that their headlines are reading: deficits for 1996 almost 
guaranteed; or something along that line. And I read a few of 
those just of late. 
 
So here we have some serious problems in this downloading for 
municipalities, much like what is happening to our health care 
and to our education systems. Now we've got health care boards 
in this province that are all looking as though they're going to 
be running deficits. So what's the difference if you pass the 
deficit down to a health board or to a municipal board or to a 
school board and they have to borrow money and have a debt? 
What's the difference if that debt is in the hands of those people 
now instead of in the provincial government's hands? I mean it's 
just an offloading of the problem, and that's exactly what we've 
done. 
 
(1915) 
 
So on paper, anybody can balance the books if you've got room 
to manipulate and move around. In Newfoundland they don't 
have fish and all they do is farm on a rock, and they've managed 
to balance their books. I won't tell you how; I don't have to go 
into that. 
 
In British Columbia they do the same thing. They've all of a  

sudden got a balanced budget. And of course we all know how 
they did it. They formed some Crown corporations and went out 
and borrowed hundreds of millions of dollars in order to 
finance their debt load, and of course they've got a balanced 
budget on the books. But it definitely is not a balance in the 
eyes of the people that know very well they'll still end up paying 
for it through their taxes, because there is only one taxpayer in 
the end. 
 
Now in the same vein, we are somewhat concerned about the 
clause regarding the new assessment notice. At a cursory 
glance, this measure simply makes it easier for the 
municipalities to raise taxes whenever they please. And our 
caucus does not encourage making it easier for governments at 
any level to raise taxes unless there is complete and total input 
from the taxpayers and the people who elect those officials into 
their positions. 
 
Now because of these objections, I would appreciate it if the 
critic for this Bill would have an opportunity to have a further 
look at it before we put it into committee work. Our critic I 
think, needs to have time to call on some of the mayors and 
reeves in our province, and to discuss with them what the 
potential outcome of this Bill can possibly be to them and to the 
taxpayers of our province. And I would therefore move that we 
adjourn this debate for now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 28 — An Act to 
amend The Northern Municipalities Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is nice to have an 
opportunity to take a look at Bill No. 28 for this year in the 
legislature. Bill No. 28 will be An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act. 
 
And once again, I guess I have to wonder why we keep on 
bringing back the same Acts and the same Bills every year to be 
amended. It almost looks like we can't seem to get it right the 
first time, so we have to keep doing it over and over. Because I 
remember seeing this one a couple of times already in the past 
years, since my short stay in this Assembly. So anyway, I guess 
we haven't got it right yet, so we're going to try again, is kind of 
the way we're looking at things here. 
 
We basically support this Bill though, Mr. Speaker, because 
having gone through it, we don't see a whole terrible lot of 
things wrong with it. But our party allows us time to take a look 
at this, or has asked us to, I guess, as third parties, I guess. I'm 
reading that wrong — third parties have asked us for a time to 
be allowed for us to take a look at the interests of the northern 
communities. 
 
It seems like when you get a little further away from Regina  



April 3, 1995 

 
1318 

than a hand's throw, a lot of folks aren't really aware of the fact 
we're here, much less changing the laws that are going to rule 
and regulate their lives. And we have some serious concerns as 
to whether or not the people up North have in fact had a chance 
to understand what's going on in this Bill and with their lives. 
 
Now the minister herself acknowledged that The Northern 
Municipalities Act, which brought municipal government to the 
North for the first time, was introduced by our government, I 
guess, in 1983. And I guess maybe the people up there must 
like it because we seem to still have it, but we haven't had the 
chance lately to consult with them to see if they're still pleased 
or not, so we're suggesting we might want to do that. 
 
As a government we were also proud, I guess, of the part we 
played in the treaty entitlement process that has made necessary 
some of the changes we see before us today. And we agree with 
the government that it is high time that the northern 
municipalities were recognized for their responsibility and 
mature institutions that they are. 
 
It is a testament to the character of the people of the North that 
they were able to master these responsibilities in such a short 
period of time, given that the municipal government was largely 
unfamiliar to that area before 1983. So I guess there is an 
evolution in that process in the North according to the work that 
we've done in the preliminary stages of this Bill. 
 
Similarly we agree that the government should have long ago 
allowed the municipalities of the North to participate in the 
Saskatchewan municipalities board rather than dealing with the 
minister's office on the related fiscal matters. 
 
Now likewise we would like to give our acknowledgement to 
the provincial government and the treaty land entitlement bands 
for continuing to work cooperatively to establish quickly the 
foundations for this new era in the history of the native bands 
involved. 
 
I guess we're going to probably have to qualify some of those 
statements by saying that we definitely know that we will be 
getting some other input from some of the folks up in the North 
who may agree or disagree with those opinions. As the minister 
pointed out in her speech, many of the provisions of this Act 
simply bring the northern municipalities into line with The 
Urban Municipality Act, including many of the most recent 
changes. And of course, if you're amalgamating the rural and 
urban municipal bodies, as we have done, then obviously there 
is some sense to having these folks brought into the process and 
up to date in their Act. 
 
I notice that the government has allowed the communities an 
appropriate leeway on issues like ownership of business 
interests to accommodate the special circumstances of the 
North. And we have several other constructive comments that 
we'd like to make on this Bill at a later time, Mr. Speaker, and 
as I've said we need probably to take a little time to let the folks 
in the North know that in fact this Bill is being done; that what 
is done in this Bill will affect their lives; that they will have a  

transitional period to get used to doing something different. 
 
We think that it's important that people have a chance in our 
democracy to have input into the laws that we make before we 
make them and sign, seal, and deliver them. We have far too 
many people in our province that are unaware of many of the 
rules and regulations that we have already in existence, and I 
think it's time that we take a minute to have a little cooling-off 
period and listen to the people. And with that point having been 
made, Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to move that we 
adjourn this debate for the time being. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 29 — An Act to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say just a 
few words about Bill 29, An Act to amend The Rural 
Municipality Act of 1984. Although this Bill in many ways 
resembles the other Bills before us tonight, I am not sure that 
we can be quite so supportive of this Bill as we were with the 
other ones. I will grant the government that many of the 
provisions are inoffensive and technical in nature. Now many of 
the clauses changing the ways RMs (rural municipalities) can 
organize are commendable in that they improve the ways RMs 
can deliver services such as emergency responses. And that, of 
course, is a good idea, Mr. Speaker. Likewise, there are many 
provisions which have praised earlier . . . which we have 
praised earlier and which we continue to concur with here, such 
as the clauses here that provide for the protection from liability 
for fire-fighters. 
 
Now there are, however, a number of areas that raise some red 
flags for us and which we would therefore like to examine more 
closely. One of these is the change to extend assessment power 
of the municipality, particularly in regards to improvements to 
property. This would seem to be a blank cheque for the 
municipalities to squeeze further tax dollars out of rural 
Saskatchewan. And that alludes to some of the things that I was 
saying earlier about the other Bills, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 
those same arguments still apply. We believe that this would 
have a chilling effect on building and improvement in rural 
Saskatchewan which would only further slow down the recover 
of the rural economy. 
 
Similarly, we feel that the new provisions for the RMs to 
license homes, businesses, are exactly the kind of example of 
government red tape and taxation that is killing small business 
and entrepreneurship in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, anything that is going to cause those kinds of 
harmful effects in rural Saskatchewan, obviously we as an 
opposition would have to be opposed to. And of course we are 
here to discuss these matters with the government in the hopes  



April 3, 1995 

 
1319 

that we can bring them to their senses and perhaps we can 
discuss some way that we can correct these problems. We can 
look at amendments perhaps, or whatever else it takes to 
straighten out these provisions in the Bill in order to make it a 
good law that people will want to have and will want to live 
with and will want to enforce themselves without having 
something that's just going to be a nightmare out in the rest of 
the province. 
 
It is perhaps too much to expect of this socialist government, 
but all levels of government in this province must learn to just 
get out of the way of business. And we've seen far too much 
interference in business in the last three years, but more 
especially in the last six months. 
 
And coming into the spring of this year we see even more 
regulations being discussed in a lot of the Bills that we passed 
earlier on in other sessions. And the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we've just got such a maze of regulations, rules, and high costs 
built into Saskatchewan now, that the business community is 
feeling that there is no longer a level playing-field. In fact the 
playing-field doesn't even exist any more in Saskatchewan. 
They don't even bother landing here; they just fly right straight 
over and go to Alberta. They don't even stop to consider 
Saskatchewan any more in a lot of cases. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are some serious, serious problems with 
the way we've treated business, the backbone of creation of jobs 
in our province. And we need to take a hard, long look at what 
these kind of Bills are going to do to the people in 
Saskatchewan that could best improve our tax base and could 
best improve the conditions within our province that would 
help us to eliminate not only unemployment, but the long lines 
of welfare people that we seem to have building up daily in the 
city of Regina especially. 
 
Now these provisions in this Bill do exactly the opposite to 
what we think they should. They get in the way of business 
development in order to promote the interests of government 
and bureaucracy. And obviously that is something that we 
cannot go along with. We can't support that kind of an approach 
because not only we don't believe in it, but we also have come 
to understand by studying other jurisdictions that this approach 
doesn't work; and a more open and businesslike approach does 
work. 
 
And we've got some pretty clear, good, and honest examples of 
those to give to the government. And in the days that are ahead 
of us, we will take some time to show the minister and her 
government how things can work in a province like Alberta, 
right next door to us, where business is more than anxious to 
locate, in fact are scrambling over top of one another trying to 
get into the province to establish. There isn't hardly even room 
for them any more in Alberta, they're all so anxious to get there. 
 
And we're going to show this government and the minister why 
that is happening and why Saskatchewan has such a dismal 
record in terms of trying to get any job creation or anything 
meaningful going. 

The reality is that we hear some announcements of things being 
developed in our province. A business here or there will expand 
a little bit and they'll bring in 10 or 50 jobs. But at the same 
time you will find another business moving out of the province 
and going to Alberta, taking along 10 or 20 or 150 jobs, and 
you've got a net loss in the long run. 
 
And that's what's going on in our province right now. For every 
job we bring into the province through these restrictive 
government give-away programs, we end up losing two or three 
as a result of our burdensome tax in this province and our 
anti-business approach to everything that we do in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now because of these objections and others, our critic in this 
area, Mr. Speaker, definitely has assured me that he wants to 
take some further time to examine the Bill. He wants definitely 
to have an opportunity to discuss this Bill with the people from 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 
from the rural areas of Saskatchewan particularly. 
 
Also he wants to talk to the business community about what 
effects this Bill will have on their ability to continue to live and 
survive in Saskatchewan, or if in fact as one businessman put it 
to me last week, they will all perhaps end up having to get post 
office boxes in Medicine Hat or Calgary and operate their head 
offices out of Alberta just in order to escape the tyranny of 
Saskatchewan taxation, and to a large extent that can be done 
by where your head office is located. 
 
That kind of exodus is scary, Mr. Speaker, because while you 
can have business as usual appear to be here, as far as 
individuals who are buying goods and services, the reality is 
that the province suffers tremendously because those head 
offices are what generate those extra few dollars. And that's the 
margin off the top that we always lose in Saskatchewan, and 
we're going to lose it big time in the near future to Alberta even 
more than we have in the past. 
 
Unless we change our ways very quickly, we can only find 
ourselves stagnating and stay stagnated while other people go 
ahead. Now we already have people talking about another 
recession setting in. They're predicting that that could happen as 
quickly as next fall already. And you all know very well that if 
there is a recession in North America, Saskatchewan will start 
into it first and we'll get out of it last. That's been the history of 
our province. 
 
I can tell you why, but I'm not going to take the time to do that, 
Mr. Speaker. But I'm going to say to the minister that things that 
are included in this Bill are greatly contributing to that reason 
for why we always go into a recession first and get out last, and 
why our people always end up suffering the longest and the 
hardest in all of Canada and certainly in terms of North 
America. 
 
So while the rest of the country has enjoyed a relatively 
boom-like rebound from the last recession, we're just hardly  



April 3, 1995 

 
1320 

struggling out of it, and here we are facing perhaps the next one 
according to some predictions. 
 
So having said that, and noted that there are some opportunities 
in this Bill to make some significant changes, some significant 
changes that could help this province to develop in terms of 
business and in terms of building a tax base, we are saying that 
we have to study this Bill further. And for that reason, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm going to move that debate on this Bill do now 
adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1930) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Business 
Corporations Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1 and to having the 
minister introduce the officials, I see that the member for 
Regina Albert North is on his feet. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my colleagues on 
both sides of the House. It's my pleasure this evening to 
introduce a group of Cubs, the 64th Cub Pack, on behalf of the 
member for Regina Rosemont. The 64th Cub Pack consists of 
Marilyn Pollock, who is the Akelay, and James Holt, the Baloo 
— Akelay being the wolf and Baloo being the bear. 
 
These 23 Cubs have had a tour of the legislature, are going to 
sit in on the proceedings for awhile this evening, and then I 
look forward to meeting and sharing a drink of Beep with this 
group a little bit later on. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming the 64th Cub Pack. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 19 
(continued) 

 
The Chair: — At this point I would ask the Minister of Justice 
to introduce the officials who have joined us here for the 
proceedings on the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairperson. I'm honoured to be able to introduce the officials 
from the Department of Justice. Seated beside me is Brent 
Prenevost, the Crown counsel, legislative services. Behind me  

is Monte Curle, deputy director of corporations branch. And 
sitting beside him is Philip Flory, director of corporations 
branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, just a few questions. In reality, 
we've done some research and we've talked to some of the 
interested groups that might be involved and would have any 
comments. The understanding I have, not only from the 
minister's comments when he introduced the legislation, and 
from the Saskatchewan . . . specifically I believe it was the 
chamber of commerce that did respond to one of our questions. 
They don't have a lot of . . . or any real difficulty with this. 
 
I understand this is a housekeeping Bill and I'm wondering first 
of all, Mr. Minister, was this something that the department 
picked up, or did the industry come to you, asking you to bring 
these changes and bring them into effect? Is this . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm informed by the officials that the 
answer to the member's question is it was a mixture. Some 
came from industry, some were done so that this legislation 
would be consistent with federal legislation and changes made 
there, and some were generated internally by the department. So 
I guess the answer is it is a mixture of three sources — an 
attempt to be consistent with the federal Act, internally 
generated amendments, and some suggested by the industry. 
 
I can assure the member from Moosomin, however, that all of 
these changes have been discussed extensively by the industry, 
but basically it is really the professions, certainly the chamber 
of commerces, but also the Bar and the chartered accountants. 
They're really the professions whom we deal with in the most 
direct way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Basically what you're saying in the present Bill 
before us, in general, brings us up to date with other 
jurisdictions as well as federal legislation, if I understand you 
correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Minister, there is one part that I just am a little bit 
inquisitive of. And I understand the Bill allows two or more 
wholly owned subsidiaries of a company to amalgamate without 
the shareholders of the parent company having to approve it. 
 
Now I'm wondering how that falls into line. If you're a 
subsidiary, I would imagine you're a smaller company, or a 
smaller portion of a large company, and if you want to . . . By 
having two subsidiaries amalgamate it almost would . . . you 
would think that they would then, by amalgamating, would 
become larger, would put themselves in a position of basically 
maybe being able to control the parent company. 
 
And I'm wondering why would that be allowed? Why would 
they require that? Why would the company allow that without  



April 3, 1995 

 
1321 

having at least some say? At least that's the understanding I 
have from the Bill. So maybe you could explain that for us, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I am told that the provision to which 
the member refers permits a name change to occur without 
those formalities. It does not however do anything else — no 
other changes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister, I think that kind 
of clarifies that section. With that I really don't have any further 
questions. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. When the government departments 
began the process of budget preparation last fall, you must have 
had some direction from the Department of Finance on how to 
go about planning your budget for the year. Could you tell me, 
please, what those directions from Finance were, including 
what the spending areas were that you were instructed to look 
for — spending cuts or efficiencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I say to the member from Regina 
North West, following these two Bills we will be in Committee 
of Finance on estimates and that might be as appropriate a place 
to ask these questions. I can respond to the question now — it is 
really however not germane to The Business Corporations Act. 
 
If the member wants to keep note of her question, I'll be more 
than happy to answer that in the Committee of Finance, where it 
maybe belongs. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 
Bill No. 20 - An Act to amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I do 
have a few questions here regarding the purposes for this piece 
of legislation. 
 
And as the minister outlined in a second reading speech, there 
are basically six basic things that the legislation does. I noticed, 
one, it removes the requirement for co-ops to register a 
particular municipality of operation and thereby allows co-ops 
to move their business offices elsewhere in the province or 
wherever they wish. 
 
And I guess the question I would wonder is: under this change 
what is the need to allow co-ops to locate their business offices 
outside of their areas of operation and what do you mean 
specifically by that? I think a lot of small communities, in 
looking at it, may feel that if you allow offices to move out; the  

offices may then look to larger centres, leaving small 
communities, which means a loss in jobs and certainly the 
prestige of having offices in a smaller community. So I wonder 
if you can explain that for us, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We are here referring to just the 
registered office; it may not be the business office. Many co-ops 
prefer to have their registered office in the office of a law firm. 
One of the main functions of a registered office is it's a place 
where you're served with official documents. In some smaller 
businesses, in some smaller co-ops, they are not necessarily 
geared up to deal with these. It doesn't always mean very much 
to them, and some of them prefer to have the registered office 
right in a law office. It's a common enough practice. And many 
of the co-ops, for the best of reasons, use the same law firms, 
often located in one of the cities. Actually it's often one in 
Saskatoon, and thus the registered office may be in that law 
firm, whereas it may carry on business anywhere in the 
province, including Moosomin. And that's the reason why, 
because they may well for the best of reasons, want the 
registered office to be in a law office; and it's often a firm that 
serves a great number of co-ops. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I also 
understand what the Bill does, is it registers the term co-op as 
equivalent to cooperative as a business description limited to 
cooperatives that . . . if I gather correctly from your earlier 
comments, and I guess basically you're just tying the two words 
if you will together, so they basically mean the same thing. 
 
The third point you brought out are firms . . . that directors can 
only be selected or fired by the membership and not by other 
directors. And I guess I'm wondering regarding this portion, Mr. 
Minister, why you have that in there. I guess I basically 
understood directors were all appointed or elected by the 
membership and not really by the directors at large. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could explain the reasoning and the 
rationale for that and the fact . . . I can appreciate the fact that 
possibly what it is doing is indicating that the membership 
indeed do have the control and do have the ability and that it is 
left solely with them. So can you explain the reasons for that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, it's just a basic tenet of 
corporate and cooperative democracy. Directors represent the 
members who own the business; only the members should be 
able to remove the directors who represent them. 
 
I suppose it's somewhat the same as sitting in this Assembly. 
You're elected by your constituents; only your constituents 
should be able to remove you. Directors enter it the same way. 
Directors represent the members and the view is that only 
members should be able to remove them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Another point that you raised was that this piece 
of legislation clarifies that only members may pass by-laws and  



April 3, 1995 

 
1322 

may not delegate these powers to directors. But the question I 
would have is, at times I'm sure the membership in general 
would feel that they wouldn't have enough information on a 
by-law, may choose . . . members may choose if you will, to 
have the directors of their corporation make by-laws and bring 
. . . 
 
I guess in most cases though, when by-laws are made and 
changes are made to a corporative constitution or any group that 
would have a constitution, directors would bring those by-laws 
forward. They would review them; they would look at the 
by-laws; they would then determine whether or not it's 
necessary and they generally would bring it forward to the 
membership for final approval. And here again I guess one 
would wonder, one would ask, is there a specific reason for this 
portion in the legislation, or is it, as you're saying, clarifying 
that fact that indeed the membership does have that ability, that 
the directors cannot unilaterally impose or change the by-laws? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's very much the latter. This was 
simply brought to our attention during the discussion of this 
Bill with the stakeholders and the industry. And it was argued 
that it should be clarified to ensure that only members can enact 
by-laws, and we agreed. There is, however, I'm told by the 
officials, there's no widespread practice of doing otherwise. In 
fact I think no practice at all of doing otherwise. Members 
always pass the by-laws. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, one of the fifth points the minister 
brought out, that the legislation allows speedier processes for 
dissolving inactive co-ops, particularly those where the 
remaining members, if any, cannot be located. 
 
And what I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what constitutes an 
inactive co-op? Who decides whether a cooperative is inactive? 
And who gets . . . if there's any money that's been accumulated 
or any money that's left at the end of the day, who gets the 
money and why? 
 
And I guess, are there any specific co-ops or former co-ops at 
present that you're aware of or that the department is aware of 
are in this position where they basically would be determined as 
being inactive and whether or not . . . Do you have requests 
already for processing of these claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member I think will be aware 
that if a co-op fails to file its return for three years, they're 
struck off the list. That is not however what you're referring to, I 
don't think. You're referring to the section which . . . the 
amendment to section 162, I believe. 
 
Let me say that the practice is and has always been that only 
members can decide to wind up a co-op. So it is the members 
who must decide that it's inactive. Before winding it up they 
must make provision for disposal of all funds and all assets. 
 
The amendment simply provides a situation where you can't 
find members and you can't find anyone to do it. This allows 
you to deal with those exceptional circumstances. 

I asked the officials if there's any cases awaiting disposition. 
They tell me they're not aware of any, but there'll probably be 
some come up during the oncoming year. 
 
This is just an attempt to deal with some very exceptional cases 
where you can't find any members, or the members cannot be 
located. And you can't follow the normal method of winding up 
a co-op by having the members so direct. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then in that case, Mr. Minister, who then 
determines the process of winding up that cooperative? Does 
the Act define out specifically who would do it? Is it a local 
jurisdiction or a judicial office? Or who makes that decision 
and how is it carried out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — What happens under these 
circumstances is that one of the members, often someone who's 
been laboriously filing the returns and so on, comes forward. 
He indicates they can't find the members to get the matter 
wrapped up, and asks for the assistance of the department in 
wrapping up the co-op. And that has been the process. 
 
There is no hard and fast guidelines as to when they will act on 
such a request. Each case is determined on its own merits. And 
that's the process. One of the members will come forward, be 
unable to locate the other members, and will ask for assistance 
in getting the co-op wound up. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Before we report progress, I'd like to say thank 
you to the minister and to the officials for having taken the time 
to come tonight. I realize this wasn't a real tedious affair as 
they're fairly straightforward pieces of legislation, but 
appreciate your taking the time to come with us and just answer 
the few questions we had. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, and I'd like to associate myself 
with the remarks of the member from Moosomin. I'd like to 
thank the officials for waiting and for assisting us in this Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Business 

Corporations Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third  



April 3, 1995 

 
1323 

time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

Item 1 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce the 
officials who have joined us here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairperson. I'm delighted to be able to introduce the officials 
from the department. Seated to my left is Brent Cotter, deputy 
minister of the department. To his left is Kathy Hillman-Weir, 
who is executive assistant to the deputy minister. On my right is 
Twyla Meredith. Seated behind me is Doug Moen, who is 
executive director of public law and policy; and to his left is 
Ron Hewitt, who is associate deputy minister, registry services 
division. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Minister, I think there's too many areas that we need to discuss 
in this department before we get into even considering letting it 
go. 
 
But first of all, a couple of fairly straightforward questions. 
Number one is the global questionnaire that we sent to your 
department. I realize that the end of the fiscal year just has 
passed by about three days, but I'm wondering if you could 
indicate to us as to when we could expect responses to these 
global questions, at what time. And we'd appreciate it, Mr. 
Minister, if we could have response as quickly as possible to 
allow us to review the responses to the global questions before 
we really dispose of the estimates of Justice. And maybe you 
could give us an indication of how quickly the department feels 
they may be able to respond to the global set of questions that 
have been passed over. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's a little difficult to be terribly 
definite, but perhaps a couple of weeks might sound reasonable. 
That's sort of the time we're aiming at — that's not a 
commitment, but that's our best guess as to what might be 
reasonable. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you can 
appreciate the fact that it speeds up the process in here by 
taking the time to list those questions out, rather than me 
standing up here and going through them tediously one by one 
and trying to pull information; so as quickly as you can do it, 
we certainly would appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I realize that you're fairly young in your new  

portfolio and responsibilities as Minister of Justice. However, 
Mr. Minister, a few quick questions regarding your office and 
the staffing component that you have in the office. 
 
And I'm wondering, have there been any major changes? Were 
you specifically bringing new staff into the office of Justice 
after you took over, or do we have the basic number of staff 
members, basically what it was, the same staff members. I 
wonder if you could just bring us up to date on it and who is 
working in the office at this present time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — When I took over as Minister of 
Justice, I assumed the staff which was there, which was in place 
and served the former minister of Justice, and there were no 
changes at the time. I just assumed all of his . . . I moved into 
his office and assumed all of his staff. 
 
There was one vacant position, which was the junior ministerial 
assistant. And some steps had been taken to find a position. I 
think the matter had been advertised in some fashion; there had 
been interviews held. And after some delay, in fact we agreed to 
appoint the person which had been chosen under that system; in 
a way really under the former minister. So that person is in 
addition to what was there prior to my taking it over on 
February 20. And that person is Dale Emery, who is the junior 
ministerial assistant. Otherwise, the staff is exactly what served 
the former minister. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The fact that the staff 
has remained the same, they must be a pretty good group of 
people to have had to make that major change from the former 
minister to the present minister and be able to, could I say, put 
up with the present minister. But actually I think the present 
minister is doing a pretty good job, but we'll find out as we get 
into further debate in estimates here. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you give us an update on . . . a list of the 
staff members, positions, salaries, and whether or not there 
have been increases in the past year, since we last discussed this 
matter. And I think you can appreciate the fact that prior to, or 
last year when we were discussing it, we noticed . . . through 
your questioning, that there were increases. The former minister 
had argued no, the increases weren't there; staff members were 
given new positions and new responsibilities. 
 
I think in view of that fact, since it's the same person and just to 
change the position and responsibility, it might be more 
appropriate and more orderly to indicate, well an increase came 
into place versus the fact that we're changing responsibilities, 
thereby bumping a staff member into a higher-paying position. 
So if you wouldn't mind, we'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Okay, I can read that into the record 
for the hon. member. 
 
The senior secretary is Diane Tremblay. The title of her position 
is senior secretary. There was a 4 per cent increase on July 1, 
'94, I'm informed, and the current salary is thirty-four 
seventy-eight. 



April 3, 1995 

 
1324 

The senior ministerial assistant is Bettyann Cox. There's been 
no salary change, and she just in fact started around the first of 
the year. Her current salary is forty-two twenty-one. Dale Emery 
is the person who I mentioned who has joined the staff very, 
very recently — the last couple of weeks — classified as a 
junior ministerial assistant, and her salary is 2,893. 
 
Then I'm going to give you the staff which are also paid for by 
the Public Service Commission since there's no neat division of 
labour. In fact both . . . all staff work on both responsibilities, 
so I'll you give them both to you actually. 
 
Tanya Byrnes is an intermediate secretary; received an 
increment on July 1, '95 of $107 per month; salary 2,892. 
Carolyn Clark is classified as a junior — there is a situation 
here which is a little different than one often finds, there are 
two people who are job sharing — Carolyn Clark is one of 
those and Darlene Eckstein is another; both classified as junior 
secretaries; both received an increment on January 1 of '95 of 
$40 per month; and both receive a salary of $1,112.50. Finally 
there is Marian Morrison who is an intermediate ministerial 
assistant who received an increment on July 1, '94 of $144 per 
month; her salary is $3,598. 
 
And I'll give you this as well, two people who have left actually 
but who did serve the former minister of Justice. I assume that's 
part of your question. Michaela Keet was a senior ministerial 
assistant who left around the first of the year when Ms. Cox 
came; received a 4 per cent increase on July 1, '94; salary was 
$4,406. Joy Adams Bauer, who left just shortly after I had 
come, and who got a 4 per cent increase; her salary is $2,018. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to add that 
I certainly appreciated the way the staff have responded to any 
requests that have come out of our office; certainly myself in 
raising questions that constituents brought to my attention. I've 
really appreciated the responses and the way they've responded 
and how expeditiously they have looked into the questions and 
got back to myself, and I'm sure my colleagues can voice the 
same opinions. 
 
But I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, regarding Michaela Keet and 
Joy — I just didn't catch her last name — where they would 
have moved to. Are they now working in the department, or 
have they received other jobs, or are they, as the member from 
Rosetown has possibly suggested and that might be a 
possibility, that they moved to private life. Maybe you could 
just inform us as to where Michaela and Joy have moved to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Michaela Keet has in fact gone back 
to private practice. Joy Adams Bauer had applied for a position 
I think in the Department of Social Services . . . Yes, the 
Department of Social Services. It was in-scope. She applied 
through the competition and was successful in the competition 
in the regular fashion, so that's where she is. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that a number of ministers employ staff . . . Oh, by 
the way, I just want to come back to one thing. You made a  

comment about a position that was basically a job-sharing 
position and two individuals sharing that job, in listing the 
names of individuals working as staff in your office. 
 
And if I could suggest one thing, Mr. Minister, I think that 
certainly is commendable. If people choose to — and I know 
that out in our area of the . . . if I can use the word, area of the 
woods — in different professions people have chosen to job 
share and what that has done is basically has given two 
individuals the opportunity to work, versus one. 
 
It's created an environment where I know . . . and in most cases 
it's basically been housewives. Rather than a five-day or a 
six-day week . . . especially in the health and educational 
portion — more so in the health field — a number of women 
have felt it's freed up their time and has given them time to be at 
home, be the housekeeper and the mother as they've chosen to 
be, as well as maintain their skills and use their education. 
 
So I think wherever possible . . . and if people are willing and 
more than willing to view and take part and participate in job 
sharing, I think that's commendable. And I would certainly 
encourage any department, any office, to take a look at that, as I 
think there are a lot of people who are more than willing to job 
share. And not that they're feeling that they're not receiving high 
enough pay; I think just the additional income is what they're 
looking for, as well as being able to use the education and 
possibly enhance their opportunities down the road just because 
of the job opportunities they've had. 
 
As most people realize, without any education or the ability to 
work, when you go to apply for a job, they're looking for 
experience, and that also gives experience. So I think that's 
commendable and I want to commend the staff members who 
have chosen to do that. Basically what they're doing is helping 
each other out; possibly creating a better environment for . . . 
working environment. 
 
I started out as well by indicating that I understand a number of 
ministers do employ staff from Saskatoon. I'm wondering if any 
staff work in your office at the present time that may commute 
from Saskatoon. And if they do, could you fill us in on the 
details of expenses that would be incurred by having staff 
members come and work out of Saskatoon? The travelling back 
and forth and the living and accommodations certainly would 
be an expense that we would be interested in. 
 
And yet at the same time we don't want to hinder people from 
having that opportunity of working in a department or in your 
office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. There's no such arrangements. 
Ms. Cox and her husband lived in Saskatoon at one . . . when 
she was first hired. They now in fact have a residence here and I 
gather one in Saskatoon as well. But what I think is of 
importance to the member from Moosomin: there are no travel 
expenses paid and there are no time off given for travel or 
anything else. They are treated for all purposes as if they lived 
in Regina. If they care to commute from Saskatoon that's at  



April 3, 1995 

 
1325 

their own expense and at their own time. 
 
I think at the moment none of the staff are actually doing that. I 
think they all have residences in Regina. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
question regarding travel — fairly basic, straightforward. One 
that I think we picked up when we went through the questions 
that used to be raised by the members of the opposition prior to 
1991. 
 
I wonder if you would take the time, and you would please 
provide us with full details on ministerial travel including 
destination, purpose of trip, staff accompanying minister, all 
costs and method of travel. In addition, which travel 
agency/agencies are utilized in booking flights. Please provide 
full information on all executive trips taken by minister, and 
details on who attended the minister on those flights, the 
destination, and the purpose of the flight. And this is both in 
and out of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there may be a fair bit of information. And 
if you'd like to send it to us in writing versus standing up in the 
Assembly and reading all that information off, it's your choice. 
We'll give you that opportunity if you'd like to do that but 
certainly we'd appreciate that information, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. I think I can . . . I have the 
information in writing here for Mr. Mitchell, for the member 
from . . . for the former attorney general. I think I'll just have it 
sent across to you. It seems straightforward enough. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, on that. Now, Mr. 
Minister, I'll welcome your staff, and I'll ask the question that I 
asked at the wrong place before. 
 
When government departments began the process of budget 
preparations, did you have some direction from Department of 
Finance on how to go about planning your budget? And could 
you tell me please what those directions from Finance were, 
including what the spending areas were that you were instructed 
to look for in spending cuts or efficiencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, there were instructions. And 
they have basically been standard instructions since this 
government assumed office. I don't know what the practice was 
prior to that. But since this government has assumed office all 
departments are issued similar instructions. They're asked to 
bring in a budget which has zero increase, a budget which has a 
decrease, and thus the Treasury Board has asked departments to 
provide them with options. Options for a stand pat budget and 
options for decrease in expenditures. 
 
Inevitably there will be areas where departments feel they must 
have an increase and of course they make those arguments as 
well. But the first call for estimates does go with a requirement 
that they provide a budget with cuts so that Treasury Board is 
left with the option of economizing where they think fit and 
appropriate. 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. Did you conduct any 
internal spending audits to determine where specific areas of 
savings might be achieved? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. That has to be . . . In order to 
respond to the first call and provide a 5 per cent decrease and I 
think it's a 2 per cent decrease, the department must go through 
that effort of reviewing all their expenditures, determining 
which ones would be least difficult to the public to reduce. And 
so the process that we've had, as I say, since this government 
took office — and I've been on Treasury Board since this 
government took office — the process we've had requires all 
departments to review each expenditure in order to find 
appropriate areas to reduce. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, the Estimates 
document shows that 73.8 million will be spent for salaries in 
your department as opposed to 70.8 million last year. The total 
number of full-time equivalents for this year are 1,799.9 
compared to 1,728.2 last year. Can you tell me what the reasons 
are for this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There were three or four, I guess, 
places where the increase took place. There were some 
additions at the Regina correction institute — 28.4 FTEs, 
full-time equivalents is what that stands for, and this was to 
correct a problem which has existed for some time at the 
correction institute. For some time there have been problems 
out there. This was intended to correct that. 
 
In addition, last year we introduced mediation services. We 
expanded it considerably, expanded mediation services. There 
were 19 full-time equivalents there. 
 
Land Titles Office automation. We have a Land Titles Office 
which is in need of automation and there were 6.5 FTEs there to 
assist with the Land Titles Office automation. Finally, there 
were just general workload increases across the piece that 
accounted for 9.7 full-time equivalents. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Can you explain the reasons for 
the 12.5 increase in salaries in the administration subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Our math doesn't work out quite the 
same as yours. In fact we show in the administration subvote an 
overall decrease. Let me read out to you what we . . . and this is 
more detailed than what you will have in the Estimates. 
 
There are additional staff which I just finished reading out to 
you which comes to the cost of some 473,000. There's 
ergonomics, which is to say an improvement in the physical 
space within which people work — that's 115,000. Systems, 
which is to say normally computers — an increase of 100,000. 
There is out-of-scope increases of 27,000. Now also with the 
administration subvote, there's personal property registry system 
— there's a decrease of 707,000. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1326 

There were vacancy savings of $45,000. There were 
miscellaneous savings in freedom of information, directory 
strategic planning, of 36,000. The overall, therefore, came to a 
decrease of 73,000. So that's the increases and decreases in 
administration, but our math doesn't quite match yours. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I believe you mentioned something else 
besides salaries. What I was asking about was salaries, and 
1994-95 was 3.309 million and so forth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. Okay. We gave you all the 
changes in administration, not just all the salaries. 
 
Well there was admittedly an increase in staffing levels; I've 
explained that earlier in answer to, I believe the question put to 
me by the member from Moosomin. But the increase in salaries 
is really I think accounted for by the increase in staff. There 
were only the normal increases in salary in the administrative 
area. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — So you're saying that there were increases in 
staff in administration? There were more people in 
administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. There were 9.5 more people in 
administration during this year. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. I would like to be 
provided with a breakdown of the number of positions within 
each subvote. Could you provide that tonight or in the very near 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We can provide it; certainly we can't 
do it right now. That's not information we have with us nor is it 
often provided, but we can certainly provide it in a relatively 
short period of time. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Before we leave the matter of 
salaries, could you tell me if any of the persons on the list I will 
send over to you are employed by your department? And if yes, 
provide me with the complete details on their hiring, including 
salary, job description, etc. And whether each of these is a new 
position and was advertised for by open competition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This is a rather cursory glance, but at 
a cursory glance, none of them appear to work in the 
Department of Attorney General. Michaela Keet, I think I 
mentioned her name earlier, she's come and gone, but none of 
the others appear to be here. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. Could you tell me 
how many people are involved in the communications function 
in your department. What are their salaries, and position titles, 
and descriptions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Just one, her name is Lisa Ann 
Wood, and the salary is . . . We customarily provide salaries of 
people who work in the ministers' offices and the deputy and so 
on, because those are order in council, and that's available in  

any case if someone wants to go to look it up. We don't always 
provide — certainly through the public air waves — we don't 
always provide salaries for people such as Lisa Ann Wood. I 
don't want to make a major issue out of this but we don't 
normally provide the salaries of these sort of in-scope people in 
this forum. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — There's a difficulty with providing the 
salary of this person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I guess it's available through Public 
Accounts, I'm reminded by some of my colleagues, so I guess 
there's little point in not giving it. The annual salary: $61,896. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has your 
department done any work with Phoenix Advertising in the 
'94-95 fiscal year, say to the end of December? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes there was. All of the work done 
by Phoenix for Justice was for advertising positions which were 
filled through the PSC (Public Service Commission), the total 
of which was $80,824.65. Again, all for positions, advertising 
of positions, which were filled through PSC. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. What are all of the fees for 
licences, inspections, that form sources of revenue for your 
department, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I need to correct a comment I just 
made. The total of what we spent on advertising was 
$80,824.65. I wouldn't want to mislead anyone, including I 
guess the people from Phoenix, about the size of their probable 
bill. The amount . . . Phoenix's share of that was just $12,443. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you for correcting that, Minister. 
What are all of the fees for licences, inspections, etc., that form 
sources of revenue for your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As I think the member from Regina 
North West is probably well aware, this department collects 
quite a sum of fees and so on. The total is $53,589,904. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Could you tell me all of the changes, either 
increases or decreases, that have taken place in those fees over 
the past year or are planned for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — All right, let me . . . I'll read it then 
for the member. There were some increases. Personal property 
fees were increased — revenue of $1.5 million; effective date is 
April 1, 1995. Corporation export fees — additional revenue of 
$7,050, and the effective date is April 1, '95. Certificate of 
status fee — additional revenue of $10,000; effective date is 
April 1, '95. Telephone inquiry fee — the total amount is 
$6,525; effective date here is July 1,'95. 
 
There's also remote access fee — an increase of $22,500, 
effective date July 1, '95. Corporation change fee — raising an 
additional 37,500; effective date is April 1, 1995. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1327 

Non-profit corporation fee — charging a fee for late filing of 
annual return under The Non-profit Corporations Act, expected 
to raise an additional $10,000; effective date is April 1, '95. Fax 
surcharges — charging for faxing information to clients — its 
effective date is April 1, '95. There's a computer printout fee, 
expected to raise an additional $2,000 — effective date April 1, 
'95. 
 
Probate fee increases expected to raise an additional $421,000. 
The effective date is January 1, '95, so it's, in effect, in effect. 
 
Mediation services fee; expected to raise an additional 139,000. 
The effective date there is January 1, 1995. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. Could you please tell 
me what has been the cumulative effect of changes in fees over 
the past four years? Could you provide me with a breakdown of 
each change in every one of these fees since 1992? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I think the member asked for 
this last year, and you're keeping your file up to date, and we 
will do the same. We will bring the material up to date and send 
it to you. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. I just have one more 
question to ask before I pass on the torch. As I understand it, 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) would like to 
consolidate or amalgamate its Saskatchewan subdivisions, but 
as I understand it the department hasn't responded to their 
request. Could you review that for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I could make a brief comment on that 
subject. That proposal has been made. This is a cost-shared item 
with the federal government and this, as I understand this 
proposal, it actually came from federal government. I'm not sure 
whether it was Liberals or Conservatives in office when the 
proposal came. 
 
It has, however, come to us. We are still in the process of 
reviewing it. We want to be very sure that the level of service 
which is provided remains as good as it is. The people of this 
province are very proud of the RCMP; proud of the service they 
get. We want to be sure that that level of service continues 
under any reorganization. And it is really that question: will the 
service remain as it is and as good. That's really the question 
we're struggling with at the moment. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I guess part of the question I'm asking is, 
are you in negotiations with the RCMP, and when might this 
decision be made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, we're not really negotiating with 
the RCMP. This in a way, is our decision to make. We are 
certainly considering the matter. I don't know when the decision 
is going to be made. We've had the proposal for some time, 
actually. I don't know when the decision is going to be made. I 
frankly don't anticipate it will be immediate. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, how 
much money does the department put up, or the province put 
up, for policing in the province of Saskatchewan? It seems to 
me that the province does cover some of the policing in the 
rural jurisdictions. I'm not sure if they do in the urban levels as 
far as the large urban centres, but maybe you could give us an 
idea of what type of costs are incurred by communities in 
policing and how much the province puts towards that policing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The budget for RCMP policing only 
is $60.836 million. 
 
Mr. Toth: — 60.836 million. And that's just the provincial 
share? What about the federal share that offsets . . . or is it a 
matching share or the larger percentage of the policing costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This is not a . . . this may frustrate 
the member, but the answer to this is not very simple. We pay 
70 per cent of the costs of what is called provincial policing, 
which is almost exclusively RCMP. The federal government 
pays 30 per cent. However there are additional federal costs 
which they pay. 
 
I'm told by the officials, in all likelihood, the cost to the federal 
government would be in and around the same neighbourhood as 
what we pay. 
 
Mr. Toth: — For that amount of money, how much has the 
policing been reduced in this province in the last year? I know a 
number of communities have . . . we've certainly seen 
reductions in staffing, and I'm wondering if you'd have an idea 
whether their communities are finding that the effectiveness of 
policing in this area has been hampered due to the reduction in 
manpower hours or even in staffing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The budget last year was 61.959 
million. So we've reduced it by that amount. In some cases the 
reduction in policing was a decision of the community. If they 
have over 500 people in it then they pay part of the cost of 
policing. And they may decide on their own to reduce staffing 
to reduce costs. That is not an infrequent occurrence. 
 
But the provincial budget was reduced from 61.959 million to 
60.836 million. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, does the province help fund 
policing in the large urban centres or is that strictly covered by 
the centres themselves? And how much if they do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, it's covered by the communities 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have to 
come back to a question or two regarding the travel of the 
former minister. And I noticed in your capacity as the new 
minister you really haven't had an opportunity yet or had any 
functions that would require you to leave the city at the present 
time and . . . but no doubt that'll probably change in the near 
future. 



April 3, 1995 

 
1328 

But I find it very interesting. There's a tour of Poundmaker 
Reserve — Regina, North Battleford, Saskatoon, April 29, '94, 
and the total cost is $73. Was that a car trip or there's . . . I 
notice there are a number in here and it seems to me when the 
minister came out to Yorkton, that one of the reasons the gun 
rally was held up was because they were waiting for the 
minister to arrive, and yet the cost here was only $74. Are all of 
these trips strictly travelling in vehicles or are there any air trips 
here? If there are, I'd like to know where you found the plane to 
fly for that kind of money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — You'll note that the Hon. Allan Rock 
was on that trip . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
officials don't have the information with them. They're 
speculating that perhaps the federal government paid part of the 
cost and that's why it's so reasonable. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well that may explain that one, Mr. Minister, but 
I know there are a number of other trips here and . . . I note a 
cabinet meeting, outreach program, gun control meeting for 
Yorkton for seventy-four eighty. A number of the figures here 
would almost indicate that most of these trips must have been 
trips by vehicle versus air, and yet it seems to me the air travel 
has . . . There must be a number of trips that were out . . . like 
when you've gone to Saskatoon, Stony Rapids, Fond-du-Lac, 
and Saskatoon. That one there I believe was air fare because it's 
629. That Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, that's a 
fair bit of travel in one day especially if you've got a meeting in 
the morning and trying to get to some of these meetings. So I'm 
wondering if you could just update us and indicate whether 
most of these trips were by car and if that's why the expenses 
are as low as they are, or how the means of travel, mode of 
travel . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think we're going to have to get 
back to you in writing if you want a breakdown. We just don't 
have that information in a reliable . . . we're going from memory 
here and it's getting a little dangerous. Perhaps we should 
review the documents and get back to you in writing if you have 
questions about specific trips. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister. And if indeed 
there was air travel but it really doesn't show here, I wonder if 
you could indicate where the costs for that air travel would have 
been incurred? And I'm not sure . . . like I will allow you to go 
back and review the information, to get back to us and clarify 
the information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm not entirely sure I understand the 
member's . . . If you want us to get back to you. I wasn't overtly 
undertaking to get back to you on anything. If you have some 
specific question, I need to hear it again so that we can know 
what's being asked of us. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well basically, Mr. Minister, I'm asking for the 
means of travel on . . . for all the items as it breaks down here, 
and if it's specifically car then that may explain how the . . . the 
low dollars. But just for the areas that the minister had gone, 
when you're looking at three or four locations in the same day,  

that might be almost difficult by car, just to make all those trips 
by motor vehicle versus using air fare. And yet at the same 
time, the numbers wouldn't correspond to air fare unless you 
find a very reasonable charter courier that's willing to charter 
these different flights. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Okay. We'll have to get back to you 
and let you know by what means the minister travelled. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last year 
we had asked for some information on any lawsuits that the 
government was currently engaged in, and at the time I believe 
the minister had indicated we should ask individual 
departments. I believe that the departments failed to provide any 
information, but we've also been informed that it basically 
would come through the Department of Justice. 
 
So I'm wondering if the minister could bring us up to date on 
any lawsuits such as . . . I believe there's still an outstanding 
lawsuit on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
question. There's certainly . . . we understand there's one 
brought forward by the judges, and if that's ongoing, and if 
there are any other lawsuits in that manner against . . . whether 
it's just strictly the Department of Justice or the government in 
general and how many may be ongoing at the present time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's a . . . at any given time, that's a 
relatively long list of all the litigation the government is 
involved in. You can appreciate when you employ some 
10,000-and-so people and spend $4.5 billion, you're engaged in 
a lot of lawsuits and that's always been the case. I am told that 
this information is part of the standard questions, and so we'll 
be providing you with the information in the standard 
questions. But it's too long a list to . . . that would be too long a 
list to read out to you now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. So it's . . . Yes, I 
didn't really take the time to go through all the . . . like you say 
the extensive list, the standard questions, and I just wanted to 
make sure that there would be a commitment from your 
department to follow up and to pass that information along as 
you have time. And I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, an area of major concern to people across this 
province is the Young Offenders Act, and a couple of recent 
incidents bring to my attention the fact that I believe it's time 
this Act was reviewed. There's no question in my mind that it 
should have been reviewed long ago. 
 
And just recently, in fact the other day, I believe it was Friday 
morning, we heard on the news that an individual in the . . . I 
believe it's in the Weyburn area decided to protect his property 
and basically took matters into his own hands because he was 
getting fed up with the fact that he was continually losing gas 
out of his storage tank. 
 
And this isn't the first time that people have lost gas out of bulk 
storage tanks on the farm. In fact I can understand the 
frustration that the individual must have been facing, because a  



April 3, 1995 

 
1329 

constituent of mine raised the same question with me last year. 
 
And if the member from Rosetown would pay attention he 
might learn something. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, in example, last year an individual resided in 
town but has a nice property outside of town and had fuelled up 
his . . . made sure his bulk tanks were filled up in the fall, 
number one, so that he wouldn't have condensation in the tanks; 
number two, just in case the price of fuels went up; and it was 
just the way he operated and purchased his fuel. And part way 
through the winter he . . . or I guess on a . . . basically on a 
weekly basis he'd slide out to the farm. 
 
On one occasion he went out, there was a fresh snowfall; he 
noticed tire tracks into his yard. And in the process of 
investigation, following the tire tracks, he noticed they were 
right up to his fuel tanks and that the locks he had put on — 
gone deliberately and taken a lot of time to make sure his 
storage tanks were all locked up — were broken. And as he 
took the time to look in the tank he found a substantial 
reduction in the amount of fuel in that tank. And to just check 
and see what had disappeared out of that tank he had the bulk 
agent come out, fuel the tank . . . refuel the tank, and on that 
occasion there was roughly 100 gallons of fuel that had 
disappeared out of that tank. 
 
He then called the RCMP who came; and in the meantime what 
he had done was laid a piece of plywood over the tracks so that 
they wouldn't be destroyed; called the RCMP out and they 
indeed saw that the tanks were . . . there was a reduction of fuel 
and they acknowledged the fact that as he had fuelled it up, the 
agent had indicated how much fuel had been missing from the 
tank, took pictures of the tire tracks, made a few inquiries. 
 
Nothing happened for about a week. He called the RCMP and 
asked, well what are you doing in this situation. In the 
meantime he had another loss of about 75 gallons, a total of 
about 150 to 175 gallons of fuel taken from his tanks; so he 
called the RCMP. Basically the comment to him was, for the 
time and effort it's going to take and the reality is, if we do 
happen to find the culprits, the chances of getting a conviction 
are very slim and you're not going to get reimbursed for the fuel 
lost, and the individuals may end up with just a slap on the 
wrist. 
 
Well this individual was not all that happy to hear that, and 
pleased to hear that. He had the pictures of the tire tracks and he 
methodically checked vehicles at the local bar when there was a 
fresh snowfall, plus the local rink. And eventually he 
determined who the individuals were and waited by the vehicles 
as he identified the tire tracks. 
 
(2045) 
 
And it was interesting to note, Mr. Minister, that when the 
people came out — it was young people — they eventually 
indicated, yes, I guess we did go onto your premises, and yes, 
we did take some gas. They didn't know exactly how much,  

because they had put so many litres or gallons of fuel into a slip 
tank and they were not sure if they had actually filled it up. And 
I guess that's neither here nor there. 
 
But at the end of the story is this. These young offenders didn't 
receive anything. The RCMP didn't pursue it because they just 
. . . I gathered from their reasoning, they're just totally frustrated 
with the justice system that really doesn't give them any 
authority, doesn't hand out any authority, or doesn't place any 
responsibility upon young offenders. 
 
So what we have is a man outside of Weyburn, he became 
frustrated, happened to have a gun in his hands — and it's 
unfortunate because of the gun debate right now — and took 
some pot-shots at the vehicle fleeing his premises. Now I 
understand he possibly faces a longer list of charges than the 
young offenders who have made a practice of looting his farm 
and taking fuel. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what the department is doing 
to address this problem specifically in rural Saskatchewan. I'm 
not sure, I think there's enough break-and-enters and we do 
have policing in our large urban centres, but the break-and-
enters in rural Saskatchewan . . . and another case where a 
house was trashed. It had been used as a summer residence — 
totally demolished. And yet at the end of the day, nothing was 
done. 
 
What is the department doing . . . and I understand that the 
Young Offenders Act is basically a federal matter. But I think 
it's very important that we finally address this concern with the 
federal government and take a serious look as to how we can 
make this Act more responsible, how we can make young 
people more responsible for their actions, and how people can 
be compensated for their loss rather than shrugging our 
shoulders and saying there really isn't much we can do. 
 
And I guess at the end of the day you basically would have to 
ask why are we spending $60 million as a province for policing 
if our police have no authority? And, number one, if at the end 
of the day they really have no responsibility, because when they 
do do an investigation, they go to court, it's just basically 
thrown out, something's wrong in our system and I'm 
wondering, Mr. Minister, what the Justice department is doing 
today to address a number of these concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Let me just make a couple of 
comments in response to the member's comments. Let me say 
that I think many people in the province, including many police 
officers, would probably applaud the member's comments. This 
has been a source of a good deal of criticism. 
 
It is not entirely clear that all of the criticism levied at the 
Young Offenders Act is deserved. I would point out, for 
instance, that the Young Offenders Act has a purpose that I 
think we'd all agree with in the abstract. I think the Act says that 
young people should be treated not as hardened criminals but as 
people in need of rehabilitation. I think we'd all agree with that 
when we're dealing with the very young. We would  



April 3, 1995 

 
1330 

like to salvage them. 
 
I would point out that the Young Offenders Act has a 
conviction rate of over 70 per cent, so it's not that they're not 
getting convicted. The concern I think centres around the level 
of sentences and the level of punishment which is meted out. 
 
I am told that the Young Offenders Act, the severity of the 
sentences increased after it was passed, so that the sentences 
under Young Offenders are more severe than under the old 
Juvenile Delinquents Act. To that extent it's probably something 
of an improvement. 
 
Having said that, I began by admitting that most people in the 
province would applaud the member's comments. This Act has 
been the subject of a good deal of concern. It is currently under 
review. There is currently a task force which is doing a 
comprehensive review of the Act by the federal . . . and the 
province, and they all agree upon it. 
 
And there's also a parliamentary review schedule and we are 
given to understand that the committees — the Justice 
committee  will be reviewing the matter this fall and perhaps 
into the spring of '96. 
 
So that there is a comprehensive review of this under way, and 
in the normal fashion in which democracy works in this country 
at the federal level, the voice of the public is being brought to 
bear on these discussions. 
 
And I would assume that we will see some changes. In the 
interim, in the interim, there is some changes currently being 
proposed to the House, the federal House, in Bill C-37. These 
are some specific promises which the Liberals made in their red 
book. And so that's ongoing. So that is what is being done in an 
overall, comprehensive way to review the Young Offenders 
Act. 
 
You asked specifically what this province is doing. We're doing 
as best we can working under a federal statute. We are trying to 
respond to the public expectations of us, and I'm told that the 
level of sentences are relatively more severe in Saskatchewan 
than they are elsewhere in the country. So Saskatchewan can 
take some solace in the fact that we mete out a relatively more 
severe sentence here than we do elsewhere in the country. 
 
However the overall response to this problem — and I admit it 
certainly is a political problem — the overall response to this 
problem is to await the completion of the comprehensive 
review by the task force and the introduction of legislation at 
the federal House of Commons. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
indicate that this province tends to have a more stringent 
penalty applied regarding young offenders, and I guess as far as 
sentencing, it would depend on the type of crime. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Minister, in a situation where property 
has been vandalized, and as I've indicated and as we saw from  

the media about this gentleman at Weyburn, police were 
investigating a vehicle theft and a shooting Tuesday at a farm 
about 30 kilometres south of Weyburn. A farmer fired several 
shots at a vehicle after a group of men tried to steal gas from 
him. 
 
The frustration many people have is that you may end up, Mr. 
Minister, with a stricter sentence than another jurisdiction may 
have, but what about the innocent victim? What level of 
compensation is available or how do you achieve 
compensation? Would it be possible, Mr. Minister, in some 
cases to have — especially if it's young offenders and if it isn't 
young offenders, say someone who's a little older than the 
Young Offenders Act, but say is a young . . . can I say even in 
the 20's and 30's, a first-time offender — would it be possible 
through the Department of Justice in sentencing to make sure 
that part of the sentence is some kind of a compensation? 
Maybe it's work for compensation, some kind of a program that 
any proceeds or any funds that are accumulated through the 
individual, that they've got to work to help pay for the damages 
that they've incurred. 
 
And even for young offenders — and it might be appropriate, 
Mr. Minister, when we're talking about young offenders and 
having them work — maybe I can suggest a boot camp in this 
province, something that basically helps and puts young people 
. . . first of all puts the responsibility on their shoulders for their 
actions. Plus I think parents also need to also have a level of 
responsibility handed to them, because when a 14- or 
15-year-old is out damaging someone else's property, or stealing 
property as we've seen, or even 12 and 13 years old, I have to 
ask myself: where are the parents? 
 
And I think maybe we all ask that at some times. Where at the 
parents? Aren't the parents responsible for their children and 
they're responsible for their children's actions? 
 
And then I see another incident where there's a parent currently 
in Calgary, a triple amputee, is now facing a court action or a 
. . . or the Justice department levelled a charge against her and 
she's going to be going to court simply because she spanked her 
child. 
 
And I guess one has to begin to wonder what kind of message 
are we sending out here. First of all, I believe parents have a 
responsibility to train their children and to give some direction. 
I don't think the Justice department helps by taking that 
responsibility away from parents. I'm also concerned that we've 
created laws that we're penalizing parents who use forms of 
punishment such as a spanking. 
 
And I'm not sure, Mr. Minister, you might be old enough to 
have been in the same situation where I was, where my dad 
really kind of believed in that old philosophy where if you spare 
the rod, you spoil the child. I'm not exactly sure that you were 
that good when you were a kid, just having seen you in action 
over the last little while. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, a number of years ago when parents  



April 3, 1995 

 
1331 

really accepted their responsibility, I don't know if we saw as 
many problems with young offenders as we do today. And the 
challenge is in the home, the challenge is in our school system, 
and certainly we see a challenge in our justice system. 
 
Is the department looking at actions and making proposals to 
the federal government, especially with the young offenders, 
where we're starting to put some responsibility back where it 
belongs, number one, in the fact that teenagers or young people 
are held accountable? And maybe we need to lower the age 
where we protect young people from disclosure of their name if 
they're charged for an offence. Maybe we need to lower that age 
and treat some of these younger people, if you will, those 
individuals up in their later teen years, as responsible adults 
already. 
 
I don't think we're helping ourselves by just, number one, 
punishing parents when they choose — I shouldn't say choose 
— when they basically are accepting their responsibility of 
discipline. And number two, we certainly aren't helping them, 
and I believe in this case in Weyburn, one of the parents even 
suggested that the RCMP shouldn't be laying charges. 
 
Maybe it's time we started listening to the people on the street 
as well. And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would just . . . 
where your department is. Are you making submissions to this 
Commons committee as it reviews the Young Offenders Act, to 
address a number of the concerns that I've laid out before you 
just now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The official, in fact, who's sitting 
right behind me at the moment is not only involved but chairs 
one of the subcommittees on this task force. We are involved in 
it extensively. 
 
She tells me as well that one of the items which is under 
consideration is parental responsibility. It is a serious part of the 
discussions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I appreciate that. What is your view on this 
matter, Mr. Minister, regarding parental responsibility? Do you 
view this as something that it's time we moved back to and 
allowed parents that responsibility without . . . I think the 
problem we face in some cases, is trivial matters that I think can 
be brought up. 
 
And I raise another one. In Saskatoon, back in February if I'm 
not mistaken, where a father happened to punish a child. That 
child went to school and suggested to her classmates that her 
father had spanked her — and I'm not exactly sure whether it 
was using a belt or a wooden spoon — because she had been 
disobedient. 
 
And the classmates then reported to the RCMP that . . . or the 
police, city police — it must have been city police in this case 
— that an offence had been committed by this parent. And this 
father found himself in court. And I find that totally ludicrous, 
when a parent sets some guidelines, a child crosses and 
infringes on those guidelines, and the parent cannot punish that  

child without finding themselves in court. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what are your views on this? 
Are we really going to place responsibility at the feet of parents 
without . . . and I can understand where the department is 
coming from, and people come from sometimes, where they 
suggest that we need to . . . we've got this word abuse, becomes 
a major problem. And maybe there are parents who abuse their 
position and their responsibility. 
 
But I think a lot of parents are legitimately trying hard to raise 
their children. And to be punished themselves for having 
administered discipline when a child has not followed the 
guidelines or not listened to the rules, I think certainly doesn't 
bode well for society. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what are your viewpoints and 
what is your department doing? You mentioned that you have 
one of your officials behind you who are raising some of these 
questions. Where are we going on this matter and are we indeed 
going to put some of the responsibility back in the home, as 
well as responsibility upon the judicial system to indeed make 
sure that everyone is treated fairly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This is going to frustrate the member 
from Moosomin. I don't have any fixed views on whether or not 
parents should be civilly liable for the acts of their children. It is 
an interesting question. I understand this is one of the matters 
that the federal task force is working on, is whether or not 
parents should in fact be responsible for the damage their 
children do. 
 
My own experience as a lawyer was it was rarely worthwhile. 
There is now provision in the Criminal Code to make restitution 
orders. It was rare that it was worth the time it took to write 
them out. 
 
The type of people who got into these problems are almost 
never worth pursuing for the money. They almost always had a 
pretty good defence to civil action and that defence being 
poverty. That's the best defence in the world to a civil action, is 
abject poverty. And I found in many of these cases it simply 
wasn't worth pursuing them. 
 
(2100) 
 
In the cases which I . . . I never acted as a prosecutor. It was 
never compatible with being an elected member, and I've been 
an elected member for most of the years I've practised law. I 
always acted as defence counsel. But it never struck me as 
making much sense, because it was rarely possible to enforce 
the order. 
 
Now that doesn't exactly answer the broader question of 
whether or not it might make sense to have parents civilly 
liable. That's a good question. You know some American 
jurisdictions do that now. 
 
I think what we would want to do is to visit . . . not visit the  



April 3, 1995 

 
1332 

jurisdictions; there's no need to do that. But I think we would 
want to get the benefit of their experience. Has it helped to 
make parents more responsible? Has it helped to make parents 
accept the responsibility of raising children, and not simply 
wash their hands of a problem when it develops? 
 
I think we would want to examine closely the experience of 
American jurisdictions which have tried this. As I think the 
member knows, in the U.S. (United States), criminal law is a 
matter for the states, and so it varies from one state to the other. 
And I think this is something . . . The task is reviewing this and 
I suspect the task force will want to avail itself of the 
experience elsewhere. I really don't have any fixed views on the 
matter, one way or the other. 
 
The member also raised the question of parents spanking 
children. There's no specific section which deals with this. It 
just falls under the general heading of assault. Judges are 
required to make these difficult decisions as to what constitutes 
reasonable force and when does corporal punishment become 
unreasonable. Very difficult decisions. 
 
It will vary from case to case, from community to community. 
And there's not . . . in my experience, there aren't many general 
guidelines you can lay down which is of much assistance to 
judges. They struggle with these same questions themselves, 
and I think if there were some guidelines which made these 
decisions easy, the first people to welcome such guidelines 
would be the judges. 
 
But the judges — particularly provincial court judges usually — 
judges are fixed with these responsibilities of determining when 
corporal punishment is reasonable, when it becomes 
unreasonable, and they struggle through these decisions, as do 
all of us, and do the best they can. I'm not sure there is a better 
system than to simply leave it to the judiciary. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I'm not 
exactly sure being poor is a good enough excuse or good 
enough defence. It certainly may be lucrative for lawyers to 
have the types of laws and allow the process to work the way it 
is, but you did indicate that to pursue some of these matters, for 
most people, it certainly isn't worthwhile because at the end of 
the day — and that's what happened in a couple of the 
circumstances I just indicated earlier — by the time they 
pursued it, the cost became so astronomical it just wasn't worth 
it and yet the frustration of having to deal with these types of 
situations . . .  
 
I think as well, Mr. Minister, just this past summer, we're quite 
well aware of the so-called Oldsmobile gang and whether . . . 
I'm not exactly sure those individuals were hard-up young 
people in a lot of cases. It seems to me some of the individuals 
that may have been picked up or looked at at the time . . . I 
think the suggestion came out they were coming from 
well-to-do homes. And that's not levelling names, but it was 
certainly not, say, from just the poor class of society. So I think 
it crosses all lines. 
 

And I guess for that reason, Mr. Minister, what I'm suggesting, 
where a person really doesn't have the physical means, maybe 
the justice should be looking at a form of punishment that 
includes restitution of some kind, like maybe doing something 
in a community where you're basically paid and that money then 
goes to the individual who has had wilful damage done to 
property. 
 
I think those are areas that we should look at and I'm wondering 
if the Justice department is indeed looking at similar 
circumstances because I personally don't believe we should be 
sending everyone to an institution. 
 
I think there are some people, especially young people, who, if 
you will, may be first-time offenders, may have just got in with 
a group of individuals, may have gone, if you will, along for the 
ride and ended up in a circumstance that became where a 
criminal offence occurred and they up end before a judge. 
 
And that individual, with possibly the proper sentencing and 
having to work to help repay or restore the loss that was 
incurred to an individual that may have been victimized, 
possibly would receive just as much as a corrective measure in 
that form versus being institutionalized for a period of time and 
then back on the street. 
 
In some cases, being institutionalized just enables a young 
member to find out from individuals who've been around the 
crime scene a lot longer, how to go about in a more methodical 
way of committing even higher forms of crime. 
 
So that's an area, Mr. Minister, that I think we should be 
looking at and I'm not sure if your department is looking at that, 
but maybe you could respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We are indeed struggling with this 
problem of a fair and better treatment of victims. And we have 
a program which has had some interesting innovations, called 
the victim services program. And we've put some sums of 
money into that to try to make this work. 
 
Actually with respect to the Oldsmobile gang, particularly the 
Department of Social Services did work with the offenders and 
the victims, attempted to make arrangements whereby the 
offenders worked, and the money that they made and the 
services they performed, went to benefit the victims. And did, I 
think . . . actually you mention that case. I think in that case, as 
good a job as could be done under the circumstances was done 
in an attempt to ensure that the offenders did recognize the 
damage they'd done to the victims, and so far as possible, did 
attempt to compensate the victims by their earnings. 
 
So I think the Department of Social Services did do a pretty 
reasonable job of trying to ensure that the victims of those car 
thefts were aided by the offenders in the work they did. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
mention the fact that Social Services was involved. And if I'm 
not mistaken, Social Services basically administers young  



April 3, 1995 

 
1333 

offenders . . . it administers the Young Offenders Act or it's 
responsible for the young offenders. And I guess the question I 
would have is, why would Social Services indeed have that 
responsibility? Why wouldn't that rest with the Department of 
Justice, and then the Department of Justice maybe working 
through Social Services to address some of the concerns that 
may be out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Young offender corrections and the 
young offender penalties, I guess, is in the Department of Social 
Services. It is thought to be . . . again this is thought to be not 
primarily retributive in nature, and not primarily punitive in 
nature, but primarily rehabilitative in nature, and thus it is in the 
Department of Social Services. It's part of the philosophy of the 
existing young offenders program. A philosophy I think most of 
us would agree with in the abstract. 
 
Where we have some serious problems is where members of the 
public appear to have had significant property damage, and 
there is no responsibility borne by the victims who seem to be 
treated as if they were somehow or other exempt from normal 
laws of human behaviour because they're young. That is being 
addressed in a different forum. 
 
That perception is something that concerns all of us. I think all 
of us strongly believe that the justice system must be responsive 
to public opinion. It is not a system unto itself. It is paid for by 
the public and must be responsive to their views. And there has 
been some very real attempts to do that, including in the whole 
area of young offenders. And that work's ongoing with the task 
force. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you made the comment that the 
young offenders — or the Justice department — should be 
cognizant of public opinion. I think if I could offer something, 
I'd be a little leery of always being just jumping at public 
opinion. I think the public have opinions on a lot of cases when 
it comes to correctional matters, when it comes to charges, 
when it comes to criminal activity. 
 
And unfortunately in some cases I'm not exactly sure if the 
public are well enough informed to basically start making 
demands of politicians, or departments, or police forces, in 
investigative matters. And maybe I could just bring up this 
situation of the Martensville case. And I'm not going to get into 
that in detail at the present time. But I think what happens, Mr. 
Minister, on many occasions the justice or police forces react to 
public opinion. 
 
And I think that sometimes public opinion can become very 
strong to the point that our justice system almost feels they have 
to find a guilty person, or at least show that they found a guilty 
person, even before they have done enough investigative work 
to arrive or to determine whether or not they have indeed an 
individual or a group of individuals, if you will, in front of them 
that are indeed guilty of having committed an offence. And I 
think it's very imperative that: number one, I think the public 
must allow the justice system to work if it's going to work 
properly. 

I think as far as the judicial system, it's imperative that we listen 
to the public, and we establish some guidelines, and establish, if 
you will, procedures and sentencing that would fit the crime. 
But at the same time we should not allow public pressure to 
pressure a judicial system — whether it's the prosecutors or 
whether it's policemen — to have someone paraded in front of 
the public. Let's say . . . for example, it wasn't that long ago we 
had, I believe, an investigation into the disappearance of three 
women in the Saskatoon area, and that over a period of time. 
And of course when that happens and someone disappears — a 
young girl or a young boy such as the case that happened in 
Moose Jaw — the public would be demanding to have someone 
arrested immediately. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I don't believe that's always possible. And I 
think it's very important that our justice system be allowed to 
operate properly and without — how could I phrase this — 
without being forced to bring forward and come up with an 
individual or individuals to show that they're doing their job. I 
think sometimes it takes a bit of time for a thorough 
investigation so that you, at the end of the day, can feel quite 
certain that you've got the proper individuals in front of you. 
 
And I think just this last year we've seen a number of occasions 
where earlier convictions, some as old as 10 and 15 years, have 
been overturned because a review of matters have basically 
indicated maybe there was some information lacking at the 
time. And I don't think it serves our judicial system well to be 
forcing an issue and forcing a justice system, or forcing our 
police network, or forcing prosecutors to act and prey at an 
individual. So on that basis I think it's important that the public 
realize that there are procedures to follow. 
 
But what the public I believe are demanding of us is that at the 
end of the day there are sufficient crimes and penalties . . . or 
penalties if you will, to fit the crime. And that even goes for 
young offenders. So that's an area I think that it's very important 
that we follow up on and that we take the time and we set out 
some very stringent guidelines. 
 
I think if you will, Mr. Minister, we've created so many 
guidelines and so many different avenues of criminal activity 
that it becomes mind-boggling. And I'm sure even for our police 
networks themselves they must find it frustrating trying to 
determine whether this person is guilty of this offence or 
whether there's another offence that they should be charged 
under. 
 
And I'm not sure if there's a simpler way of administering 
justice in the province of Saskatchewan. If there was, maybe it 
would then eliminate the need for the largesse, if you will, of 
the legal system in our province or in our nation. I don't know. 
 
But certainly I think what people are looking for, they're 
looking for a justice system that is fair, treats everyone fairly. 
And I certainly believe, and I think the public must realize, that 
in this Canada . . . or, in this country of Canada and in this 
province if you will, I believe our justice system operates on a 
premiss that you are innocent until proven guilty. 



April 3, 1995 

 
1334 

Unfortunately most of the public, as soon as you mention, or it 
comes out in the media that a certain individual has been 
arrested based on the assumption that they may be guilty of 
having committed a certain crime and have been arrested in this 
certain investigation, the public seems to jump on the 
bandwagon and they've already got that person convicted before 
that individual has had an appropriate time to have, or have had, 
their day in court. 
 
(2115) 
 
So I think it's very important that we not only listen to the 
public and set appropriate penalties, but as well, the public 
allow the judicial system to . . . process to work appropriately 
so that when a trial is complete and whether a conviction is . . . 
I shouldn't say a conviction is gained, that you indeed . . . the 
judicial system has been able to determine whether or not that 
person was guilty or innocent. 
 
And I guess at the end of the day as well someone might argue, 
well that individual got off because they had a good lawyer, or 
that individual got convicted because they didn't have a good 
lawyer. There are some of the concerns out there. 
 
But regardless of what happens, we should allow our judicial 
system to operate and to indeed address the concerns that the 
public have at large, that they can believe in the system. 
 
Another question regarding the young offenders, and I was 
going to allude to it as well. You had mentioned that the 
department administers justice, but the young offenders, as far 
as the institutionalization of individuals, Social Services 
administers a number of these programs. And I'm not sure. 
 
There is a work camp out at Kenosee Lake that I think has 
worked quite well. It was very interesting. They cut some of the 
dead wood in the park. And I remember going out there a year 
or so ago to pick up some wood to use in our fireplace. What I 
found very interesting, Mr. Minister, is that the attendant in 
charge of the camp came out and said, okay fellows, let's go and 
we're going to help Mr. Toth fill his truck full of wood. And the 
eagerness with which those young fellows came out of the door 
and to help I thought was very interesting. 
 
And I think that is the type of a program, Mr. Minister, that 
certainly allows young people an ability to, if you will, provide 
for restitution for the crime they've committed. Because while 
they're out cutting that dead wood they're beautifying the park 
because they take all that dead wood out of the park and out of 
the trees, and so when people come down to the park it's just 
that much nicer. And at the same time they turn around and 
make that wood available and they sell that wood, which means 
you're generating some income. And I realize most of this 
probably goes just to administer the program. But these are 
avenues whereby I think . . . that I look at as means in which we 
can help people to better themselves and lift them up in society. 
 
Another thing I think we could do for a lot of young people . . . 
I think a lot of the younger people that end up having criminal  

records and being involved in criminal activity tend to be young 
people who, in some cases, may not have had that opportunity 
to really advance or may have been slow learners and have 
ended up in the wrong crowd. Maybe an educational program to 
help them at least attain a grade 12 education while they are 
institutionalized might be an appropriate method of helping 
some of these young individuals as well. 
 
And so I've thrown out a number of areas, Mr. Minister, and 
maybe you'd care to respond or like to respond to some of these 
concerns I've raised. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, many of your comments are . . . 
I found your comment with respect to the justice system 
actually quite thoughtful. The member is full of surprises 
tonight. 
 
Certainly you put your finger on a conundrum. And that is that 
with respect to any individual case, the justice system must be 
independent from one end to the other, both from its beginning 
with the police investigation to its completion when the matter 
is finally disposed of by the highest appellate court which is 
available to the litigants. It must be completely independent. 
And the public prosecutions branch must be independent. 
We've had some discussions about that actually over the last 
few days; we in fact in this House have struggled with trying to 
define that independence, and members have had, I think, 
honest differences of opinion. 
 
And you're also correct in stating that while a member must be 
. . . while, I'm sorry . . . while the justice system must be 
independent with respect to any individual case from one end to 
the other, nevertheless the system taken as a whole must 
generally meet public expectations of fairness and 
effectiveness. And the public must be satisfied that the justice 
system is in fact doing its job, that guilty people are being 
convicted, and that innocent people are not, and that the system 
does deter crime. If they lose that confidence in its fairness or 
its effectiveness, very serious problems can result. 
 
And we see some of those problems. Indeed we see some of 
those problems in our neighbours to the south, where the 
criminal system is seen to have broken down. And in some 
cities in the great republic to the south, some of the cities face 
very serious problems where there's simply no confidence in the 
justice system from one end to the other. 
 
This province in fact has been well served by having a justice 
system which has been independent in its entirety. Through at 
least the lifetime of three governments  the Blakeney 
government, the government led by the member from Estevan, 
and the current government  the justice system has been 
independent. 
 
At the same time, I have noticed in that 20-year period, I have 
noticed increasing interest, shall we say, by the public and an 
increasing, I think, level of criticism to be candid. I think I find 
an increasing level of criticism of the justice system now. I 
don't think that's the fault of any one person, or perhaps is it the  



April 3, 1995 

 
1335 

fault of the justice system. Perhaps it's simply the temper of a 
time and the strain of modern day events. The justice system is 
trying to cope with a world which is changing quickly, some 
ways more quickly than we can adjust to it. 
 
The member also made some interesting comments with respect 
to youth camps. These again are difficult issues. You try to 
teach them useful skills. You try to teach them a sense of 
responsibility. You also try to teach them that crime doesn't pay, 
and that people who are convicted face serious penalties, 
ostracization from the community, and then the community 
which is important to them, and also penalties in the sense that 
loss of freedom and liberty and so on. 
 
So all of these the system tries to balance, and some of the 
things you described, some of the camps, are an attempt to 
balance these various competing goals of rehabilitation of youth 
and also providing a deterrence in the future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just the 
one comment. In regards to that, I made a comment about 
education. Do we have any kind of education programs 
available in some of the institutions to help young offenders 
who may not have much of an education, may not have 
achieved . . . Let's throw out a number; I don't really know. 
Maybe what they've received so far is about the equivalent of a 
grade 9. Maybe they're students that have a difficult time 
learning. 
 
And I think that's why some of these individuals do end up on 
the street. And I think it would be important and certainly 
beneficial if we did have some form of an educational program 
whereby these individuals, rather than just sitting idly all day, 
may have an opportunity to enhance their intellectual skills. 
 
And certainly at the end of the day, while they're receiving 
correction and may help to face society down the road, they at 
the same time will be receiving that educational equivalent, or 
an increase in their education so that when they do get out of an 
institution they have the potential for job opportunities because 
of the fact they do have those educational skills. And I don't 
know if that's taking place but is that something that's being 
looked at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes we are conscious of that. The 
child protection plan, it should be pointed out, attempts to 
identify homes and children which are high risk, in the sense 
the children have high risk of becoming offenders. And we try 
to prevent that. 
 
Certainly once they do offend, we also try to rehabilitate them. 
And the most effective way of doing that is through education, 
as you well point out. We do try to . . . the child protection plan 
does try to deal with the system, both before and after the 
offence is committed. So we do try to rehabilitate them, we try 
to prevent it, and we do try to use education so far as possible. 
It's by far the most effective thing you can do with a child who 
has offended, is to keep them in school to develop some very 
real and marketable skills. 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I do want to come to that point that 
you alluded to just a moment ago about equality of the law and 
that's regarding the suggestion or the . . . brought down by Mr. 
McIntyre regarding Mr. Mitchell and this section of the Young 
Offenders Act and the concern that the Battleford Telegraph 
feels that they have been unjustly treated. 
 
And it would seem to me that if I'm not mistaken in comments 
. . . I read some of the comments by even the prosecutor in the 
case regarding the North Battleford Telegraph where they 
basically indicated that they felt that The Telegraph 
inadvertently had printed the name and it was a human error 
and in making their submission to the court . . . And now we've 
got the decision from Mr. McIntyre regarding Mr. Mitchell's 
comments that were inadvert comments made by the media. 
However, they did contravene a section of the Young Offenders 
Act. 
 
And it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that number one, if we 
were talking of equality it would be probably, I guess if you will 
. . . and I don't know how this really works in a court system or 
in our justice system today. If indeed a higher . . . and Mr. 
McIntyre I believe was on the federal . . . I can't remember if he 
was a Supreme Court justice but it would seem to me that when 
a ruling or a suggestion comes down from a person of that 
equivalent that possibly a junior or a Justice department and 
even a prosecutor's office would take all those things into 
consideration and maybe come up with some changes to apply 
the law equally. 
 
But at the same time is your department looking at . . . is this 
another area that your department is specifically looking at and 
suggesting we make some changes so that individuals aren't put 
in a position of possibly inadvertently again, if you will, 
contravening the Act? And I think that's an area that certainly 
has to be addressed as well in view of the outcry that came, 
arose when Mr. Mitchell stepped aside because of those 
comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I want to . . . I want to take this 
opportunity just to make a comment about public prosecutions 
in this province. Through several years, certainly more than 10 
years, public prosecutions in this branch have handled some 
very delicate cases, have handled them and they have involved 
members of this Assembly and that has gone on for at least a 
decade. Throughout all of those years under the most difficult 
circumstances, public prosecutions have discharged their duties 
in a way which has met everyone's concept of fairness until 
very, very recently. 
 
The ability of this branch of the department to discharge its 
duties in a way which was independent, in a way which is 
impartial, never been called into question. I think that's a 
remarkable record for this department, given the very difficult 
circumstances they've operated under. 
 
No province in the Dominion of Canada has had the number of 
delicate, difficult cases to deal with that Saskatchewan has, and 
this branch has discharged them in a way that they think is  



April 3, 1995 

 
1336 

exemplary, in a way which I think has brought real credit to the 
whole justice system. It's only very recently that events have 
conspired to cause some questioning of the way this matter has 
been handled. 
 
I want to say specifically with respect to North Battleford, I 
don't know how one can respect the independence of the public 
prosecutions branch and get into a discussion here as to whether 
or not the newspaper should have been charged. I don't how 
we'd do that and still leave public prosecutions independent. 
 
And I'm going to decline to comment on that, except to say that 
the matter was handled by public prosecutions. Sometimes 
these are subjective decisions. They're not always objective. I 
think the decisions were discharged with competence, with a 
sense of fairness. And it's somewhat distressing to me to find 
that just so recently, after having gone through such a difficult 
period, for I say spanning far more than a decade, having gone 
through such a difficult period very recently, to have their 
decisions called into question. 
 
Specifically with respect to the question of whether or not this 
section of the Young Offenders Act is being considered, I am 
informed by my officials, one of whom, as I say, is directly 
involved in the matter — I am informed by my officials that in 
fact this section of the Young Offenders Act is one of the things 
that's being reviewed by this federal-provincial task force. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, what I was basically 
asking of you, in regards to the situation we discussed regarding 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview and the North Battleford 
Telegraph, the fact is this. What process is followed when a 
decision is made such as Mr. McIntyre's; it would seem to me 
that that would be the type of decision that the department . . . 
and I'm not sure; are you telling me that the Crown prosecutor's 
office operates totally separate? The Crown prosecutor's office, 
while it operates separate, at the same time must . . . what 
they're basically doing is they're applying the rules as they 
understand them, that have been set by this Chamber and by the 
department as they would bring forward suggestions for 
legislation. 
 
They would establish then the legislations, the penalties, the 
types of criminal activity. I don't know, sir, if the Crown 
prosecutor's office establishes that. I think that's . . . I believe 
that's established in here through legislation, and the Crown 
prosecutor's office then applies that legislation as they 
understand it, in a court of law. 
 
But at the same time, I believe in this case with Mr. McIntyre, 
does the Justice department come up with the recommendation 
or would a prosecutor's office then determine okay, here's a 
senior official has come down with a ruling that basically would 
set precedence, and that maybe we should look at in view of the 
specific piece of legislation that we're looking at here. Would 
they determine then that this may be an area that needs review? 
Would the prosecutor's office come to the  

Department of Justice and suggest that this is an area we should 
look at or how . . . 
 
Is there any interaction at all between the prosecutor's office 
and the department regarding laws as to how . . . the types of 
laws that you would bring forward, and whether or not . . . or 
the types of laws you would apply, or how does the system 
really work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. Under a system which, as I say, 
was certainly firmly established in the '70s when I was 
ministerial assistant to the now Premier, who was the attorney 
general, under a system which was firmly established then, this 
has not changed in the 20 years that have elapsed, toward the 
quarter of a century that's elapsed since then. 
 
The laws first of all are passed by the federal government. The 
Young Offenders Act, the Criminal Code, are statutes of the 
federal government. We don't pass them. The prosecution's 
branch do not receive directions from the political arm or the 
executive arm of government; they operate independently and 
have during that period of time. 
 
We do not give them directions on specific cases. We do not 
give them general directions. They apply some fairly simple, 
basic rules which are standard to all prosecutors across Canada 
and I think probably throughout North America. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then basically what you're saying, Mr. 
Minister, is in a scenario we've just laid out and the discussions 
that are now taking place as the review is undertaken with the 
Young Offenders Act, and if any changes are made and the 
federal government implements these changes, then the 
prosecutor's office then would look at that and that's how they 
would then apply the laws? 
 
Basically, if I understand you, once a law is made, then the 
prosecutor’s office . . . rather than the prosecutor's office 
suggesting maybe there's some areas we should look at here, 
they don't really make suggestions; they just apply the law as it 
is laid out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's correct, yes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So therefore then I would encourage your 
officials to certainly — in view of all the discussion that has 
taken place . . . that this is an area that I believe no doubt your 
department is quite well familiar with already, and will be 
raising with regards to the Young Offenders Act as they deal 
with the Act and with the specific sections, or the different 
sections, that will be coming forward. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to guidelines for abuse, I just want to 
make a couple of comments here. I'm not exactly sure how we 
specifically lay out guidelines as to what may be considered 
abuse and I think I indicated that a little earlier. 
 
I think the period that you and I grew up in, even school 
teachers had the ability . . . there was a strap usually hanging on  



April 3, 1995 

 
1337 

the wall. There was in the school I went to, and a lot of teachers 
weren't afraid to use it in a disciplinary fashion. But I see just 
by the looks of some of the faces of individuals in this room 
that a lot of people view that as an archaic means of discipline. 
And it seems to me that . . . and I'm not saying that we suggest 
the strap as a means of just administering discipline all the time. 
I believe there are many forms of discipline. 
 
But what I'm wondering is, when it comes to guidelines 
regarding abuse, and someone lays out an accusation, what does 
a public official — such as a police officer if you will, or a 
person in a responsible area, even say a teacher, if someone 
comes to them at school . . . what guidelines do they follow 
before they go to a higher authority and suggest that maybe this 
home should be investigated? 
 
And maybe the member from Rosetown should have had a little 
bit of discipline, and he wouldn't be talking and speaking from 
his seat all the time and always interfering. He might show a 
little more respect in this Assembly. 
 
But what guidelines are followed so that indeed we don't have 
frivolous matters always being raised and, if you will, whether 
it's police force or whether it's Social Service individuals, 
always running after situations where accusations may be 
coming that may be not legitimate? Are there any guidelines or 
is this another case where we're looking at trying to build some 
firm guidelines so officials know how and when to act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Basically what the police, and the 
prosecutors, and the judges are all trying to apply is community 
standards; which will vary from generation to generation, and 
from time to time, and from community to community. 
 
I remember my grandfather, who went to school . . . who was 
born in 1871, actually went to school in rural Ontario, telling 
me of having been strapped so hard in school that he couldn't 
walk. That would be the subject of a serious criminal charge 
today. At that day, it was considered normal corporal 
punishment for misbehaving.  
 
Obviously community standards are different today, but that 
really is the only guideline which police and prosecutors and 
the judges have is, what is . . . what are the normal community 
standards. Has it crossed the line from reasonable corporal 
punishment to a criminal assault. They attempt to establish, they 
attempt to apply, community standards. These are difficult 
decisions, and as I say, will vary from community to community 
and from place to place and time to time. But there really is no 
other guideline except community standards. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, throughout this whole session and going back into the 
previous session, we have dealt with an issue very close and 
dear to my heart, and also one close and dear to the heart of a 
number of members in this Assembly. I'm thinking particularly 
of the member from Indian Head-Wolseley.  
 
Mr. Minister, we have been talking about gun control in this  

legislation starting last session when rumours of changes to the 
regulations to the Act were heard out of Ottawa. In the previous 
session, we passed motions opposing any changes to gun 
control, to the firearms regulations that are currently in place, 
and they had no effect, Mr. Minister. Throughout the summer, 
through the fall, and this early winter, we've had rallies across 
this province opposing the federal Liberals’ proposed changes 
to firearms control.  
 
And yet those . . . that Act has come into the House. I have a 
copy of it here, Mr. Minister. It's a fairly large and onerous Bill. 
I'm sure that probably no one in this House has gone through 
the whole thing entirely and understood it. Some may have read 
through it, but I'm not sure they understood all of it because it's 
a very convoluted piece of legislation.  
 
Mr. Minister, in this whole time, we have passed a motion in 
the House opposing . . . in this session, opposing this 
legislation, putting in place a committee, a delegation that 
would make a representation to the Standing Committee on 
Justice, federal Standing Committee on Justice whenever they 
hold their hearings. That is, those hearings have not yet started, 
but that seems to have been the end of anything positive out of 
this legislature. 
 
I've presented three Bills dealing with this particular piece of 
legislation that I would like to discuss with you tonight. But 
before we get to that point I think it's important to have an 
understanding of what the firearms registrations are doing in 
Canada and where they started from. So I would like to read 
one paragraph from a background paper on gun control in 
Canada from the Library of Parliament written by William C. 
Bartlett, law and government division with the Justice 
department in Ottawa. And the first paragraph reads: 
 
 Canada has had laws restricting the possession and use 

of firearms since 1877; there was a nationwide permit 
system for the carrying of small arms in effect in 1892. 
All handguns have been registered since 1934, and in 
1951 a centralized registry for restricted firearms was 
established under the control of the Commissioner of 
the RCMP. The present classification system of 
prohibited weapons, restricted weapons (including all 
handguns), and non-restricted long guns was introduced 
in 1968. 

 
Further to this, Mr. Minister, there was changes made in 1979, 
1991, and now the current proposals. 
 
Mr. Minister, since we've had registration, and in some cases 
prohibition, of firearms in certain . . . of certain firearms in 
Canada for the last 60 years, registration, or a permitting system 
actually, since 1892, over 100 years, it seems that that has not 
solved the desired . . . the problems that have arisen, did not 
have the desired results. We still continue to have crime 
committed with handguns, with long guns. Even though in the 
case of handguns they have indeed been registered for the last 
60 years. And only those who go through a rigorous 
examination have been entitled to legally hold handguns. And  



April 3, 1995 

 
1338 

yet the main thrust seems to be, by the politicians in Ottawa, is 
to somehow further restrict the legitimate and legal firearm 
owner to have access to firearms in Canada. 
 
The argument is that further registration will impede the 
criminal use of firearms. Well, Mr. Minister, registration has 
not impeded the criminal use of handguns. They continue to be 
used. But, Mr. Minister, the argument is carried on that if we 
registered long guns now, perhaps that will have an effect. 
 
But again, all the statistics show that that would not be the case. 
In Great Britain, where in 1988 they banned most firearms, both 
handguns and long guns, there continued to be a rise in violent 
crime and crime with the use of firearms, even though most 
were banned and prohibited in the entire country. 
 
It did not have the desired effect of reducing the criminal use of 
firearms. And yet in Canada we seem to be heading in exactly 
the same direction, and, Mr. Minister, I would suggest with 
exactly the same results — that the further restriction, 
registration, of firearms will not affect the criminal misuse of 
those same firearms. 
 
Those that will be affected are the legitimate and legal owners 
of firearms. And yes, in some cases those legitimate and legal 
owners of firearms do break the law. But it's not a general 
occurrence; it's very much a small exception, rather than the 
rule. 
 
This registration system, Mr. Speaker, that is being proposed 
will have an impact only on those legal owners, not on the 
criminal element. So, Mr. Minister, before I take up the whole 
time that we have available with a speech on this, I would like 
to have your comments on this and what your government 
proposes to do to deal with the further registration of firearms 
as proposed by Allan Rock and the federal government. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I can say to the member opposite as 
we've said repeatedly . . . let me begin by saying I think all 
members of the House, including, I think, the member from 
Souris-Cannington, would support any measure which you 
believe was going to reduce violence in society. I think we 
would agree upon that. 
 
I think we would also agree that some of the measures being 
proposed by the federal minister, it's highly dubious whether 
they'll do anything to reduce violence, and they're going to 
impose an enormous cost upon society or gun owners 
depending on how the Bill is structured, the final Bill is 
structured. 
 
We believe that the registration of long firearms will be very 
expensive, and in equal parts, expensive and ineffective in 
reducing their use in any type of violent crime. 
 
We therefore oppose the registration of long firearms. I think 
we have taken all reasonable steps to try to bring that point of  

view to bear on the federal government. 
 
My predecessor, the member from Saskatoon Fairview, could 
not have been more energetic, active, or articulate in opposing 
this Bill. There were any number of gun rallies around the 
province, so the firearm owners were equally energetic and 
articulate. 
 
At the end of the day, however, there is no way that the gun 
owners can stop the federal government and no way the 
provincial government can stop the federal government if they 
are determined to proceed. We only have the power of 
persuasion and nothing more. 
 
And I know the member has brought forth several Bills. I've 
explained why we believe that those Bills are likely to be 
ineffective. 
 
The one thing which I think we could do, and we have tried to 
do, is to get a hearing before the Standing Committee on 
Justice, which will be considering the Bill. We hope to make 
that an all-party committee, and we have written the federal 
Minister of Justice asking that the committee come to 
Saskatchewan so they may hear directly the views of the people 
of Saskatchewan. That would be an opportunity for us to make 
our point of view known to the federal government, and it 
would be an opportunity for the all-party committee to make its 
comments directly. 
 
I've in fact written to the federal Minister of Justice to that 
effect. I have not received a reply and I therefore assume the 
matter is under consideration. But that step remains to us. 
 
There aren't very many more steps left to be taken though. We 
can simply . . . all we can do is rely upon the powers of 
persuasion. We don't have any effective means of stopping the 
federal government cold in their tracks. There are any number 
of cases which confirm that control of firearms is a matter 
coming under the criminal law of Canada and a matter properly 
within the jurisdiction of the Government of Canada, and so we 
have no means of stopping them cold in their tracks. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
like to read from the Canadian constitution, and I would ask for 
your interpretation of this particular section of the constitution. 
It's entitled: exclusive powers of provincial legislature, section 
92: 
 
 In each province the Legislature may exclusively make 

Laws in relation to Matters coming within the Classes of 
Subject next herein-after enumerated . . . 

 
And it goes on. 
 
So Mr. Minister, I'd like you to give me your constitutional 
opinion, or that of your officials, on that particular section of 
the Canadian constitution, and when it says, exclusive powers 
of the provincial legislatures, are those powers that can be 
overruled by the federal government? 



April 3, 1995 

 
1339 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the framers . . . Whatever the 
framers of that section meant, it was interpreted by the Privy 
Council of England to mean that the province had jurisdiction 
to legislate with respect to matters of property and civil rights. 
But those powers were subject to any powers given to the 
federal government, and federal powers were paramount. 
 
And that is the imprint put on the constitution by the Privy 
Council of England, whether or not that was what was actually 
intended by the framers of the constitution. That clearly is the 
law. 
 
It is equally clear from any number of cases that legislation with 
respect to guns and gun control comes within the jurisdiction of 
the federal government and the rubric of criminal law. And 
therefore it is a valid exercise of a federal power and therefore 
would be paramount over anything we might do in property and 
civil rights. 
 
The law on this subject is well established and admits really of 
no doubt. And therefore it is not . . . legislating under the area 
of property and civil rights is not a means by which we can stop 
the federal government in their tracks. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a differing 
legal opinion from your own, and I would like to read from it as 
it deals with section 92: 
 
 The Constitution Act, 1982, did not repeal rather, it 

effectively continued the Act of 1867 as part of the 
Constitution of Canada, (paragraph 52(2)(b) and the 
Schedule to the Constitution Act, 1982), thus the 
exclusive authority for the provincial legislature to enact 
laws with respect to "property and civil rights" is 
preserved, and extends to the subject Bill respecting 
property rights in Saskatchewan. 

 
 It might be argued that the doctrine of paramountcy of 

Federal legislation applies in this case. Were it that the 
Assembly would be, by passing an Act relating to a 
subject matter (ie regulation of the "Internet" throughout 
the province) not enumerated in either section 91 or 92, 
and the Parliament of Canada had not yet legislated or 
desired to legislate in that field, the provincial 
legislation would stand, unless and until the federal 
parliament chose to legislate in the field. Paramountcy 
would then override the provincial legislation. But here 
one has the "exclusive" and "enumerated" section 
92(13) head of provincial power, and the doctrine of 
paramountcy does not apply. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I can only say that I've heard that 
view . . . I think I've heard the member refer to that view before. 
That legal opinion is at variance with virtually every other 
opinion of anyone else who has considered the subject and 
written on it.  
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you have a 
written opinion dealing with that constitutional item that you  

can present here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well certainly I've been given written 
briefings by the department and the department has researched 
the matter. They've not specifically been written so that they 
might be tabled. But I've certainly . . . the department has 
certainly reviewed the matter with care and have come to the 
unmistakable conclusion that the federal government does have 
jurisdiction to legislate with respect to guns and control of guns 
and that their legislation would be valid. And therefore nothing 
the province could do would invalidate that legislation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you have any 
case law that would deal with section 92 and any of its 16 
components that would give us an example that the federal 
government does indeed have supremacy in this entire area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There's certainly plenty available. I 
don't actually have them with me, but I can supply some case 
names. I can supply you with lots of precedents, if that's what 
you want me to do. I can provide you with written authorities 
that gun control comes within the jurisdiction of the federal 
government. And I don't actually have them with me. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not particularly 
concerned whether or not gun control currently comes within 
the purview of the federal government. Obviously they have 
been legislating in it since 1892, so the criminal use of firearms 
is clearly within the federal jurisdiction. But I'm interested in 
section 92 of the constitution — whether or not the federal 
government has supremacy over section 92. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that's precisely what these cases 
say. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well then I have to ask, Mr. Minister, 
why is section 92 still in the Canadian constitution? If it says, 
exclusive powers of provincial legislatures, obviously, in my 
view, it's not telling the truth. When it says exclusive, that 
means that the provincial governments do indeed have that 
power. If they don't have that power, then why is it there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I don't know why it's written as it is. I 
do not know why the Privy Council took the views they did, but 
they did, and the law on this matter is well established. I am not 
a legal historian, although I do have an interest in history of all 
sorts, including legal history. I know the general way in which 
this developed. 
 
I know that the intentions of the original framers of the 
constitution, the British North America Act, was not entirely 
reflected in the decisions, was not reflected in the decision of 
the Privy Council of England, which was the supreme appellate 
body before it was abolished in 1949. So I generally know the 
history to it. 
 
What I do know, and all that is relevant for these discussions, is 
that the federal jurisdiction of criminal law is paramount over 
anything the province might do under property and civil rights,  



April 3, 1995 

 
1340 

and if the two conflict, the provincial statute isn't valid — that 
is well-established law. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well let's explore section 92 a little bit 
more. Mr. Minister, who has power over hospitals and health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — By and large the province does, 
although the federal government certainly plays a role in both, I 
think. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Do the provinces not have the power to 
make their own rules and regulations dealing with hospitals and 
health? While they may suffer penalties from the federal 
government in a sense, in the terms of financial support, the 
provinces nevertheless have the power to, say, provide whatever 
services they desire within their hospital system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The answer to your question is yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well how about the administration of 
justice within the province? Who has exclusive powers in that 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The whole area of criminal law is 
something of a shared jurisdiction. The federal government has 
exclusive jurisdiction with respect to criminal law. The 
provinces cannot legislate the area. It is up to the provinces to 
administer the law, but here again it is really something of a 
shared jurisdiction. And this is one of the trickier areas of 
constitutional law. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — That may be so, Mr. Minister, but it's the 
province, is it not, that has exclusive jurisdiction over the 
administration of justice within its boundaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, subject to the jurisdiction of the 
federal government to make laws with respect to criminal law. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes, Mr. Minister, the federal 
government does indeed make the law, the criminal law, but it's 
up to the province, is it not, to administer that law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, but when passing the criminal 
law the federal government can make rules with respect to its 
administration which must, in general terms, be honoured by 
the provinces. So you can't pretend these are two watertight 
compartments  one administration; one the law itself. They 
are not watertight compartments. The federal government can 
and does lay down rules with respect to the administration of 
criminal law in the Criminal Code and those must be respected 
by the provinces. So these are not two watertight compartments. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — How about another area, Mr. Minister. 
Municipal institutions within the province. Who has the power 
and jurisdiction over those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The province has jurisdiction over 
municipal institutions. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, these are all items 
under section 92 of the constitution. You've admitted that the 
province has jurisdiction under municipal law for municipal 
institutions. You've admitted that the province has jurisdiction 
for hospitals and health, and while the federal government can 
certainly penalize us, they can't . . . they do not interfere within 
the structure other than through a process of coercion. 
 
Now we've had a bit of a discussion on the administration of 
justice, that the federal government makes the Criminal Code 
and determines as to how — not how — what should be 
delivered but it's up to the province to deliver that justice. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if those are areas in which the province 
dictates the methods of delivery and the application of the 
constitution, why in that very same section — section 13 in this 
particular case dealing with property and civil rights in the 
province — is it all of a sudden the federal government has 
paramountcy? If they don't have that in section 7, if they don't 
have it in section 8, and they don't have it in section 14, why do 
they have it in section 13? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the doctrine of federal 
paramountcy applies to all of the areas you have mentioned. If 
the federal government . . . Let us take an example which is 
bordering a touchy subject. It is true that the provincial 
government has the power with respect to health and hospitals. 
If however the federal government passes laws falling within 
the criminal law  abortion might be an example  and that 
overrules anything the provinces might have done, and the 
doctrine of paramountcy applies. 
 
And so the comment that these heads of jurisdiction under 
section 92 are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the provinces 
has been interpreted by the Privy Council and the Supreme 
Court of Canada to mean exclusive only if there isn't a valid 
exercise of a federal power under a valid federal head of 
jurisdiction. 
 
If the federal government does that, then that takes precedent. 
And it doesn't matter whether it's education or whether it is 
health or whether it is property and civil rights, so long as the 
federal government exercises power under a valid head of 
jurisdiction, it overrules anything the provinces . . . can be done 
in any of these sections. 
 
The hon. member is attempting to do something which should 
be possible, but it really is not. The hon. member is attempting 
to read the British North America Act, and from the bare . . . 
and it is written, and he is trying to read the Act and trying to 
deduce from the wording itself the meaning of the Act. 
 
You really can't do that. You really have to not only read the 
Act, but you also have to have read a century and a quarter — a 
century and a quarter  of legal decisions since then. And you 
can't really do what the member's trying to do, and that's read 
the Act and argue that this is what those plain words must  



April 3, 1995 

 
1341 

mean. 
 
Because there has been a century and a quarter of interpretation 
by the Privy Council and the Supreme Court of Canada, and 
you really have to read the Act as it has been interpreted by the 
Privy Council and by the Supreme Court of Canada. And so the 
exercise the member is attempting to go through perhaps should 
work in a perfect world, but it doesn't. You can't interpret this 
Act unless you also are familiar with the jurisprudence on the 
Canadian constitution. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, outside of the 
Criminal Code, what powers can the federal government 
exercise to override the section 92? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The officials have actually provided 
me with an example which I think does help to illustrate the 
paramountcy rule. 
 
The province has so-called exclusive jurisdiction with respect to 
property and civil rights. Then if you go on and read section 93, 
section 93 outlines the powers the federal government has, one 
of which is bankruptcy. If there's a bankruptcy then the property 
and civil rights doesn't apply and the federal rules overpower. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't have the 
complete constitution here, but my photocopy does bring in a 
portion of section 93 and the heading on it is education, not 
dealing with bankruptcy but education, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I was distracted during part of your 
question. I am told it's the powers in 91 to which we should be 
addressing ourselves. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I missed that, Mr. Minister; if you could 
please repeat that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Federal authorities in section 91. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — That is correct. I just happen to have the 
copy of that here, Mr. Minister. Because when you said 93, I 
was just kind of a little curious as to how you got bankruptcy 
into The Education Act. Because the education is another area 
of provincial jurisdiction in the main, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, has there been any attempts within Canada to 
utilize the power of exclusive provincial . . . exclusive powers 
of provincial legislatures as they relate to property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I really, I guess, return to the 
comment I made, and that is that there are any number of cases 
where the provinces have tried to argue that property and civil 
right protects their legislation. But if it conflicts with a federal 
statute it has always failed. So there's any number of instances 
where it's been tried; none where it's been successfully used. 
 
I'm told . . . there's been some discussion, and it appears this is 
an appropriate time to move — and I'll so do — move that we  

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
I'm told that we should not do that for a couple of minutes. So if 
the member has one more burning question, why don't you do 
that, and then I will so do. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that, to me, 
this section 92 is very plain and very clear in its language, and it 
takes 125 years of lawyers to screw it up so that no one can 
understand it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe under section 7 of the constitution it 
deals with the legal rights that we have in Canada. And I'd like 
to read that section. Section 7 reads: 
 
 Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the 

person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in 
accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. 

 
Also, Mr. Minister, I believe it's under section 33 of the 
constitution, that allows provinces to pass, notwithstanding the 
Canadian constitution, amendments to sections 7 to 15, and I 
believe 32 perhaps is another one. But clearly sections 7 to 15 
are those which can be amended by a provincial legislature 
using a notwithstanding clause. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would it be impossible — which seems to be 
your attitude towards this — impossible to place property under 
section 7 using the notwithstanding clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The notwithstanding clause cannot 
be used to transfer a matter falling within the federal 
jurisdiction to the provincial jurisdiction. You can't use a 
notwithstanding clause to deprive another level of government 
of a legitimate exercise of their authority. And that I think is 
agreed — well perhaps you have a different opinion, but if you 
do it's the only opinion in that area. Virtually everyone else 
agrees. You can't use the notwithstanding clause to transfer 
jurisdiction from one level to another. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:10 p.m. 
 
 


