


















































February 15, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 15, 1995 

 

 
199 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two sets of 
petitions I'll read the prayer for. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'll present those. And also we have a petition; that prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearms 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
On this matter as well. I'll present these now. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present. I'll read the prayer. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crimes control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the south-east corner 
of Saskatchewan — Carnduff, Manor, Storthoaks, Estevan, 
Weyburn. I present them now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions I 
would like to lay on the Table, and I'd like to read the prayer: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose changes 
to present legislation regarding firearm ownership, and 
instead urge the federal government to deal with the 
criminal use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on 
abusers, recognizing that gun control and crime control are 
not synonymous, and allowing provinces to deal with gun 
control legislation on a provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these petitions are signed by individuals from the 
communities of Redvers, Kennedy, Carnduff, Alida, Carlyle, 
Kelso, Wawota, Gainsborough, Antler, Moosomin, Whitewood, 
Broadview, and a number of other communities in that 
surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have received 
some more petitions, and I would like to read the prayer: 
 
 Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding gun control, 
firearm ownership, and instead urge the federal 
government to deal with the criminal use of firearms by 
imposing stiffer penalties on the abusers, and urge the 
federal government to recognize that gun control and 
crime are not synonymous. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from a wide cross-section of 
the province. They are all the way from the west side of the 
province to the east. And I would like to lay them on the Table 
at this time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I also have petitions, two different ones, the first being from 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the condition of 
Highway 42. And I'll just read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate the total amounts 
of funds garnered from the taxpayer for fuel tax, vehicle 
license fees, and provincial sales tax on new vehicles, 
toward the maintenance and capital costs of 
Saskatchewan roads; and further, that the Saskatchewan 
government dedicate any monies available from the 
federal infrastructure program towards Saskatchewan's 
road system, rather than provide these sums toward 
capital construction of casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 
And I also, Mr. Speaker, have petitions, over a dozen pages, of 
Saskatchewan citizens concerned with the federal government's 
initiatives in the area of gun control, and I would like to table 
both sets here today, sir. 



February 15, 1995 

 
200 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 
colleagues in tabling over 200 petitions that I received since 
yesterday. And the prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the south-east corner of the province, from 
Alida, Oxbow, Langbank, Estevan, and Weyburn, 
Gainsborough, Manor, and some other places as well. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
and the prayer reads this way: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with the gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
And I have signatures here from Estevan, Carlyle, some from 
Manitoba, Frobisher, Saskatoon, etc. Thank you very much for 
allowing me this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have petitions 
to present this afternoon. I'll just quickly read the prayer into the 
record: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing the 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from, primarily from the 
south-east part of the province — Wawota, Alameda, Glen 
Ewen, and Carnduff areas of the province. And I would be 
pleased to present them today. 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
to present from constituents in my area who are concerned 
about the federal government's gun legislation, and I'll read the  

prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with the gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
The petitioners, many of who are first nations, from Patuanak, 
Keeley Lake, Meadow Lake, and Green Lake, and I do present 
them now. 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present on behalf of concerned citizens in 
Saskatchewan. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
I'm pleased to lay these on the Table on behalf of these 
concerned citizens today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you 
and through you to my colleagues in the legislature, two 
students, grade 12 students, from Greenall High in Balgonie. 
And I'm going to ask them to stand, Mr. Speaker, because there 
are a lot of fine looking people up there today. They are Jeff 
Leibel and Bill Reinkens. 
 
These students have been selected to represent Saskatchewan at 
the Forum for Young Canadians which takes place later this  



February 15, 1995 

 
201 

spring in Ottawa. And the Forum for Young Canadians gives 
young leaders a practical understanding of government by 
allowing them to go and watch how it works. 
 
Now both these young men are very involved in their local 
school governments as president and as treasurer. And they've 
been with me since 8 o'clock this morning trying to get some 
idea of what an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
does during the day. 
 
I assure you that we've had wonderful conversations, met some 
fascinating people, and they are very committed and very 
informed. And I ask all of you to welcome them here to this 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Several times 
each year, as members will know, we are favoured in the 
Legislative Building with study tours by public servants who 
come to the building, spend the day here, and study the things 
that we do here in this Assembly, in the various caucuses, in the 
MLA offices, and in cabinet. We have such a tour today. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 24 public servants 
engaged in the study tour today from the Departments of 
Justice, Finance, Indian and Metis Affairs, Labour, the Public 
Service Commission, Environment, Municipal Government, 
Highways and Transportation, and the Legislative Library. 
 
Through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of the House, I'd ask 
that we welcome the public servants on the tour here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow is the 
beginning of the 66th annual convention of the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation. The three-day convention will be held at 
the Ramada Hotel here in Regina. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation has a long, 
distinguished, responsible and effective record of achievements 
in Saskatchewan. The federation has focused its attention on 
habitat protection and has played a key role in the establishment 
of the wildlife development fund, and more recently, the 
fisheries enhancement fund. 
 
In addition, the federation was instrumental in the establishment 
of the Saskatchewan heritage marsh program, Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act, North American waterfowl management plan 
and the federation's own habitat trust land acquisition program. 
 
To achieve its objectives the federation has prided itself in 
working cooperatively with a number of interest groups, 
including the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association,  

Saskatchewan Natural History Society, Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Ducks Unlimited Canada, 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, as well the 
government of the day no matter the political stripe. 
 
With over 30,000 members, the federation is the largest per 
capita wildlife conservation organization of its kind in North 
America, if not the world. 
 
Hunting and fishing and other outdoor recreational activities in 
Saskatchewan generate an annual expenditure of over $346 
million which in turn supports over 5,300 jobs in our province. 
We wish the federation a very successful conference in Regina. 
And many of us in this Assembly look forward to attending part 
of the convention and visiting with delegates during the three-
day conference. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Quest For A Cure Campaign 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest per 
capita rate of multiple sclerosis in the country. We have more 
than 2,000 cases of this disease of the central nervous system, a 
disease that affects young adults around the world. 
 
It is an ugly disease that I am all too well aware of since both 
my sister and cousin are victims. 
 
The cause and cure of MS (multiple sclerosis) are unknown, but 
in Saskatchewan we have a fund-raising campaign underway, a 
campaign called Quest For A Cure, which will contribute to 
finding that elusive cure by raising $1.6 million. 
 
I will be taking part in a benefit to support that campaign. Radio 
station CKOM and Cameco Corporation are co-hosting a 40th 
birthday party and roast of radio personality Brent Loucks. As a 
politician I get to roast a media person, a rare and pleasant 
opportunity. 
 
Cameco Corporation, with its headquarters in Saskatoon, has 
committed $400,000 to pay the fund-raising campaign expenses 
for Quest For A Cure. Cameco's involvement makes it possible 
for every cent of every dollar raised to go towards equipment 
and research costs at the MS research centre. 
 
Research into MS is performed at the MS research centre at 
City Hospital in Saskatoon. The centre works with the 
University of Saskatchewan neurosurgery department and is 
collaborating with the Mayo Clinic as well as 10 other 
Canadian MS clinics. 
 
Individuals, several service organizations, and businesses, have 
contributed to the success thus far of the campaign. It is truly an 
effort of many to combat and finally conquer this disease which 
has baffled and plagued us for so long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
202 

Major Heavy Oil Find 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm very 
pleased this afternoon to inform the Assembly of a very, very 
large heavy oil finding in the Mantario area which is within the 
constituency of Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that the field may be the largest in Saskatchewan's 
history with approximately 135 million barrels of oil in place, 
with recoverable reserves in excess of 30 million barrels. 
 
Grad & Walker, a Calgary-based oil company, has made the 
discovery. I understand they have reserves of approximately 60 
per cent, or 18 million barrels. And the remaining 12 million 
barrels are owned by Wascana Energy of Regina, formerly of 
Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, a very successful privatization initiative 
of the former administration. 
 
We would like to congratulate the men and women in the 
industry for their very, very hard work, Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. It just goes to show you, Mr. 
Speaker, that less government results in strong economic 
development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Formation of Dura-Fibre 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The optimism about 
our province's economy is being felt in all regions of 
Saskatchewan. Today I would like to tell you about a project in 
the agriculture sector which will create jobs in the Canora 
region. 
 
Sask-Can Fibre and Cargill Limited recently announced a 
formation of a joint venture company, Dura-Fibre, which will 
undertake a two-year pilot project to assess the commercial 
viability of processing natural fibre from oil-seed flax straw. 
 
This coming spring the partnership will establish a pilot plant at 
Canora utilizing the novel processing technology developed by 
the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. Production from 
this plant will be test marketed to a variety of industrial fibre 
users including pulp and paper. 
 
Sask-Can Fibre is a farmer-owned straw cooperative located in 
Canora and it will supply Dura-Fibre's straw requirements. 
 
Cargill will be responsible for marketing the plant's production, 
Mr. Speaker. This plant is expected to employ five persons in 
the pilot phase of its operations, which is positive news as the 
economic turnaround in Saskatchewan continues. 
 
I would like to offer my congratulations and best wishes to 
these two companies as they make their contribution to the 
Saskatchewan economy. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contribution of Wildlife Federations 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to take a moment as 
well to recognize the work and the role of the wildlife 
federations, certainly in my constituency and across the 
province. I want to recognize the hard work of the locals, 
Rocanville, Wapella, and the Wawota Wildlife Federations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they have done is developed a wildlife 
habitat. Certainly there's been a lot of tree planting in our 
community because of what they've done. The gun control 
legislation has been certainly initiated and pushed by the 
Wildlife Federation in bringing forward strong and responsible 
ideas as to proper use of firearms. 
 
As well there's a project in Wawota that I want to recognize, 
and the Wildlife Federation's working towards developing a 
dam that will provide recreational facilities as well as water to 
that community and surrounding areas. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, wildlife federations throughout the 
province have certainly worked to build this province and I 
welcome each one of the delegates from my area that will be 
coming to the annual meeting. 
 

Optimist Club in Govan 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in this 
Assembly we have heard many members talk about the spirit of 
cooperation and community that they find in their 
constituencies. Well I have my own example. 
 
In the town of Govan in my constituency, the Optimist Club has 
just won two prestigious community service awards. These 
awards are to be presented by Optimist International in 
recognition of the outstanding contribution the Optimist Club 
of Govan has made to youth and to the community during the 
1993-94 club year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can add that the service has continued into 
this current year. 
 
Mr. Charles Wiles, president of Optimist International, said of 
this recognition, and I quote: 
 
 These awards exemplify the highest level of service by 

an Optimist Club to its community. My sincerest thanks 
and congratulations go out to this club on these great 
accomplishments. 

 
These accomplishments Mr. Wiles refers to might seem small in 
the great overall scheme of things, but to a small community 
like Govan they are vital to its life. 
 
The 42-member Govan club has been involved in several 
projects including the sponsoring of the Scouting association, 
youth ball tournaments and ball diamond upgrading, hockey 
rink upgrading, and much more. 



February 15, 1995 

 
203 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Mr. Cal Shaw, president, and Mr. 
Denis King, secretary-treasurer, and all 42 members for their 
outstanding service to their community. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sutherland Recycling Depot Closure 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to share 
a textbook primer of the do's and don'ts of recycling from my 
constituency. 
 
Three years ago the Sutherland School in Saskatoon initiated a 
recycling project initiated by the vice-principal there, Yves 
Bousquet. It was a very popular project with the students at the 
school and members of the community. 
 
Last week in the Star-Phoenix of Saskatoon there was an article 
that the project was closing. Why? 
 
First of all, people were not cleaning the materials that they 
were dropping off at the recycling depot. Secondly, people 
weren't sorting them properly according to materials. And 
thirdly, vice-principal Bousquet was essentially standing alone 
with the children. There were other adults in the community 
that failed to step forward to help with this project. 
 
I want to say today that there's a valuable lesson for all of us to 
learn from this school experience. Unfortunately the problems 
encountered at the Sutherland depot are all too common in the 
recycling business, especially with improper drop-offs and the 
tendency for people to recycle anything and then think that 
they've done their job. And that isn't good enough. 
 
If recycling is going to work all of us has to re-examine the role 
we play. Not every environmental recycling project that starts 
ends up in success. 
 
But I spoke last night with the vice-principal and the two of us 
agreed that it wasn't the children who failed in this project. In 
fact the two of us are convinced that out of the ashes of this 
project, the children will ultimately succeed in teaching us all a 
lesson about recycling. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Balanced Budget Legislation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, later 
today the official opposition will be introducing balanced 
budget legislation which will include a provision to protect the 
largest interest group in Saskatchewan — the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, our legislation will contain a 
provision which forces the provincial government to go to the 
people that they serve before they raise any more taxes. That 
means that in any given circumstance the Premier must, first of 
all, cut his own spending, first and foremost. 
 
My question is to the Premier, is very simple: do you believe 
that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should have a direct say in 
any and all tax increases, or do you believe that you are the only 
one that has the right to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what I wish to say to the 
official Leader of the Opposition is that his stated interest and 
concern for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan today comes a little 
bit too late. After nine years of decimation and destruction of 
the taxpayers. After nine years of an administration which put 
the province of Saskatchewan in a total cumulative hole of $15 
billion where the interest payments a year — from the taxpayers 
— amount to $850 million, approximately, which interest 
payments go to Hong Kong and to Tokyo and to New York and 
to Paris and to Zürich and to London and to Montreal and 
Toronto rather than staying here at home. It ill behoves the 
Leader of the Opposition to be talking about interest and 
concern for the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You didn't need to have a balanced budget legislation, all you 
needed to do was to be a responsible government. All you 
needed to do was example common sense and decency in 
taxpayers' dollars and interests. I tell you we are going to 
balance the budget. We're going to introduce balanced budget 
legislation as the Speech from the Throne has indicated, and the 
people of Saskatchewan have a right all the time — as they will 
in this province of ours as well very shortly — always a right 
about taxes at election time and in the legislation that we shall 
introduce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Premier, you don't get it. You just don't get it, and 
you never will because you don't listen. You don't listen. You 
just want to talk and that's exactly what you're going to do on 
the TV show this weekend we understand. And that's because 
you believe this legislature is your own personal soapbox. 
That's the reason why the need for this kind of legislation. 
 
If you were listening, if you were listening, Mr. Premier, you 
would hear from people like Waverly Stechyshyn, a baker from 
Saskatoon, and he said in today's paper: 
 
 How do (you) . . . feel when I hear (a) . . . government 

talking about balancing its budget? I feel depressed. 
Why? Because where does it come from? It . . . comes 
from small businesses, from taxpayers . . . 

 



February 15, 1995 

 
204 

Mr. Premier, our legislation protects taxpayers from people like 
you. It protects the people of Saskatchewan from people like 
myself. It protects people from the third party leader, who's 
already pledged $350 million of increased spending, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you support balanced budget legislation that 
hamstrings the spending habits of government, of all provincial 
governments, in the future of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Stechyshyn's 
concerns are quite proper and valid. Mr. Stechyshyn's concerns 
are proper and valid, because as I said in my answer to your 
first question, it was your administration, sir, which sunk this 
province into a $15 billion abyss. Those are the facts. 
 
It is your administration which has forced the province of 
Saskatchewan to ask the taxpayers of this province every year to 
have their hard-earned tax bucks go to New York and to Hong 
Kong and to Zürich in order to balance the budget. It is your 
government that has indentured and has strait-jacketed the 
working men and women and the small-business people like 
Mr. Stechyshyn. 
 
It is our government that has worked hard, with the support and 
the help of the public like Mr. Stechyshyn, through a judicious 
approach to balancing the budget — as you will see tomorrow 
— and the progress, and the hope, and the optimism that we lay 
out for the future. 
 
I say to the Leader of the Opposition, I am as concerned as you 
are about what the Leader of the Liberal Party has in mind. 
After all, we are told by her executive director, Mr. Emmet 
Reidy, all the Tories are leaving you and are going to her. And 
if they're the same Tories that got this province into the hole 
under your administration, it'll be the same Tories — heaven 
help us if they should ever get to power — that'll further sink us 
back. But the people of Saskatchewan are too smart. Neither 
you nor she are going to get that chance because they've got 
responsible government for a change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you're 
responsible all right. You're responsible for $500 million more 
spending in this province today than in 1991. You said $4.5 
billion was enough. That's what you said, Mr. Premier. And 
now you're spending $5 billion in this province today. And that 
is why there's a need for balanced budget legislation that 
protects people of this province, taxpayers of this province, 
from spending governments like yourself, Mr. Premier. 
 
You've told the chamber of commerce in recent weeks that a 
government can't control or plan for calamities like drought or a 
bad harvest or a sudden decline in resource prices. Well isn't 
that a revelation, Mr. Premier. That's exactly what happened in 
1980 and through the 1980s, Mr. Premier, and you viciously  

attacked and said that that was Saskatchewan's darkest hour. 
And any unforeseen event calls for deficit budgeting. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, make up your mind. Make up your 
mind. We have. We say no to deficits and no to taxation 
without consent. Will you do the same, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I feel sorry for the 
official Leader of the Official Opposition because, as a new 
member of this Assembly and one who did not sit on the 
treasury benches, he is trying desperately to divorce himself 
from the history of the party — members of whom were in that 
government of the day and who surround him and still advise 
him. And I know how difficult that is. 
 
But I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition the following. In 
1990-91, operating expenses of government — these are figures 
tabled by your minister of Finance at that time — amounted to 
$4.544 billion a year. In the 1994-1995 mid-year report tabled 
by our Minister of Finance, the operating expenses were $4.24 
billion. 
 
Now you and the Leader of the Liberal Party, you and the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, you and the Leader of the 
Liberal Party go around the province of Saskatchewan, saying 
no, the figure is 5 billion. You know why the figure is 5 billion? 
Because on top of the $4.2 billion operating expenses, add $850 
million interest payments on the public debt, thanks to you. 
Thanks to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — We said that 4.3 billion was adequate 
to operate the government, and we're doing it on less than 4.3 
billion. And if we didn't have the $850 million interest 
payments on the public debt, we'd be doing below 4.3 billion. 
But no, you, the Tories, and you, the Liberals — because now 
you're getting the Tories, so I'm told by the Liberal Party — you 
want us to continue down that same ruinous path. 
 
Look at, just accept, the fact that it isn't going to happen. It will 
never happen that the people of Saskatchewan are going to ever 
return to the dark days again of spend, profligate waste, 
patronage gone rampant, of the two old-line parties — the 
Conservatives and the Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I don't ask 
for or want your sympathy. What I want from you is to have 
some sympathy for the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, 18 of 24 departments of your government have a 
higher budget today than they did in 1991 — 4.5 billion was 
enough. That was your promise. Five billion is what is being 
spent by your government today. And that's why there's a need 
for balanced budget legislation. 



February 15, 1995 

 
205 

The Alberta government announced it will be bringing forward 
similar legislation. They know that the taxpayers have hit the 
wall and they're not going to take it any more. And they know 
that their taxation in Alberta is minuscule compared to yours, 
sir. 
 
Mr. Premier, it's time, it's time for the taxpayers to start 
restraining government rather than the other way around, Mr. 
Premier. If you don't embrace this, you'll have failed to learn 
from the past mistakes, you'll have failed to learn from your 
own mistakes, and you'll be destined to repeat them over and 
over again, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you believe so strongly in balanced budgets, so 
strongly in the belief of taxpayer protection, why will you not 
support our legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the 
Official Opposition says that he doesn't ask for my sympathy. I 
have to tell the Leader of the Official Opposition, he's right, he's 
not asked for my sympathy. But I have to tell him, you have to 
get some sympathy from somebody because this is a very 
difficult job that you've inherited. 
 
And what makes it difficult and why I am sympathetic is 
because of your conversion, after nine years, to balanced 
budgets. You did not practise what you preached. You 
campaigned in 1991 as an MLA in full support of the former 
premier's position — full support. You supported the former 
premier until, all of a sudden, you got the leadership of the 
Conservative Party. 
 
Now I've said to you, we're going to be introducing balanced 
budget legislation. There is no doubt about that. I tell you that 
we are coming in under $4.3 billion in the operations of the 
government. There's no doubt about that either. But I want to 
say something else. As was pointed out by my colleague, the 
Associate Minister of Finance, yesterday, the Prairie Messenger 
none the less says this: 
 
 The current Saskatchewan government inherited a mess 

proportionately far greater than that bequeathed to 
Klein, and Saskatchewan has not known the oil and gas 
revenues which have graced its western neighbour. Yet 
the success Saskatchewan has achieved in balancing . . . 
(the) books makes its neighbour's accomplishment seem 
quite trivial in comparison. 

 
You don't have to accept my words, and you can tell the Prairie 
Messenger and those who support that view that you don't 
accept their words. But I tell you the Prairie Messenger speaks 
for the average person of Saskatchewan. We are providing 
responsible government and balanced budget legislation — 
unlike you, unlike the Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Tendering Policy 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, last 
week on February 8, I asked you whether your government was 
developing a new union preference tendering policy. You said, 
and I quote: 
 
 . . . we are not pursuing the policy which I understand 

the member to be alleging. We have had a policy in 
place for some time . . . And we think it's working 
reasonably well. But the answer is that we have a policy 
which we think is satisfactory. 

 
Mr. Minister, that same day, February 8, you signed a letter to 
the ad hoc labour fund committee which reads, and I quote: 
 
 The Crown Investment Corporation has been instructed 

to undertake a review of current policies with a view to 
developing a Crown corporation policy that deals with 
the union preference issue. 

 
Congratulations, Mr. Minister. It usually takes the members of 
your government at least 24 hours to change their policies. This 
time you even did better; you did a complete about-face in one 
day. 
 
Mr. Minister, were you misleading the House or were you 
misleading the ad hoc labour fund committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, I was not misleading the House. 
I may say, with reference to my comments, the language was 
perhaps not as carefully chosen as it might have been. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, we have had the whole question of 
tendering under consideration for some time. The policy which 
we inherited from the members opposite, the policy which we 
inherited from the Progressive Conservative government, was 
really unworkable and really destructive and we have been 
attempting since then, Mr. Speaker, to work out something 
which is fair, balanced, and reasonable for all concerned. And 
we continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, clearly your 
government is developing some kind of a new union-preference 
tendering policy for Crown corporations. Could you tell us, is a 
similar policy being developed for other areas of government, 
like government departments? Are any departments in your 
government currently awarding any contracts on a union 
preference policy or basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I appreciate the member's interest. 
Mr. Speaker, when we have anything to announce in this area I  



February 15, 1995 

 
206 

know the member will be interested, and I'm sure you'll be the 
first ones to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
understand a tender has been let by the East Central Health 
District to do about $2 million worth of work on the 
Langenburg Health Centre. I have here a copy of a letter sent by 
the architects on that project to all companies who are bidding 
on the project. It says, and I quote: 
 
 Saskatchewan Health has inquired as to whether your 

company is union or non-union. Please advise. This 
question is being addressed to all firms who bid on the 
above project. 

 
Now let me repeat that first part for you, Minister, so that you 
get it perfectly clear — Saskatchewan Health has inquired as to 
whether your company is union or non-union. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if your government's departments do not 
have a union-preference tendering policy, why on earth is 
Saskatchewan Health making such an inquiry? Mr. Minister, 
will you now admit that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
union-preference tendering policy is now spreading like a 
cancer to other government departments like Saskatchewan 
Health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, because the member has 
referred to the Department of Health, I will endeavour to 
address his question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members opposite should know by now, the 
decisions will be made on a local, regional district basis in 
terms of contracting, in terms of making the decisions for the 
provision of facilities in that district. Mr. Speaker, if the 
member opposite has some documentation to show me 
otherwise, I'd appreciate him providing that documentation to 
me. 
 
The Speaker: — Last question to the member from Maple 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It won't take more 
than one question any more because obviously there is a flip-
flop going on here that is so evident that it won't take much to 
explain it. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the past your government has told us that it 
does not have a union-preference tendering policy for Crown 
corporations. Then we found out that you did have such a 
policy. Clear fact. We found out. 
 
Now you told us that you were not developing a new union-
preference policy, and then we found out that you were 
developing a new policy. 

You told us that you were not expanding the union-preference 
policy to government departments, like the Department of 
Health, and now we're finding out that you are expanding the 
policy. Everything you say that you haven't done, you've done. 
 
Mr. Minister, why can't you just tell the truth? It'll come out 
anyway. People will find out. The health boards aren't going to 
take the rap for you on this one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member has asked his 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to my 
current friend from Maple Creek, the problem is not that we 
have been attempting to avoid the questions; the problem is 
some of these questions are so convoluted they really are 
difficult to make sense out of. 
 
What I say to the member opposite is, the policy which we 
inherited from you was an acknowledged disaster. The industry 
. . . And there is general agreement about that. We have been 
reviewing that policy. When we have something to announce, 
we will share it with you and we're sure that you'll join with us 
in supporting it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Government 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite very well know where the excesses are in their 
government, Mr. Speaker, because they created most of them. 
 
One does not have to look very far to realize that we have far 
more government than we need, and much of it exists to give 
pals and buddies bogus jobs for which they have no 
qualifications — high-priced jobs in the Gaming Corporation 
and even in Executive Council. Truly professional civil servants 
are insulted by the crass politics of this administration and the 
one that went before it. 
 
The Premier of Saskatchewan pays 88 staff to run his office. 
This costs every man, woman, and child in the province of 
Saskatchewan $7.10 per year. The Premier of Alberta gets the 
job done with 47 people at a cost of $1.17 per person in the 
province of Alberta. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, what 
is it that you do for any individual in Saskatchewan that is 
worth more than what the premiers of every other province do 
for their people at a cheaper price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn't quite sure 
whether to believe or not the statement of the executive director 
of the Liberal Party that the Tories were flocking over in 
Saskatchewan from the Tory Party to the Liberals, but I am now 
confirmed in my mind that he is correct, that this must be the 
case. 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
207 

Because here we now have the Liberal leader getting up and 
citing with admiration and affection the operation style of the 
Conservative leader in the province of Alberta. She is saying 
. . . And I might add, Mr. Speaker, much to the applause of the 
Conservative Party to her right. 
 
The Hon. Leader of the Third Party has bought this line of less 
government lock, stock, and barrel in a desperate attempt to try 
to be more right-wing than the right-wingers that sit to her right. 
And you know something? She may be succeeding. 
 
But the Leader of the Liberal Party is so confused on so many 
issues, namely jobs and StatsCanada; namely on expenditure 
levels or nonexpenditure levels; on gaming, is she for it or 
against it? Oh yes, she's for it, but not the way that we're doing 
it. Walking both sides of the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan won't accept for a 
moment, as I don't, the figures that she cites in this House 
respecting Mr. Klein or any other premier. 
 
I can tell you, we run a Premier's shop, an Executive Council's 
shop, which is less than it was in 1990-91, including all the 
growth. Mr. Klein can run his office the way he wants to run it. 
I'm running it as sparely and as efficiently as we can. And when 
it comes to patronage — I don't need any Liberal lessons about 
patronage. I do not need any Liberal lessons about the Governor 
General or any other . . . the list of the Liberal patronage, which 
you and your colleagues administer. 
 
Will you get up and tell us why you support Liberal patronage 
to the extent that you do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to assist the 
Hon. Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, of the 29,000 
members of the New Democratic Party who've torn up their 
memberships, they're flooding to our party as well. 
 
And it appears, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of Saskatchewan 
is one of the greatest cheer-leaders of the Alberta Premier. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
has provided overwhelming evidence that it can spend every 
dime the public will part with, every lucky penny it finds, every 
ill-gotten dollar it can win from the public. But, Mr. Speaker, 
governments across the country recognize that smaller, less 
expensive government is the government of the future. 
 
But here in Saskatchewan, this New Democratic government 
and this particular Premier are going the wrong way down a 
one-way street of high taxes and bigger government. 
 
My question to the Finance minister: will tomorrow's budget 
lead by example and force your government to finally tighten its 
own belt by reducing the cost of government that  

Saskatchewan taxpayers pay for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say, with the greatest 
respect to the Leader of the Liberty Party — she may not accept 
this from me; I suspect she won't but I will say this  drawing 
on a few more years of experience in this legislative Chamber 
than she does, that at the essence of any political argument has 
to be some attention to facts. 
 
We may disagree on philosophy or approaches, but we cannot 
change the cards that have been dealt us and the facts that are 
there. I tell you that in 1991, operating expenses of this 
government were 4.54 billion — and check that out. 
 
I tell you, operating expenses, mid-year report, '94-95, were 
4.24 billion. That's $300 million less. I tell you that on a basket 
of services which we provide, say, compared to the same basket 
of services the Albertans receive and the Alberta government 
provides there, their per capita expenditure is roughly in the 
neighbourhood, if they were to follow our books, of about 
4,500 to 4,700 a year; ours are 4,100 a year. Those are the 
figures. 
 
Now those are the facts. You can ignore them; you can continue 
to come back to gaming, come back to StatsCanada figures, 
come back to any you can. But please take one little piece of 
advice from me. In order to have any shred of credibility left for 
you — and all of the various positions you've taken on rhetoric 
and not on fact — pay some attention to those facts. Understand 
that if we're over $5 billion, it's because of interest rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, to introduce a guest, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I'm pleased to introduce and welcome to 
our Assembly today, seated in your gallery, sir, Mr. Carter 
Currie, a resident of the constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow, 
a close friend and family friend, and a man who I can say in 
various endeavours of his life devotes himself to the assistance 
of others. 
 
I want to welcome Carter, and I would ask all members to 
welcome Mr. Currie to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To introduce a guest, please, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 



February 15, 1995 

 
208 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to introduce in the gallery a 
gentleman, Paul Meid, from my constituency. And Paul is a 
person who is so interested in what goes on at the House that he 
also receives Hansard. And I see he's here today, and I hope he 
enjoyed it. Would you join me in welcoming him. Give a wave, 
Paul. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Microgro International Research Inc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure today to 
rise and announce to the Assembly an important endeavour 
undertaken in Biggar and announced this morning. I want to say 
as well that I join with the Leader of the Opposition on his 
announcement today of the huge oil find in his area of the 
province. 
 
But I want to say that just this morning, Mr. Speaker, I and my 
colleague, the Minister of Agriculture and Food, as well as the 
member for the area, for the Biggar constituency, had the 
privilege of being invited to participate in an event in Biggar 
that exemplified the job creation opportunities already being 
seized upon through the enterprise and hard work of many 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The occasion, where 300 people joined with us, was the news 
conference and ribbon cutting held by Microgro International 
Research Inc. to celebrate the completion of the province's 
largest micro-laboratory and greenhouse in Biggar, creating 20 
new jobs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm especially pleased 
to acknowledge the key role played by the officials and people 
in my department in facilitating this project through various 
support and assistance programs and through the diligent efforts 
of dedicated departmental staff. One staff member in particular, 
Royal Hinther, was instrumental in bringing together two of the 
key partners that made it all possible in the first place. 
 
By way of explanation, Mr. Speaker, this project is a technical 
system by which an infinite number of perfect copies of plants 
can be produced from a single original plant. It's just one of the 
many complex terms we're going to become familiar with in 
Saskatchewan as our biotechnology industry continues to 
rapidly expand. Saskatchewan's agriculture biotechnology 
industry has grown by 300 per cent in the last three years, Mr. 
Speaker, much of that located in your city of Saskatoon. 
 
More and more successes in this field are positioning our 
province as a big-league player in the global economy as it 
affects biotechnology. The biotech industry now includes many 
leading edge Saskatchewan-based firms. It's also attracted large 
multinational corporations such as Cameco, AgrEvo, the former 
Hoechst out of Germany, Monsanto, Pioneer Hi-bred, and Plant  

Genetic Systems. They're located in Saskatoon to benefit 
Saskatchewan's world-renowned research capabilities. 
 
Many of these firms are developing products and services for 
the agricultural industry and we will hear much, much more 
about that in the weeks and months to come. 
 
However, the industry is also expanding into the value added 
food processing, environmental detection, and cosmetics, as 
well as health care areas. One of the initiatives under the 
government's long-range economic development plan, 
Partnership for Renewal, is the research and technological 
commercialization strategy and action plan. It clearly states the 
importance of industry-led strategic partnership such as we saw 
today in Biggar. Strategic partnerships and alliances are critical 
to the successful adoption, development, and commercialization 
of research and technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under Partnership for Renewal we've started the 
great Saskatchewan comeback. And I say, Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow's budget will build on that momentum over the 
coming year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the people of 
Biggar. But first of all let me say that the great Saskatchewan 
comeback, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan say 
it's about time that some of these jobs come back that they have 
driven out of the province over the last three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I could not help but notice 
during the minister's remarks . . . and I understand that he has 
never really been an NDP, and I can understand now why the 
Premier is saying to people across the country, I'm not really 
NDP, you know. Because finally some of these folks are getting 
the message, I believe. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I believe that these people are getting a 
message. And that message is that they have had a dismal, 
dismal record of job creation. That even though we have had a 
so-called comeback over the last year or so, we are still below 
the 1991 levels of jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker, and let us 
not forget that. 
 
This is not a positive growth. This is still an attempt at a 
comeback that those people forced upon the people, forced 
upon small business in Saskatchewan over the least three years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think quite frankly I have to say something 
positive because Biggar has been successful in landing jobs. 
And I want to commend once more the people of Biggar 
because the technology is extremely significant. Because what 
we're talking about is simply cloning, Mr. Minister. Your fancy 
word there of micro-propagation laboratory greenhouse 
complex is going to have the ability of cloning the perfect 
plants so that we can reproduce more of those. 



February 15, 1995 

 
209 

So, Mr. Speaker, the issue that I would like to also address is 
that finally we have this government admitting that 
multinational corporations are not an evil thing. They recognize 
our own Pool in Saskatchewan as being one of those creatures, 
the ones that they took great delight in bad-mouthing. 
 
Now that the responsibility and the mantle of leadership rests 
upon their shoulders, they are showing from time to time certain 
signs of grasping what business is about, what job creation is 
about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once more I congratulate your staff, I 
congratulate the people of Biggar, and I commend them for the 
opportunity that has been presented to them. And, Mr. Speaker, 
charitably, I would say that probably the minister has had some 
role in this as well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very, 
very pleased on behalf of the Liberal caucus to indicate that 
whenever jobs are created in the province of Saskatchewan, 
we'll be the first people to applaud. 
 
Furthermore, we are very delighted that the biotechnology 
industry is being promoted in Saskatchewan. We think it 
appropriate, however, that the federal government's financial 
contributions to this particular field should be acknowledged 
and we find them woefully lacking in acknowledgement from 
the Minister of Economic Development today. 
 
The provincial government always seems to take all of the 
credit, Mr. Speaker, and I find that most interesting, especially 
when comments are made regarding the amount of dollars that 
have gone into the Saskatoon project. 
 
It is indeed interesting, this particular announcement this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that 15 to 20 jobs are going to be 
created, while at the same time I have on my desk a letter from 
a greenhouse owner in Saskatchewan who has written on 
several occasions to this government, and in particular to the 
Premier, stating that in fact his rural greenhouse business has 
been put out of business, and all the jobs that it has created, 
because of the energy policies of this particular administration. 
 
So while we may be potentially gaining 15 to 20 jobs for 
Biggar, there is another part of this province where people have 
been put out of jobs by the policies of this government. 
 
At the same time, we are delighted that there are going to be 
individuals who will in fact receive an opportunity to have the 
dignity of employment in Saskatchewan. We applaud the efforts 
of all who were involved in this project, and we're pleased 
today to hear that something positive is happening in the 
community of Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

30th Anniversary of Canadian Flag 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, members 
have on their desks today, a Canadian flag and some other 
informational material which I know members will find of 
interest. Let me explain the reason, Mr. Speaker, for what is on 
the desks today. 
 
The reason is because this is a very special day in our great 
country of Canada. Today marks the 30th anniversary of the 
national flag of Canada. It was on February 15, 1965, that the 
distinctive red and white maple leaf flag was proclaimed by Her 
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada, as the national 
flag of Canada, and was first raised over Parliament Hill in 
Ottawa and in hundreds of communities across this country. At 
home and abroad the maple leaf flag symbolizes a united, a 
proud, and a confident nation. And those of us who have 
travelled abroad will know that to wear the maple leaf on one's 
lapel anywhere in the world brings a warm response and a 
recognition of the fact that we are Canadians, because of the 
respect that Canada has around the world, and we can be very 
proud of that. 
 
(1430) 
 
This year also, Mr. Speaker, marks the 50th anniversary of the 
end of the Second World War. And Canada remembers a war in 
which tens of thousands of Canadians marched off to defend 
those values which I have mentioned just a moment ago, many 
of them never to return. It was a war of sacrifice which led to a 
legacy of peace. 
 
This year also celebrates the 50th anniversary of the United 
Nations, of which Canada was a founding member. We've gone 
on to play a leading role, making significant contributions to the 
United Nations in initiatives such as the eradication of hunger 
and disease and international peacekeeping. 
 
So we have much to celebrate this year, much for which to be 
thankful. And in the words of George Vanier, Governor 
General of Canada, spoken on that anniversary day on February 
15, 1965, and I quote: 
 
 Bless this flag and grant that this banner of our 

nationhood may proudly fly over a people devoted to 
the pursuit of righteousness, justice, and unity. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as our country struggles with some of the 
issues which confront us, be they financial troubles or national 
unity or others, it is important to know that our history, the 
respect in which we are held throughout the world, the fact that 
we are a nation of people who have come here from every 
single part of the world and therefore have created a sense of 
community and compassion and understanding of each other, 
this fact, Mr. Speaker, indeed will be the basis on which we will 
succeed in overcoming our problems and continue in building, 
as the United Nations has said, the best country in the world in 
which to live. 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
210 

Our flag symbolizes all of that, and today we celebrate the 30th 
anniversary of our Canadian flag and I ask all members of this 
legislature and all Saskatchewan people, as Canadians, to 
recognize this very important event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
certainly join with the minister in sharing the pride that we all 
feel in Canada and the flag of Canada. 
 
People from across this nation all share today's marking the 
50th anniversary of the flag of Canada . . . 30th anniversary, 
pardon me, of the national flag of Canada. It is with a great deal 
of pride that we all have in our country from coast to coast. 
 
We must, as you said, remember the veterans of conflicts 
around this globe, Mr. Speaker. People who . . . men and 
women who have fought for our country, the pride that they 
share in our country and the pride that we share in their 
accomplishments, the freedom that we all enjoy across this 
nation. 
 
It is with a great deal of envy that the rest of the world has for 
Canada and the flag of Canada. It is a symbol of a peaceful, 
law-abiding nation across this world in which all share the 
envy, as I said, of wanting to come to Canada to share in that 
legacy of peace and tradition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride that I as well 
join with the minister in celebrating this day, and I'm sure all 
Canadians from coast to coast to coast would also celebrate this 
day as a very important day in the history of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few months 
after the birth of my daughter in 1964, there was a passionate 
debate over whether or not our country should have her own 
flag. And I know that I had mixed feelings at the time, having 
been raised to honour the Union Jack each and every day in 
school. However, I also sang with pride very frequently in those 
years, "The Maple Leaf Forever." 
 
I think what has transpired over the last 30 years has brought us 
all to a position of feeling very, very good that we do have our 
own flag. Our flag has come to represent what people around 
the world envy: tolerance, stability, peace, and generosity 
towards others. 
 
The Liberal caucus is very pleased to join with the Deputy 
Premier today and all members of this House in congratulating 
our country and in acknowledging the 30th anniversary of the 
flag of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act respecting the Protection of 
Saskatchewan Taxpayers 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with a 
great deal of pride that I move a Bill respecting the Protection 
of Saskatchewan Taxpayers be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting the Application to 

Saskatchewan of the Convention on Protection of Children 
and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the Convention 
on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of 
Intercountry Adoption be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Crown Minerals Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, I would ask leave to change a couple of members on 
committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, 
seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney: 
 
 That the name of Ms. Teichrob be added to the Standing 

Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
I so move. 



February 15, 1995 

 
211 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Serby be substituted for that of 

Mr. Pringle on the Special Committee on Regulations. 
 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley, seconded by Mr. 
Knezacek. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to enter the debate on the throne speech, especially on 
this day where we are celebrating the 30th anniversary of the 
Canadian flag. I would first like to indicate to the Assembly that 
I am going to be supporting the motion, supporting it for a 
number of reasons, but mainly because I feel it indicates a 
turning point in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
A turning point from a period that is the longest and darkest 
period that we've had in financial administration in this 
province, to a period where it is my belief we will achieve a lot 
of benefits for everyone. 
 
I'd like to take the opportunity, as well, to congratulate the 
mover of the motion, the member from Milestone in her present 
. . . in moving the motion on the throne speech, and she 
indicated she was proud to move the motion of the throne 
speech, the fifth individual to do so in this legislature. 
 
I also would like to congratulate the member from Saltcoats for 
his remarks in seconding it. And as well, another person that I 
would like to congratulate is the Lieutenant Governor of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Jack Wiebe. I had the opportunity to 
be in this Assembly when he was one of the members, 
opposition members, at that particular time. And I believe that 
if he continues in his new position as he did in the legislature at 
the time that he was elected to the Assembly, he will do an 
excellent job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech basically, broken down into a 
number of different areas, gives you an indication of where this 
government is going in jobs and where it is going in agriculture 
and I'd like to just say a few words related to what is taking 
place in employment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

The debate has given a number of different decisions in 
employment but I think that the issue has now been fairly well 
covered, but it won't hurt to go over some of the figures just to 
indicate where it stands at the present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on January in '95, total employment in this 
province was up 12,000 people over the same period one year 
previous, and that means that we have an increase of people 
employed in this province. And although the figures did not 
come out in that particular manner to begin with, after they 
were reviewed and some changes were made to the analysis that 
was being done, this is what occurred. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I did not find these figures to be 
much out of place, because if you spent the time visiting people 
and talking and analysing what was taking place in the small 
communities in rural Saskatchewan, you would find that 
individuals would tell you that sales of ski-doos were up, sales 
of — potential sales — of motor boats were up, that there was 
some difficulty fielding hockey teams, curling spiels were a 
little bit lower in the number of people that were expected to be 
there and play in these games, because a large number of the 
younger people in the communities had gone to work in jobs 
that previous years they had not been able to find. 
 
So you see the employment from that particular perspective, 
indications that employment was up, was showing very clearly 
in the communities and along with it a buoyant feeling of what 
is taking place. 
 
I'd also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, one particular example 
where the employment is up from the Turtleford constituency in 
this way and that is at the Weyerhaeuser mill in Big River. They 
have put on an extra shift to handle material, to handle the logs 
that they've been harvesting and sell them into the market. 
 
(1445) 
 
This shift is driven by the market and it's expected that they will 
maintain the increased shift of some 35 people for at least two 
years before the market has been filled with the product that 
they are producing, namely the dimensional material. 
 
It's interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, to realize that 
Saskatchewan unemployment rate is the lowest in the country 
 an employment rate that is running 2 or 3 per cent below the 
national average  at 7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's been some comments made as well about 
the taxes in the province of Alberta and taxes here in the 
province of Saskatchewan and elsewhere. And I'd like to just 
talk a little bit about that, and I bring to the attention of the 
Assembly an article in The Edmonton Journal of January 12 
where the headline reads: Alberta's claim of having the lowest 
taxes just a Tory myth. 
 
The individual writing it goes on to indicate what is meant and 
where the people . . . which groups of people are actually 
paying an increased amount of taxes in Alberta as they would  



February 15, 1995 

 
212 

pay in other provinces, saying that those people at the lower end 
of the income scale, with taxable incomes up to about 10,500, 
would find themselves in a position where they would be 
paying less taxes if they were to move out of Alberta into some 
of the other provinces. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the strange things that occurs in this 
particular . . . in the Alberta system of taxation is that although 
some particular taxes are lower, you find some very unique 
taxing situations in Alberta. For instance, depending upon the 
. . . not the municipality but the county in which you live, as to 
whether it is a rich or a poor county, you could find yourself as 
a parent paying $500 or more transportation cost for each and 
every student that you have that is attending school. And this 
then is a tax, as far as I'm concerned, but it is a tax that impacts 
on individual families directly at a time. 
 
As well, in the education field you could be facing a tuition if 
you wanted your children to attend kindergarten. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that does not bode well to offering a system of 
education that is available to everyone in a reasonable and non 
. . . well so that there are no economic barriers to achieving an 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's also an indication why  since this has been 
operating in the province of Alberta  it may also be an 
indication why the federal Liberal government has taken a look 
at the cost of education and said that they . . . and indicated that 
they thought they could get . . . to get away with increasing 
tuition fees for students in university. It's not a fair system and 
would cause a lot of problems. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the area of utility costs, one of the things 
that has occurred in the province of Saskatchewan is that we've 
been able to drop the cost of natural gas by some 6.5 per cent 
and made this, Mr. Speaker, retroactive to January 1. 
 
This occurred because . . . if we take a look at the history of the 
gas utility in the province of Saskatchewan, the previous 
government stripped it of its base of natural gas so that now it is 
more tied to the fluctuating rate of gas as it is sold on the 
market, rather than being able to minimize rate increases and 
rate . . . and therefore rate drops when there is a large 
fluctuation in gas, whereas before it would be able to maintain a 
very level cost of gas irregardless of the fluctuations in the 
market. 
 
And that I say, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the 
Assembly, is the difference between running a system and 
managing it well and just allowing a system to go up and down 
without any management in it at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the area of agriculture we're seeing a 
number of changes occur, and the changes that are occurring 
will have some major impacts on people in agriculture. But I 
wish to say that I hope that the agricultural community, as it 
goes through these changes, remains supportive of the Canadian 
Wheat Board and the single-desk marketing system that that 
provides. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is that basis that has  

maintained the agricultural community in this province as stable 
as it has been throughout the ups and downs that have occurred 
and been brought about by other . . . by political factors from 
outside the country as well as those within the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other area that I'd like to comment on a little 
bit has to do with the health reforms that have taken place in the 
province of Saskatchewan. In the Turtleford constituency, the 
Parkland Health District Board, I believe, has proven that the 
transition from the system that we had into a wellness program 
was potentially possible to do, and that they have done it in a 
very effective manner. 
 
Just to indicate some of the things that have taken place while 
they've been doing that, I'd like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
although the district has maintained something like 54 hospital 
beds available, they've been able to reduce the utilization of 
those beds down to something like 35 by simply being very . . . 
or by managing the people that are admitted to those beds and 
ensuring that the people that are . . . when they are sent home, 
everything moves through the system and there is home care 
being provided. 
 
And this means that they've been able to keep those beds in 
place, although they have not been using them. And I think that 
that's something that indicates what the problem was under the 
old system of health care, is that there wasn't the local 
management there or the will to do that local management, 
which the new funding system has brought about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, they've been able to increase funding for 
services through home care by 25 per cent. And this means that 
the home care in the Parkland Health District has increased 
substantially. But as well as doing just the increase in funding, 
they've also decentralized home care into a number of 10 
facilities, Mr. Speaker, providing the home care to be provided 
and administered from the four hospitals, a number of . . . a 
municipal office in one area, another . . . nursing homes 
throughout the rest of the home care district. 
 
And this decentralization of home care has meant that it 
provides service when needed, where needed, and is saving the 
constituency a lot of cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that, as I said to begin with, that this 
throne speech is a turning point  the turning point. And I 
want to indicate of when we . . . of coming to an end of deficit 
budgeting and the financial difficulties that that passes on to the 
next generation, to a time when the budgeting will be balanced 
and we will pay as we go, and therefore do things that we can 
afford in the manner that we can afford to do them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — I'd like to indicate again that I'm going to be 
supporting the motion and take this opportunity to thank those 
for allowing me to speak. 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
213 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, myself 
and my colleagues have stated on many occasions that the 
throne speech and long replies take up too much time in this 
Assembly. And while the taxpayers are picking up the tab for 
$35,000 a day before we get to the real business. 
 
In other words, we will spend, Mr. Speaker, a quarter of a 
million dollars — as a matter of fact, it's $180,000 — before we 
get to the budget, to debating changes in legislation, to dealing 
with the important issues facing Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I found hard to accept 
when I came down here first was the time that we wasted here. 
And I will admit to you, sir, and this Assembly, that I have been 
part of it at times when we have wasted time, and rang the bells, 
and done things like that. Because we were forced into it, and 
things like that. 
 
It's too bad, Mr. Speaker, that this government hasn't taken a 
page from the Alberta lead and delivered a 30-minute speech in 
reply to the Speech from the Throne, and then getting right 
down to the business of the legislature. And keeping this in 
mind, Mr. Speaker, I will make a few points and I'll keep my 
remarks quite brief. 
 
Every government has tough decisions to make, whether it's 
dealing with the province's finances or with reforming social 
programs. That comes with the territory and every government 
has to do that. 
 
And for instance, Mr. Speaker, Alberta and Saskatchewan have 
taken opposite approaches to deal with deficits. Saskatchewan 
chose to raise every tax and every fee in sight while Alberta 
held the line on all taxes — two different approaches. And I 
believe it's more beneficial, Mr. Speaker, to take the Alberta 
Premier Ralph Klein's approach: tackle deficit by first cutting 
government spending and not raising taxes. 
 
In fact recently, Premier Klein delivered his annual report to 
Albertans in which he declared the Alberta budget was 
balanced two years in advance of his projection. In so doing, 
Mr. Klein fulfilled his election promise of acting through 
spending cuts rather than tax increases, and it was signed, 
sealed, and delivered two years ahead of schedule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted, it should be noted that . . . 
especially to the members opposite that an Environics poll the 
very following day showed Mr. Klein leading the most popular 
provincial government in our country. This NDP government, I 
think, should take note of that. Mr. Klein's government is 
leading in many other areas as well, Mr. Speaker, and as the 
official opposition member responsible for Social Services I'm 
especially interested in reforms taking place in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, welfare reform initiatives implemented in Alberta 
since 1993 are very impressive in my opinion. Welfare 
expenditure on client benefits dropped by $200 million in 1993- 

94, while total spending has been reduced by 300 million 
during the same period. In addition the welfare case-load 
declined 38.9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The department has 
reduced the case-load from 94,087 people in March of 1993 to 
57,521 in September of 1994. 
 
(1500) 
 
And at the same time the Alberta government is set to trim it's 
social services department by 23 per cent by turning over the 
delivery of child welfare services to community groups. Mr. 
Speaker, these groups in turn will contract services from 
various non-profit agencies. 
 
Compare this, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan's welfare numbers. 
In December of 1991, there were 57,199 individuals on social 
assistance in our province. July 1994 figures show the number 
has sky-rocketed to 83,039 persons. Mr. Speaker, expenditures 
have grown from 367.4 million in 1991-92 to 530.8 million in 
1994-95. Just compare those two. 
 
So instead of reforming our province's welfare system, the NDP 
administration fired welfare abuse investigators, eliminated 
Saskatchewan works program, and therefore increasing the 
chances of further generations trapped in the welfare cycle, and 
increasing the cost to the already strapped Saskatchewan 
families that are not on social services. 
 
Income assistance programs have become a welfare trap. This 
trap can trap the recipients in the status quo of dependency. It 
can also trap the government in the status quo of perpetuating 
dependence. It has no value to either of the parties, Mr. 
Speaker. The government gets trapped and so do the recipients. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Lose, lose, lose. 
 
Mr. Britton: — It's a lose-lose proposition, as one of my 
colleagues says. 
 
In order to leave social assistance, a client must give up the 
certain benefit of a government cheque for the uncertainty of 
returning to work. The government's even managed to make 
trying to get out of welfare difficult. A client faces deductions 
from social assistance for every dollar that they earn privately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this does nothing to alleviate the problem. Instead 
it creates a high marginal tax rate upon the welfare clients trying 
to learn new skills and to make future job contracts. 
Governments created the welfare trap, Mr. Speaker, and 
governments can break it — just like the government in 
Alberta. 
 
Firstly, Alberta ensured that incentives within the social policy 
network encourage rather than inhibit the required economic 
adjustment. Secondly, they ensured that social safety net 
involves a manner that reflects the changing needs of citizens. 
What this means basically, the Alberta government believes 
social policy has to facilitate and assist in the occupational and 
industrial relocation in the new economy that is required of the  



February 15, 1995 

 
214 

current creation generation of Albertans. It is to rebuild 
confidence in the social safety net. It must be simplified and 
redirected to those who are really in need. 
 
The Klein government implemented an initiative called support 
for independence, which emphasizes the responsibility of 
individuals and families to look after themselves, and targets 
the most vulnerable groups in Alberta's society. And it's 
working, Mr. Speaker. The numbers speak for themselves. 
 
In order to keep a social assistance case load down, every 
government must ensure that social assistance remains an 
unattractive alternative to employment. This must be 
maintained as a hand-up instead of a hand-out. 
 
The argument that generous welfare encourages people to 
abandon jobs, Mr. Speaker, is well supported by available 
evidence. I would like you to consider the Bob Rae NDP 
government in Ontario, the province with the highest level of 
benefits in Canada. A couple in Ontario with two children 
receives $1,770 per month plus benefits. Ontario has about 63.5 
welfare cases per 1,000 population. 
 
Compare that to New Brunswick with the least generous 
province. The same couple would receive $877, and has only 
49.3 cases per 1,000 population. Those two figures should 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members opposite, that 
by over-generous welfare benefits people will not try to 
increase their chances of a job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my belief that social assistance should be a 
springboard to independence rather than a net to become 
entrapped in. Unfortunately it seems the members opposite do 
not share this view. 
 
Before the NDP members opposite start to moan and groan 
about how uncompassionate the Ralph Klein government has 
been, I think they should keep a few things in mind. They talk 
about the slash-and-burn policies of the Alberta government. 
Well firstly, let's look at what they have done. First, no taxes 
have been raised in the province of Alberta. Secondly, while the 
NDP government in this province has promised thousands and 
thousands of jobs, they have actually created zip. 
 
Now whether the old StatsCanada reports are examined or the 
new ones, the more recent ones, our province is down anywhere 
from 1,000 to 10,000 jobs since 1991. And the members 
opposite can holler and moan and groan, but the facts are there. 
And let us look at what has happened to Alberta in the 
meantime in terms of job creation. 
 
Well, here we are. The Klein government can boast, 
legitimately so, of 80,000 new jobs created in the last two years. 
So the Klein government almost tripled the Saskatchewan 
NDP's promise of creating 30,000 jobs by the year 2000. They 
done it in only two years, Mr. Speaker. And they didn't raise 
any taxes; they didn't do any of the things that this government 
has done; no fees have been raised. 
 

Mr. Speaker, no wonder the welfare numbers are down and Mr. 
Klein can boast of heading the most popular government in this 
country. Mr. Speaker, he has created a positive business climate 
by not raising taxes, cutting government spending, and in turn 
he has created thousands and thousands of jobs. It will work if 
you do it. 
 
Now the members opposite will say, well but they have no 
health care premiums in Alberta . Mr. Speaker, that is also true. 
But if you add up all the taxes and fees and loss of jobs in our 
province, I think most people would rather pay a few hundred 
dollars a year for health care and have a job. They would rather 
pay a few hundred dollars and have a job rather than be out of a 
job -- what's happening in Saskatchewan -- and then bear most 
of the highest taxes in Canada as we do in Saskatchewan. It's a 
double hit for the working people in Saskatchewan. They also 
pay the highest taxes and they have to help feed the most 
unemployed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other issues to bring up with the 
government and I will do so at the earliest possible time. But 
my Wilkie constituents in the meantime are saying to me, let's 
get on with the business of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, it's always a privilege to stand in 
this House in my place and represent the people of the Nipawin 
constituency. It's enjoyable to be back here and be with the 
colleagues on both sides of the House. 
 
It's also enjoyable to be back here with you, Mr. Speaker. Your 
wise counsel and your fairness are much appreciated. I know 
the people of our constituency and I believe of the province 
recognize and support your efforts in improving the decorum of 
this place, although there is, no doubt, there's still room for a 
little improvement once in a while. 
 
I would like to compliment my colleague and friend, the 
member from Bengough-Milestone , for moving the Speech 
from the Throne. I would also like to compliment the member 
from Saltcoats on seconding the speech. I and others recognize 
that it is an honour to be asked. 
 
I also want to recognize two special people: firstly, the member 
from Regina Hillsdale , the former minister of Health. Her 
vision, her steadfastness, and her wise judgement is being 
recognized by people of this province, people in the health care 
field of this province and in Canada and indeed in other places 
in the world. 
 
The former associate minister of Health . . . I should say the 
former associate minister of Finance, the member from Swift 
Current, I believe has been an example for all of us in this 
House in the way he has served the province and the way he 
conducted his business with his wise counsel, with firmness 
and fairness. Many of the misguided megadeals of the former  



February 15, 1995 

 
215 

government needed to be and were renegotiated under his 
guidance for the betterment of all in this province, especially 
the taxpayers. 
 
I also, as others have, I want to congratulate the member from 
Kindersley on being elected Leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. I have grown over the last three years to 
appreciate his ability, as I'm sure we all have. The task ahead of 
him is a big one, but I am sure that he will address it with his 
usual vigour and enthusiasm as he has displayed in the House. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, as others have, I want to welcome 
our new Clerk's assistant, Meta Woods , and the pages. And I 
should, as well, congratulate the member from Athabasca and 
the member from Regina Lake Centre on their appointment to 
cabinet. Their talents and their dedication have been recognized 
and rewarded, and deservedly so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Nipawin, as you know, lies in 
the north-east part of the province. It's just south of the forest 
area. It's the furthest north-east-most agriculture area in the 
province. And forestry is one of the major industries in our 
area. The pulp wood goes to Prince Albert, of course, the small, 
locally owned saw mills, post operations, and the government-
owned mill in Carrot River. 
 
Our agriculture in that area is very diversified and has been for 
years. There's a lot of cattle in our area. There's three provincial 
pastures, provincially operated community pastures. There are 
several alfalfa dehydrating plants. Their product is exported 
overseas. And it provides much appreciated jobs to young 
people and farmers and ex-farmers in the area. 
 
CanAmera Foods is a canola crushing plant at Nipawin. It's a 
major employer and much appreciated by the people that work 
there, the town of Nipawin, and the farmers. 
 
The leaf-cutter bee business is another industry that's somewhat 
unique to that area. It's used, as you know, to help pollinate the 
alfalfa and that little bee that's . . . is exported all over the 
world. 
 
The honey bee business also in my constituency, Mr. Speaker 
— I understand that in the constituency of Nipawin we produce 
about 25 per cent of all the honey in the province. So it's a 
sweet place to live. And I suppose that comes from the large 
number of blossoms on the canola fields and the clover fields 
and so on that have been there for years. 
 
(1515) 
 
Another major influence on that area of the province are the 
two hydroelectric dams in that area. They have created two 
lakes and an exciting tourist attraction. They add very much to 
the natural beauty of that part of the province. 
 
And I think most of all, most significantly, they have provided 
one of the best places in the world to fish. This is world-class 
fishing in that part of the province. We have people that fly to  

that area to fish from all over the world. And the main fish 
caught there, the record-size fish, are the northern pike — we 
call them the jack. And of course the wall-eye, and we call them 
the pickerel. These are record-size fish that are fairly easily 
caught. I've been able to catch a few significant sized ones 
myself, and I don't consider me to be a fisherman of any renown 
. 
 
I remember last summer, Mr. Speaker, in the local paper one 
day a picture of a young boy and his father, and the young boy 
was holding a big pike and the father was holding a big 
pickerel. And the story under it went on to say that the son had 
caught — I forget how many pounds it was now, 18 or 20 
pounds, pike — and the father was holding the Saskatchewan 
record in the history of the province. He had come up and 
caught this record-size pickerel in three days of fishing. 
 
The story went on to say the father said, in his interview, that he 
had drove over 1,000 miles for that, and here he had a 
Saskatchewan record in his hand and his young boy standing 
beside him with an 18- or 20-pound fish as well. He said, I 
drove over 1,000 miles. And we that go fishing with our sons 
and our daughters know what it means to have that kind of 
success. He said, I drove over 1,000 miles and it was worth 
every one of those miles. 
 
Then he went on to say, and this is almost unbelievable but the 
story was in the paper and I believe it, that they had decided on 
the way up — because they had heard that fishing was so good 
up there — they had decided as they drove along on the way up 
that any fish they caught under 10 pounds they were just going 
to throw it back. 
 
And believe it or not, that same day that they caught that 
Saskatchewan record, they threw back two wall-eye — 9 
pounds, some ounces — and they were rewarded with catching 
the Saskatchewan record. I think that anybody that'll throw back 
two 9-pound fish, with your son in the boat, deserves to catch a 
Saskatchewan record, and I'm glad he did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — The Nipawin Regional Park . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — More of a fish story than the throne 
speech. 
 
Mr. Keeping: — I'm going to tie this together with the Speech 
from the Throne , Mr. Speaker, in a few minutes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Another thing I'm thinking of when I think of the government, 
especially in eastern Canada — the Upper House  in Carrot 
River-Arborfield area . . . A lot of people don't know this, but it 
is unique too. It's the only one in the province; it's the only one 
in Canada. In the Carrot River-Arborfield area, along the banks 
of the Carrot River, they discovered an 85-billion-year-old 
crocodile — 85-billion-year-old crocodile, prehistoric, older 
than most of the dinosaurs. He is preserved in the museum here  



February 15, 1995 

 
216 

just on the north side of the lake here in the Saskatchewan 
museum of natural history. It's the only one in Canada, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I have seen the fossil. He's perfectly 
preserved. One of the best examples of a preservation. I haven't 
seen . . . I've seen fossils in the Upper House in Ottawa that 
weren't preserved as well as this one. 
 
This is the only one in Canada and it was found in my 
constituency. And I think that everybody should take the 
opportunity, go to the natural museum of history here in 
Saskatchewan and see this crocodile that's called Big Bert, 
affectionately, and see what you think of him. 
 
With this new throne speech, Mr. Speaker, with this new throne 
speech, I think that Saskatchewan has reached a new day, a new 
day of hope and opportunity. For the last three years we have 
been on a journey of renewal, the transition period from a 
period of waste and mismanagement and overspending; a 
period where we had promised in our first term of office to get 
our financial books in order and to balance the budget in the 
first term of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — And now we have reached a major milestone, 
the first major milestone, our first major goal. Tomorrow we 
will be unveiling our balanced budget — the first balanced 
budget that Saskatchewan has had since the New Democratic 
Party were last in government. 
 
I know that people have had to make hard choices. A lot of 
people in government have had to make hard choices. A lot of 
ordinary, everyday people have had to make very difficult and 
very hard choices. We all know that as we go through our 
constituency. But we realize that they were the necessary ones 
and they were the right ones. And this is what government is 
about — is making the hard choices and making the right 
choices and doing the right thing. And now at last we have 
good government restored. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — This budget speech outlines our plans for 
sustainable resource development. I want to underline the word 
sustainable. Anybody can go out and have resource 
development. Just pour money into it, pour money into it, prop 
it up with taxpayers' money, and don't worry about the future 
generations — our children, our grandchildren. And don't worry 
about the debt you're putting over here, and don't worry about if 
it's sustainable or not. 
 
We are outlining in this budget . . . in this throne speech our 
plans, and tomorrow it'll be the budget for sustainable economic 
development and resource management. 
 
We have also tomorrow, and will be putting the financial figure 
on, the plans in the throne speech that we outlined for 
continued agriculture diversification. We know in the future, as 
much as anybody can see, that that's the way to go. I think — I  

don't know if it was our grandfathers or our grandmothers or 
whoever coined the phrase — don't put all your eggs in one 
basket, still is a good rule to go by. 
 
A job strategy was mentioned in the throne speech. A job 
strategy that is going to train and build jobs, sustainable jobs. 
And training for jobs that there are; not training just for 
training, but to build bridges between training and jobs. 
 
We have, as you know, are continuing on a modern health care 
plan that is going to be copied and envied by a lot of other 
provinces and other places in the world. 
 
I think one of the major things about our health care plan that 
should be recognized and admired is the local decision making, 
the local boards, taking away from people a long ways away 
from the situation making the decision. But the people that live 
there, the people that know the needs of the community, 
matching the needs with the service provided. 
 
As you know, this is the 90th birthday of our province and we 
celebrate our past. We also look forward to the future. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I love to read history books, especially of my 
area where I recognize some of the names and the families. I 
have most . . . I think I have all the history books of my area and 
I have them close to my bed actually and I can reach out and 
read them at night and get to know some of the families that 
lived in that area before me, the families that are still there now. 
 
People moved into that area from southern Saskatchewan; 
people moved into that area from the United States; moved into 
that area from Europe. It was all bush and swamp and water and 
flies and cold weather, and it always amazes me how forward-
looking those people were in their plans for the future. How 
forward-looking our parents and our grandparents were when 
they planned for a better future for us. They planned and 
worked for a better future for us. They planned and cooperated 
with one another for a better future for us and we've enjoyed a 
better life than most of them have, far better. And they deserve 
our respect. 
 
We can learn a lot today from that example that they set for us 
and on this past three years of transition, from the former kind 
of managing the business of the province and the affairs to what 
we have set now — a new outlook, new hope, a new day. We 
have been working, cooperating and working, planning together 
with labour, with business, and government, for the benefit of 
all and especially for the future and the benefit of our children 
and their children and their children. 
 
That's what the kind of example that we were set if we look at 
what people have done in the 90-year span of this province — 
90 years is a short span. There's some people living in the 
province, a lot of them, that are older than the province. And if 
we look what in the short term of 90 years how they worked 
and sweat, with no roads, no schools, no health care, no social 
assistance, no markets, no anything, and what they built and left 
for us, we have to pay more attention to what we're doing for  



February 15, 1995 

 
217 

the future. And that's what we've been doing, Mr. Speaker, over 
the last three years and now it's starting to pay off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an independent spirit I believe that brought 
people to that part of the province, a spirit of independence. But 
they soon learned as they faced the bush and the harsh weather 
and the flies and the fact that there was no schools and no 
resources, they soon learned to cooperate. Cooperation was a 
learned behaviour and they learned it. And it benefited our 
province well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that's what we've been doing this past three 
years. We have had to temper some of our idealism with 
pragmatism. We have had to temper some of the things that we 
would like to do and be realistic because this is all we can do. 
 
The highlight for me, Mr. Speaker, in the budget speech will be 
the balanced budget. The highlight for me in the throne speech 
was the fact that we are going to balance our budget and we are 
going to pass balanced budget legislation. 
 
That was the main reason that I ran, when I let my name stand 
and people were asking me to run, and now here it is. Just three 
and a half years later, here it is. I am absolutely elated. I am 
absolutely overjoyed that it's here. And not only it's here, it's 
here a year earlier than we had predicted. 
 
Sure, things worked well. You always expect the good luck. I've 
noticed when I played ball, Mr. Speaker, we played on a team 
that was a very winning team. Wasn't because I was on it, but it 
just happened to be a very winning team. And people would 
always say, you guys are so lucky. And I said, yes, I noticed one 
thing, the more you practice the luckier you are. The harder you 
work and the better plans you make, the more lucky you will be; 
watch hockey teams, it's the same thing. Saskatchewan has had 
some luck but I think the people of Saskatchewan, the way 
they've worked and the way they've sacrificed and cooperated, 
in lots of cases put our idealism aside. We deserve to have some 
good luck and we're all the better for it. 
 
This throne speech marks the end of the transition to good 
government. This throne speech marks a new beginning, a new 
day of new hope and new opportunity and I am proud to 
support it. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
happily to enter this debate today — happy because, as the last 
speaker said, we are starting to govern the province the way the 
province should be governed, and was governed in the past. 
Having a balanced budget is not everything to the province but 
having the balanced budget takes the handcuffs off the 
government as far as facilitating jobs, programs. It takes the 
handcuffs off government as far as having options, because 
when you have a budget that is negative, when you spend more 
than you take in, your options are very limited. 
 

And this province has had a number of years — and indeed this 
province and other provinces — have had a number of years of 
governments that believe in handcuffing government. They 
believe in handcuffing government because they don't believe 
in government. 
 
Witness our neighbours to the west. A great article, editorial, 
from one of the Alberta papers telling how Jack . . . Ralph 
Klein, rather, is destroying government. And they want to 
destroy government. They want to destroy confidence. His 
ministers are going to be — in Alberta — are going to be given 
the power to privatize parts of their department without even 
coming to the Legislative Assembly for debate. 
 
(1530) 
 
Get government out of the lives of people. That's what the 
catchword is — get government out of the lives of people. But, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, government is people; the government is 
the people. 
 
Now I want to make a comparison, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
have proposed balanced budget legislation in this throne speech 
for this session. I particularly don't think there should be a need 
for balanced budget legislation. I think many of us think that. 
 
We look back in history of this province and we have to then 
project to the future — and heaven forbid that we should ever 
not be government; there will be another Tory or Liberal 
government that will need balanced budget legislation. 
 
Now the opposition benches also put forward balanced budget 
legislation. But the difference between it is this. The 
opposition's attitude as the right-wing Conservative or Liberal 
attitude is this: you have to protect the people from its own 
government. 
 
Just think of the logic: protect the people from its own 
government. The people who elected the government have to be 
protected from that government. Well I think there is some 
necessity for that, but as far as we're concerned, it's the 
government job to work for the people and to protect the 
people. 
 
That's the difference in psyche. And what it leads to, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the fact that if you can convince the 
government . . . if you can convince the people that they have to 
be protected from their government, you promote anarchy, 
because the people who think they have to be protected from 
government think, well maybe we should get rid of government. 
And that's what Ralph Klein is doing. That's what the United 
States has done. 
 
Because as you get people wanting to get rid of government and 
the institution, then they become disenfranchised because they 
think, well if it's there it's not worth voting for anyway. As they 
become disenfranchised then you could argue, well there's less 
need for government. 



February 15, 1995 

 
218 

But I argue the opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker; there is more and 
more and more need for governing — not government but 
governing — in Canada and in the United States. 
 
In the United States, 40 per cent of the people vote in a national 
election — 40 per cent  60 per cent of the people feel 
disenfranchised. That's no accident, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
that's what's being promoted by the right-wing Liberal and 
Conservative governments in Canada and in Saskatchewan. Get 
rid of this institution and then let business take over. 
 
Well, get rid of the institution, how do they do this? How do 
they promote this? Well here's how they do it. You see Ralph 
Klein, Preston Manning, standing up and saying, balance the 
budget but no tax increases. You don't have to increase taxes to 
balance the budget. 
 
Well when you think this through, first of all, in Mr. Manning's 
case, the people who are surrounding him are all . . . the people 
in Ottawa for a number of years and their advisers who are now 
moved over to the Reform Party, they're all old Conservatives 
who created a major part of the budget . . . I should say, created 
a major part, finished off, the Liberals' creation of the major 
part of the deficit rather. 
 
But he stands up and says, balance the budget; no more taxes. 
Well yes, you can do that and it can be achieved. You can sell 
off the health care system, get it out of government, privatize it. 
You can sell off the educational institutions, the universities, 
and privatize them and the technical institutes, as we have seen 
in the United States, as we are seeing in the move in Alberta. 
 
But the result of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the result of that is 
that the people are still paying but no one's there to govern the 
province to make sure that the wealth that is moved around the 
province is distributed evenly through social programs, 
medicare, unemployment insurance, social services. Nobody is 
there to make sure that the money that is taken from the people 
goes to roads, to access to health care institutions, 
opportunities, to kindergarten. 
 
Just think of that logic — get rid of the institution. And I'll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that is what Ralph Klein in Alberta is calling 
loud and clear. And to hear the opposition benches in this 
House, both Liberal and Conservative, applauding Ralph Klein, 
tells me one thing  that they would take this province down 
the same path. No more taxes; get rid of the institution; 
disenfranchise the people; control by whom? Control by the 
people with money. And if you look at the United States of 
America, you will see exactly that happening. 
 
You hear Ralph Klein jumping up and down about members 
promoting, and in this province we heard members of the 
opposition, when they were government, promoting the fact that 
members of this Assembly are not very well respected. I 
remember Mr. Lane saying, after explaining why he had 120 per 
cent slip in his budget, saying, well I'm just a politician. 
Promoting the fact that his colleagues in this institution are 
somewhat less than the respect they deserve. 

Why would we do that? Why would we promote . . . an 
institution promote degrading people who are elected to 
govern? Well you would do that because you don't believe in 
governing. And if you don't believe in governing, you want the 
people to say well, everybody's the same, so we don't have to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in governing. This 
throne speech is designed deliberately to promote governance 
— governance for the people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Leadership. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Leadership, as my colleague says. Because 
without leadership of government, it becomes anarchy. 
 
And like I said before, it is controlled by the rich. And that's 
what . . . that's where this country is heading for. I mean I'm not 
saying tomorrow, but that's what's being promoted by the 
Liberals and Tories to take us down that path to anarchy. 
 
Disrespect for members of this institution, just think about it. 
The people who are out there in the province who vote for 
members of this Assembly and then members of the elected 
bodies of our country downgrade their colleagues. I mean there 
is no purpose other than to get the government down in the 
depths of no control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the balanced budget legislation in this province 
sadly is needed because of what happened in the past and put 
there as a protection for the future. 
 
It's just like fixed election dates. If you go through from 1944 to 
present in all the NDP governments . . . in fact, 1944, June, 
when the first Douglas government was elected, until 1964, 
every four years, there was an election held in June. Like 
clockwork. We didn't need legislation. We didn't need 
legislation. And it flows fairly consistently through the years of 
NDP governments to try to have an election every four years. 
 
The fact that people are asking for fixed election dates is a 
recent phenomenon. Just because you see the last government 
go nearly 10 years in two terms was an anomaly . The people 
want to guard against that. And all you have to do is put a 
government in who believes in governing, who believes in not 
disenfranchising people but it believes in people's right to vote 
and elect and have some control over their own affairs by 
putting in the party that they think will best serve them. 
 
That's what governing and government is all about. That's what 
this throne speech is all about. Four years ago we set out a plan. 
We set out a plan to try to get this province back on its feet 
again. And the Liberals and the Conservatives are saying, well 
you're taxing the people to death. You're taxing; you're mean, 
cruel people. Do like Ralph Klein does. 
 
Okay, let's do a little comparison to Ralph Klein. Ralph Klein 
. . . how much medicare do Alberta people pay? No taxes in 
Alberta, by the way. No, but how much medicare? 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
219 

An Hon. Member: — Nine hundred. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Nine hundred for a family of four or 
thereabouts. What's the car insurance compared to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three times, three times as high. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — At least three times as high. And if you're a 
younger person it can be way more than that. Oh but there's no 
taxes in Alberta. No, no. What about kindergarten? Oh, I guess 
I got to pay 500 bucks to send my child to kindergarten. But no, 
there's no taxes in Alberta. We'll never have taxes to balance the 
budget. 
 
What about hospitals? Two major hospitals are going to be shut 
down in Alberta; the purpose is to privatize them. No taxes, no. 
You wait and see. There's going to be . . . the scrap has started 
already between Ottawa and Ralph Klein about privatizing 
health care. No, not raising taxes. 
 
The next thing that will be is the universities. You wait and see. 
In fact they've started already. Already across Alberta and some 
other provinces where there's major funding from private 
institutions into the universities, major funding. Granted that is 
not all bad, but what's the end result? What's the end result? 
Who's going to be in control of the universities, what's it going 
to cost and who will be able to attend? No, you don't have to 
raise taxes. 
 
But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if that vein is kept, you don't need 
taxes. You don't need taxes because you'll have a class of 
people who are down without any possible way to earn a living. 
Don't have to take care of them. Cut back social services. Cut 
back social services. Make them work. Well that sounds good 
but, Mr. Speaker, the problem with that is that if there is no 
control by government to help the people, who's going to do it? 
Who's going to take care of the poorest of the poor? Who's 
going to take care of the medically unable to work? Who's 
going to take care of the special needs people? Who's going to 
do that? 
 
We've seen Alberta cut those areas. In Saskatchewan we 
haven't. And this is the comparison I want to make, Mr. 
Speaker. In Saskatchewan we put together a budget . . . we put 
together a throne speech rather, to be followed by a budget. 
Budgets over four years that were announced . . . the targets 
were announced four years ago. We have maintained right on 
those targets. In fact, last year we were ahead of our own 
projection, ahead of our own projection, right on the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you have a taxation system, when a 
government who wants to govern, you have a government that 
maintains basic services. And that's what we've done in 
Saskatchewan. I'll tell you there has been very few . . . in fact, if 
you can find somebody in Saskatchewan who has not been 
affected on the road that we have had to take to recover this 
province from the grasps and the bowels of debt, then that 
would be something because I think everybody's been affected. 

I don't care if it's been the drug plan or the E&H (education and 
health) tax or whatever, but the point is, it was a plan, a plan to 
govern. A plan to release ourselves from the debt that's 
handcuffing us so that we cannot take care of our poor, to get 
them back into jobs; that we cannot take care of our special 
needs people who need taking care of. So that we can again 
take care of the people who through no fault of their own are 
sick and can't work. 
 
In the right-wing Liberal Alberta Conservative model those 
people are forgotten about. Fritz Pearls, an old sociology 
professor, wrote a book one time, and his theory was, out of 
sight out of mind — the toilet theory. Give them a flush and get 
them out of your sight and don't worry about them. And that's 
their approach. Saskatchewan took a different approach, 
maintain basic services, social services, health care. 
 
It's not the way it was, but we have achieved something that no 
other province in this country has achieved in recent times and 
that is to be able to come in with a budget where you don't 
spend more than you take in. This allows the province, Mr. 
Speaker, to have options. When all of a sudden then you have a 
surplus, it'll be small, but then you can decide whether to pay 
down the debt. You can decide whether you wanted to put it 
back into services for the people; you can decide whether you 
wanted to put it into job creation, or assisting job creation. You 
give yourself the option to make choices. And that's what 
governing is all about — making choices. 
 
But to hear the opposition talk, they would like to create the 
feeling that government is somehow separate from the people, 
as witnessed by their balanced budget legislation protecting the 
people from its own government. 
 
What kind of a logic do we have? What kind of logic is it when 
we have to put forward a thought that we have to protect the 
people from its own government? 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province we have a number of exciting 
things that are happening. I'll tell you, in my area, in the 
Humboldt area and the Watrous area, I defy anyone to go up in 
that area and find someone who doesn't have a job if they want 
it — anyone. 
 
Things are moving. The manufacturing sector, implement 
manufacturing sector, went up something like 56 per cent last 
year. 
 
And oh, some people say, well the government can't take any 
credit for this. It's the economy. It's turning around, and the 
Saskatchewan government has got nothing to do about it. They 
got nothing to do about it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well the Liberal member says, hear, hear. See, 
that's just what I've been talking about. You want the people to  



February 15, 1995 

 
220 

think that government is nothing and nothing to do with 
anything. 
 
But I'll tell you what this province has done, Mr. Speaker, is 
we've positioned ourselves to be out front, ahead of everybody 
else in the race in this province to turn their economies around. 
We're so far ahead of them they can't see us because we're 
coming in with a balanced budget. And as this economy 
recovers and there's more people paying taxes and as more 
people working, we will be the model for Canada — the model 
for Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada needs a model. I look at the provinces in 
eastern Canada. The provinces in eastern Canada are governed 
by the Liberals. Debt, despair, taxation greater than 
Saskatchewan's. Combined taxation in Saskatchewan is the 
second lowest in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem with this province has not been the 
people; the problem with the province has been the government. 
And that's why we see the attitude. And when now we are 
successful in becoming government and governing again, we 
see the cries of foul, overtaxation, and everything from the 
opposition benches. 
 
When I'm out in Humboldt, Saskatchewan in the north-east 
section . . . corner, in the manufacturing sector, you know what? 
I don't hear a howl, like the members opposite say, about people 
saying there's no jobs, the economy and everything's lousy. I 
hear exactly the opposite. I hear exactly the opposite. If you talk 
to the Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association , they say 
the position this province has taken is fantastic because the 
province's job is to create the climate, create the climate for 
recovery in this case, create a climate of economic activity. And 
that's what we've been doing. 
 
The business tax decreases over the last few years has helped. 
Oh no, government's got nothing to do with recovery. Well I 
talk to the people who think that reducing of the business tax 
was a particularly fine thing in that point in time because they 
were feeling the pinch. 
 
And I hear things like, well — from the opposition benches — 
well your energy rates are too high. A little bit hypocritical 
coming from the opposition when they're the ones that gave 
away our energy reserves and now all we are is buying on the 
spot market, transferring it through TransGas , and selling it to 
the customers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . remember they sold the coal mines. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — A very good point. My colleague said they 
gave away the coalmines as well, all the energy systems. And 
then they say, well your energy rates are too high. If our energy 
rates are too high maybe we should get rid of SaskEnergy . Like 
they did. Well rates didn't go down. All we do now is buy on 
the spot market. But if you compare, Mr. Speaker, to some 
provinces where they have a private energy sector, power or 
energy, the rates are no lower, in fact higher in many cases. But  

where do the profits go? Do the profits go back to the people 
like it is in Saskatchewan through the Crowns? No, it goes right 
to the private hands. 
 
I don't hear people out in rural Saskatchewan squawking about 
the energy rates. They don't like to pay; nobody does. But you 
know what they're talking about? They're talking about 
opportunity. And that's what this budget document . . . this 
throne speech document and that's what this budget will be all 
about, Mr. Speaker -- opportunity. 
 
You give people a little glimmering of hope for turnaround in 
economic fortune for themselves and I'll tell you they will take 
that and run with it like you wouldn't believe. And that's what 
this province has done. We've taken the glimmering of hope, off 
in the distance, step by step. And it's been hard, you know, and 
I really feel sorry. I really feel sorry for the people of this 
province because it hasn't been easy for them as we all know 
around here. 
 
It certainly wasn't easy for me to sit in opposition and see the 
last government building the debt. But the poor people of this 
province have taken a double whammy . First of all they went 
through the debt building and then they went through the 
hardship of trying to get it turned around, and that's unfair. 
That's unfair for the people of this province to have to go 
through. 
 
But you know what? At first they were angry at our 
government. They said, you can't do this. In fact some of my 
own supporters, Mr. Speaker, some of my own members said 
you can't do this, and if you continue to do this maybe I won't 
support you any more. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? Those 
people are back saying, you were right. 
 
And I don't say aye, because I tell you, as you sit around and 
you look at what you have to do to people, it hurts inside. And 
we all took our turns saying, well gee, we can't do this; it 
doesn't matter if you're a member of this House or whether 
you're a member of the public. And some people, Mr. Speaker, 
can't take that. Some people can't take that criticism and they 
have to go leave it and walk away from it. But it takes leaders to 
be able to wade through the criticism. It takes leaders to be able 
to be focused on an objective, the objective of hope, delivering 
hope to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've seen it in education. Fantastic things 
happening in education: career laddering, having institutions 
recognize each other's courses. They say, Mr. Speaker, that a 
young student today going out of university will change careers 
six times. Six times, and I think when I was going out it was 
something like twice or three times. So those people are going 
to be mobile. They're going to have to have a wide range of 
skills. They're going to have to be credited from job to job for 
pensions; they're going to have to have portable pension plans. 
This is the way of the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that's what government is there for, to allow 
them to do that; to kick-start their economic activity as they go  



February 15, 1995 

 
221 

through the university system. And not just selectively like we 
liked to see — like some of the Liberal members would like to 
see — not selectively by eliminating the possibility of students 
going to university. We've seen Mr. Axworthy in Ottawa saying 
to the students, to this province and Canada saying user pay, 
user pay theory. 
 
It's going to cost you $40,000 to go through university on your 
student loan. Well this is another example, another example of 
segregating people, because you know that people who can't 
afford it will not be going to university. Some people can't . . . 
we have situations today where you have a family with a decent 
income of $40,000 but if they got two children in university 
right today, they have to watch their pennies. They have to 
watch their pennies. 
 
And what's Mr. Axworthy and the Liberals saying? We don't 
care about you. You go to the bank and get your student loan 
and we'll guarantee your student loan and you go out in the 
workforce. Well I'll tell you, if I've got an income or a reserve 
that will allow me to go to university and not worry about the 
$40,000, I'll be there. 
 
But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you that there will be 
numbers and hundreds of students who will not go to 
university, who will not go to university because they can't 
afford the $40,000 student loan. Can't afford to take the chance, 
because if they get out of university and can't find a job, who's 
going to be paying for it? Their parents are going to have to be 
paying for it and they can't afford it. 
 
So I mean, the thought . . . It's a different way of sort of 
privatizing the institutions and having them serve only the elite 
of society. I say elite in the monetary sense. 
 
See that's Liberals, Tories, same old stories. And that's proven 
again, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that the people in the Liberal 
Party are saying openly: we've got Conservatives coming to us 
left, right, and centre. Well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ted 
Urness. Yes, Ted Urness, I believe, is over there. There's a 
number of them. In fact it's nothing to do with governing, 
nothing to do with government or parties, Mr. Speaker; it's just 
there's a number of people who just hate to see the New 
Democratic Party govern. They hate to see the New Democratic 
Party govern because we try to put some respect back in 
government. And when your objective is to destroy 
government, to have the elected members of this House 
debating hardly anything, you lose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying earlier, there are 
a number of encouraging signs in this province. The people in 
my constituency, the constituency of Humboldt, are excited 
about what's happening. They have not sat back and said, the 
world is falling, the sky is falling in. They have created REDAs 
(regional economic development authority). They've taken on 
the new health reform with gusto. Economic development in 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is booming. 

And it's probably one of the better areas in the province because 
it's got a history of manufacturing and it was maybe a little 
easier to recover. But I'll tell you, they didn't say, that's good 
enough; we're just going to let things go. They grabbed a hold 
of the REDA concept. They're working with the communities, 
they're working with the government, to try to make it even 
better. 
 
And oh no, government hasn't got anything to do with the 
economic turnaround. No, no. That's what the naysayers say. 
But I tell you, when you create a regional economic 
development authority and talk to them about how they can 
improve their life and their neighbour's life by building on their 
strengths, people get excited. And that's what the government 
has done. 
 
We facilitated the REDA program, not for government to 
deliver economic development programs, but for the 
community to take hold of themselves, take hold of their own 
affairs: to decide whether or not their strength is tourism; to 
decide whether their strength is agriculture, agribusiness, 
manufacturing. 
 
They're going forward with gusto because  do you know why, 
Mr. Speaker?  because they've had enough of the past, the 
debt-building, the squandering of money. They've had enough 
of the federal Liberal governments who, as we're witnessing 
today, are no different than the federal Tory government. I 
mean I can go example after example. Transportation rate. The 
transportation system with the Crow benefit. Canadian Wheat 
Board. It's the same thing. Nothing has changed. The policy has 
not changed since the federal Liberal government came 
forward. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I still have to keep going back to my point. 
My point being that the people in my constituency — and I get 
around rural Saskatchewan quite a lot — many constituencies, 
are not sitting back. They're taking the bull by the horns and 
they're going to be part of this economic recovery. They see the 
opportunity. 
 
And that's why I question the strategy of the members opposite. 
Standing in this House, standing on their podiums, wherever it 
may be, spouting doom and gloom. I think if they were to be a 
little more rational about building credibility, they would get 
with the times, get with the people, and try to keep up to the 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that we've seen in this 
government, in this House, is the accuracy of facts from the 
Liberal front bench. A little lack of accuracy of facts from the 
Liberal front bench. Standing up on her hind legs saying, well 
there's no jobs. Jobs are gone down. Well I'll tell you, the very 
next day StatsCanada says, well you're wrong; the jobs have 
gone up. 
 
(1600) 
 
The front bench in the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, has problems  



February 15, 1995 

 
222 

with staying accurate from one day to the next on policy. She 
wants gaming. Well maybe she doesn't want gaming. Well yes, 
she wants gaming, but she wants it different than it is now. 
Well how different? Well I'm not sure how different, but we 
don't want it the way you guys are doing it; we want something 
different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's not leadership. That is not leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. What that is is desperation. 
 
Not only in gaming. We've seen it time after time after time, the 
flip-flops of the Leader of the Liberal Party. And I'll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, I question that strategy; I really question that 
strategy. Because I think if you want to build credibility, you do 
it by being credible. You don't have to be a rocket scientist to 
figure that out. 
 
But in desperation to be government, in desperation to be 
government filled with advisers from the old Tory government, 
to get rid of a government who in four years has balanced the 
budget, she grasps at straws. A policy a day. Well there's a 
Monday policy and a Tuesday policy and a Wednesday policy 
and a Thursday policy — none of which may be the same. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whatever happened to the idea per 
week? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That same member, Mr. Speaker, I could 
remember a couple of years ago, said she was going to give one 
job creation a week. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hundred and sixty weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Hundred and sixty weeks ago? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hundred and sixty weeks ago, she said. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well somebody's kept track. Well there hasn't 
been one put forward. There hasn't been one put forward. And 
even though the job stats in this province have shown that we're 
moving quickly in the right direction, she keeps saying no, the 
naysayer is out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it must be hard to be a Liberal these days because 
I think you're in a bit of a box. And I understand this because I 
talk to a lot of the business people who . . . many business 
people who traditionally have not supported our government — 
not supported our government. 
 
But I'll tell you, there's a change, Mr. Speaker. There's a change 
because they can understand, business people understand 
business. And the business of government is running a tight 
ship, just like any other business. They can see what we've 
done, and they like it. They had something to compare to, the 
old Conservative Party, and they don't like that. 
 
But here's the question. Why aren't the Liberals running to the 
Liberals? I see nominations from around the constituencies. I 
see nominations with parachute candidates for the Liberals  

coming in. I see candidates being elected who either had a 
Reform . . . ran for the Reform Party last time. I see candidates 
nominated for the Liberals who ran for the Conservative Party. 
Why are the Liberals scared of being Liberal? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think it's called leadership. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I think it's . . . exactly what I was going to say. 
I think it's called leadership. You have to be able to promote 
leadership. To be a leader you have to promote leadership. 
 
Well I'll tell you that's the problem with the member from 
Greystone, the Liberal leader, and that's why the Liberal Party is 
having problems keeping its members. You would think at a 
time when with the aid of the press and other people, with the 
destruction of the last Tory government, that there's a certain 
number of people who just will not be New Democrats and 
they're shifting across. And they are. But where are the old 
Liberals? Oh, I ask the Liberal members, where are the old 
Liberals? 
 
I come from Humboldt, which was traditionally a Liberal area 
at one time long, long ago, and the old Liberals have no 
confidence in the new Liberals because they see the new 
Liberals as Tories. And why would they see it any different? 
Why would they see it any different? Because as I've stated, you 
have a flood of Conservatives. You have members . . . you have 
people getting nominated in the Liberal Party who ran for 
Reform, who were Conservatives, who worked for 
Conservatives, Western Canada Concept. The old Liberals 
know the difference and that's why you're going to be in the 
opposition benches for a long, long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks by saying that I am 
very proud. I'm very proud of the fact that I was . . . They say 
timing is everything and it's true. I am proud of the fact that I 
was able to be in this institution, like in '44, like in '71, like in 
'91. To be a part . . . maybe take a little bit of small credit for it 
myself, but to be part of an organization of a group of 
colleagues who had the intestinal fortitude to stand up, to take 
the heat, to take the criticism of the people of the province, and 
then to be rewarded by a thank you from the people. And that's 
what they're saying now. I am very proud to be able to stand in 
this House and be a part of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've had a plan to balance the budget and we are 
going to succeed. We will continue planning in the future. We 
will continue to put our plan out and the plan basically is 
working around getting people working in jobs. And that's a 
tough . . . that is tough to do when you’re starting to get the 
economy going again. 
 
But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it couldn't have been any tougher 
than making some of the decisions that we had to make to get 
this province back on track. I thank my colleagues and I thank 
the people of this province. I am honoured to be able to be in 
this House, in my seat, at this point in time. Thank you very 
much. 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
223 

The division bells rang from 4:08 p.m. until 4:19 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Upshall Serby 
Van Mulligen Hagel Sonntag 
Thompson Bradley Flavel 
Wiens Koenker Roy 
Tchorzewski Lorje Cline 
Lingenfelter Teichrob Scott 
Shillington Pringle Kujawa 
Anguish Lautermilch Stanger 
Johnson Crofford Kluz 
Goulet Renaud Knezacek 
Atkinson Murray Harper 
Kowalsky Hamilton Keeping 
Carson Trew Jess 
Cunningham Draper Langford 
Penner   

— 43 
Nays 

 
Boyd D’Autremont Bergman 
Neudorf Toth McPherson 
Martens Britton Muirhead 
Goohsen Haverstock  

— 11 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 
 
 That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of 
the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 
 
 That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 87, hereby appoints 

the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty and to consider ways and means 
of raising the supply. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:26 p.m. 
 



February 15, 1995 

 
224 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 153 of Hansard No. 6B Monday, February 13, 1995, 7 
p.m., left-hand column, second paragraph, the word “equally” 
should read “easily;” and the right-hand column, first 
paragraph, the word “pull” should read “hope.” 
 
 
[Note: The online version has been corrected.] 


