






















































March 24, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 24, 1995 

 

 
1103 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake 
and Hazlet area of Saskatchewan. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights), which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan and specifically firearms 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of Regina. I so 
present them. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I have a different petition to present for other 
people. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. I haven't quite 
recognized the member yet. I recognize the member from Maple 
Creek. His light wasn't on. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll read the prayer 
for this other petition that we have from our constituents in the 
south-west part of the province: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding  

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1 and 
further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 
monies available from the federal infrastructure program 
toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 
allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
From the Walsh and Calgary and Gull Lake and Maple Creek 
area. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule (11)7 they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And petitioning the Assembly to allocate adequate 

funding dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
three people in your gallery over on the west end there. They 
are friends of ours, and also my wife is there. 
 
Starting on my right — and on your right, Mr. Speaker — is 
Frances Hooge, Ruth Lechner, and my wife, Jo. Please welcome 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, six grade 7 students seated in the Speaker's gallery. 
They're here this morning from the Cornwall Alternative School 
and accompanied by teachers, Joanne McLeod and Faye 
Sparvier. I'll be meeting with them in a little while, after they've 
had a chance to view the proceedings of the Assembly and a 
tour, and look forward to their questions. 
 
I'd like to ask all members to join me in welcoming them here 
this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

PAMI Expansion in Humboldt 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,  



March 24, 1995 

 
1104 

yesterday I was proud to be present at the announcement of an 
expansion to the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute in 
Humboldt. A new centre will be opened which will deliver a 
nation-wide testing service for load cells. 
 
A load cell, Mr. Speaker, for those few who do not know, is the 
weight-sensing component of electronic weigh scales that 
measures the weight of everything from meat at the butcher 
shop to grain at the elevator. Load cells used for sale of 
products must be certified to meet Canadian and international 
standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan currently leads the nation in 
manufacturing load cells, and exporting these cells is a 
tremendous opportunity for Saskatchewan. This new centre will 
give manufacturers quick and easy access to service that will 
enhance export opportunities. 
 
This is a $1.7 million project funded jointly by PAMI (Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute), Saskatchewan, and Industry 
Canada. It will provide construction jobs, permanent jobs when 
completed, and additional jobs in the manufacturing sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an excellent example of developing 
partnerships for the good of all. I want to congratulate the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, PAMI, the town of Humboldt, 
Massload Technologies, Norac Systems, Economic 
Development, and Industry Canada for working together to 
secure this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PAMI started as a provincial government initiative 
and they survived by securing fee-for-contract services during 
tough economic times. This load cell facility is in Humboldt 
because of PAMI. Massload and Norac are in Saskatoon 
because of the load cell facility and more people are going to be 
coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the only facility in Canada — one of six in 
the world. We should be very proud of that. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Family Reading Contest in Pilot Butte 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last night I was 
happy to attend an event in a community I plan to become much 
more familiar with in the next short while. I liked what I saw 
thus far. 
 
Pilot Butte, just east of Regina, has a large community facility 
which houses the town offices, the arena, and the public library. 
Last night the library held an open house and kick-off for a 
family reading contest. This is the kind of event, Mr. Speaker, 
that never makes headlines, but it does make for good 
communities. 
 
The meeting was conducted by the library board, and it was 
ably assisted by the Pilot Butte Brownie pack, which sponsored  

two contests designed to encourage not just kids, but all 
members of the family, to become more active readers. 
 
As well, to bring the joys and benefits of reading directly to 
those who read, mystery writer Gail Bowen gave a short talk on 
reading. It was good, I think, for readers to see that the books 
they hold in their hands actually had a beginning in hands just 
like theirs. The author-to-reader connection is indeed a human 
one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a nice, pleasant event. I enjoyed being 
there. And someone must have enjoyed me being there too, 
because I've been invited back to the winter carnival this 
Sunday. 
 
I would like to congratulate all those involved in planning this 
warm community event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Southwest Regional Economic Development Authority 
Annual Meeting 

 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night a very 
important meeting took place in Gull Lake. The Southwest 
Regional Economic Development Authority and the Horseshoe 
Regional Tourism Association held a very enthusiastic, very 
positive meeting, during which they reviewed the progress 
being made on tourism in our area and discussed ways to make 
it better in the next year. 
 
Over 150 people from several communities, in four 
constituencies, met for supper, heard a report from the 
Associate Minister of Economic Development, and reported on 
what has been happening in our areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a tremendous feeling of optimism and 
excitement. The first year of REDA (regional economic 
development authority), it was generally agreed, has been very 
successful. It has been the best year ever for business in the 
south-west. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, events like T-Rex have done us no 
harm. But what is interesting is the way other entrepreneurs are 
adding to the tourism attractions of the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those of us who know this incredibly lovely part 
of our province understand its attractions. Because of the work 
and enthusiasm of the people who came together last night, it is 
only a short time before this awareness becomes general across 
the country and the continent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to the Silver Lake Rats 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish to 
share with the House the achievements of a remarkable group 
of young people from my constituency, who incidentally I  



March 24, 1995 

 
1105 

taught. The Silver Lake Rats are lifeguards from the Maidstone 
area. They recently competed in the Royal Life Saving Society's 
provincial lifeguard competition and were overwhelmingly 
successful. 
 
Several things, Mr. Speaker, make their success so 
overwhelming. First of all, the Silver Lake Rats are an all-girl 
lifeguard team, a rarity at this time. Next, the recent competition 
was their first — and for the Rats to win is unique. The final 
outstanding feat is that the Rats received all of their training at 
the waterfront at the Silver Lake Regional Park and not at an 
indoor pool. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the sponsors of the 
Silver Lake Rats: the Maidstone and District Agricultural 
Society, the Twin Rivers Health District, the Maidstone-Eldon 
Recreational Board, and Kay and Murray Carson. 
 
But I wish to pay special tribute to the Silver Rats themselves, 
Mr. Speaker — Leanne Rhinehart, Kara Johnston, Shelley 
Rhinehart, and Maxine Pike — and ask all members to join 
with me in saying, well done! Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, while we welcome the announcement of an 
independent prosecutor to investigate the Phoenix kickback 
affair, we have many questions regarding the scope and 
mandate of the investigation. Mr. Minister, the dictionary 
defines independent as free from influence, control, or 
determination of others. Others in this case means you and your 
government. 
 
In previous instances you have referred these matters to other 
provinces with no preconceived mandates or orders as to the 
nature of the investigation. Mr. Minister, will you follow your 
own example and refer this matter to another jurisdiction and 
allow the prosecutor to investigate without any restrictions as to 
the scope or time frame? Will you assure that true independence 
of the special prosecutor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Certainly the member's question is 
almost rhetorical. The special prosecutor will be independent, 
will be seen to be independent. 
 
With respect to your second question, let me just . . . Mr. 
Speaker, it's worth for a moment just recalling the way this has 
developed. For several days they have brought the integrity of 
the justice system into questioning by saying that if the former 
member from Quill Lakes was charged, so should have a 
number of other people. 
 
This morning you see the beginning of the abandonment of that  

charge. There never was anything to it, and now they're 
beginning to abandon it, beginning to say, oh no, no, no — no. 
Not enough, not enough, got to cast our nets a lot further. 
 
I want to say to members opposite, you have brought the 
integrity of the justice system into question by alleging that 
there should have been other people charged by the prosecutors. 
That will be reviewed, and the special prosecutor will have 
access to all of the material which the Crown prosecutors had 
when they made their decision. 
 
But this will not become a licence for the opposition to 
muckrake and to search around for other equally scandalous 
and equally baseless allegations. You made your allegation, we 
will investigate it, and you're going to have to live by the result. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what we 
are questioning is Phoenix and alleged kickback schemes. 
That's what we are questioning, sir. We are not questioning the 
special prosecutor. 
 
Mr. Minister, the noises that you've been making sound awfully 
suspicious. You said that you want this done, for example, in 
the next couple of weeks. It looks like to us that you are sizing 
up the independent prosecutor for a strait-jacket, to handcuff 
them. 
 
I advise you to do this right the first time, Mr. Minister. The 
people are asking for a totally independent prosecutor to 
investigate the activities of Phoenix, and its relations with the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) and your government. They will 
not stand, Mr. Minister, for anything less. 
 
You say that this is a second opinion. Well if a doctor examines 
a patient and finds other symptoms, the doctor is allowed to 
look for other diseases. Mr. Minister, will you allow the 
prosecutor the free rein he or she will need to determine 
whether or not any further investigations are warranted into any 
other activities at Phoenix Advertising? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as for the 
time limit, the member opposite may want to make some brief 
return to the facts in your questions. I at no time specified any 
time limit on this matter beyond stating that it is in everybody's 
interest that it be concluded as soon as reasonably possible. If 
there was any time limit used I believe it was by members 
opposite in their statements, not by us. 
 
With respect to the issue of the mandate of the prosecutor, 
members opposite made some allegations, we have provided a 
review of the decisions which you've called into question. You 
got what you asked. You're not in a position now to say: ah, ah, 
perhaps we should have asked other questions. You got the 
response you . . . You are getting a review of the questions you 
called into question. 



March 24, 1995 

 
1106 

This is not a licence that . . . Now that you appear to be 
abandoning the allegation you made, this is not an opportunity 
to look further for something new, for some new 
scandalmongering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what we 
are asking for is complete openness. Open the books and jail 
the crooks. That's what we're asking for, Mr. Minister. 
 
The president, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I hadn't even taken my seat and the 
member already is commenting. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize the 
sensitivity of the government members opposite. 
 
The president of Phoenix has said that political donations are a 
common part of doing business with your government. Mr. 
Minister, your government does millions of dollars of 
advertising through Phoenix Advertising, the agency of record 
for the NDP. 
 
Can you tell us what campaigns are currently being handled by 
Phoenix? What is the value of those contracts? And would you 
not consider it wise to suspend — to suspend — any further 
activities with Phoenix until this investigation is completed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm awfully tempted, Mr. Speaker, to 
get into the origin of the line, open the books and jail the 
crooks. While I appreciate the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's coming back to haunt you now, isn't 
it? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There was not one interruption 
when the Leader of the Opposition asked his question — not 
one. And I don't want him to interrupt when the minister is 
answering his question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The members opposite may not want 
to be reminded of the origin of that particular line. It wasn't 
original, to put it mildly. 
 
I say to members opposite, you have raised the issue, I think 
unwisely. I think the justice system would have been better 
served had we accepted the decision of the prosecutors for what 
it was, an honest decision on a difficult issue. But you weren't 
prepared to do that so you got the review you asked for. 
 
I ask members opposite, as I asked members yesterday, to leave  

the justice system now to do its work and to stop trying to 
politicize the whole of the justice system, which is what you 
appear to be doing. 
 

Crown Corporation Construction Agreement 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, your 
union-preference tendering policy is unfair to construction 
workers, contractors, and to taxpayers. It's also terribly unfair to 
the workers in rural Saskatchewan, in fact workers anywhere 
outside of Saskatoon or Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, last time I checked there wasn't a union hiring hall 
anywheres in my constituency; in fact there isn't one anywheres 
near my constituency. That means that the contractors in my 
area are going to have to bring in unionized workers from 
Regina or Saskatoon and that will take away jobs from our local 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, things are already tough enough outside of the big 
cities, thanks to your government and your policies. Why are 
you implementing a policy which is going to take even more 
jobs away from our rural people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me 
remind the member opposite that he is dead wrong on the state 
of the economy. In fact the economy is picking up throughout 
all of Saskatchewan. It did extremely well in 1994, and it's 
projected to do better in 1995. 
 
The major threat to the economy in Saskatchewan, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan, is the uncertainty surrounding the 
elimination of the Crow rate by the federal Liberal government, 
the uncertainty about what the transportation policy will be with 
respect to the delivery of farm products out of Saskatchewan for 
the export market. 
 
Now I want to also address now the first part of the member's 
question, and that is the availability of construction workers in 
rural Saskatchewan. I want to say to the member opposite that 
the fact is that the majority of unionized workers do not reside 
in the two cities; they reside out of the two cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon. That's not a problem. 
 
There's also a provision in the clause wherein if there is not 
available some workers under the formula who are members of 
unions within 48 hours, that contractor is quite free to be able to 
employ anybody that he wants that is not unionized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Minister, I'm not the 
only person that are saying these things. This morning I 
received a letter from the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association that backs up our point. It says and I quote: 



March 24, 1995 

 
1107 

 The policy does not promote work for small local 
contractors and use of local labour, since seventy-five 
per cent of the workers will be supplied to projects 
throughout Saskatchewan from the union hiring halls in 
either Regina or Saskatoon. Small local contractors will 
be deterred from bidding, from the spectre of having to 
hire unknown union workers, terminating regular 
employees to make room for union workers from 
Regina or Saskatoon and subjecting their firm to easily 
being unionized and hence becoming non-competitive 
in their local bidding environment. 

 
Mr. Minister, local contractors say that you are forcing them to 
become uncompetitive. And that's the last thing we need in this 
province right now. Why are you forcing local contractors into 
an unacceptable situation such as the one I've just described? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I don't intend to be 
critical of the letter that the member opposite . . . because I 
respect the views that anyone has who has an opinion on this 
particular issue. But I want to say that that part of the letter 
which the member refers to is an inaccurate characterization of 
what the real situation is. 
 
I want to remind the members of the House and the member 
opposite that it's widely understood around Saskatchewan that 
this only applies to Crown corporation construction project, not 
anything else, and that projects out of the cities which are only 
in excess of $150,000. So therefore the agreement actually 
protects the small contractors, and will not impact the vast 
majority of them in any way under this agreement. 
 
And the member knows that, but unfortunately feels obligated 
to have to raise this issue and continue to confuse it even 
further, although it seems to be confusing only in his mind and 
a few other people; because as far as the rest of the public is 
concerned, including the construction industry, they understand 
and have accepted this arrangement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
hardly any of the construction workers in my area or other areas 
outside of the big cities are in fact unionized, with perhaps the 
exception of the CP (Canadian Pacific) rail workers that are 
picketing at the present time. 
 
Now most don't want to be unionized as well, yet you are 
forcing them to join a union if they want work on a Crown 
construction site. And even if they do join a union against their 
will, they're probably going to be shut out of most jobs. That's 
because your union preference policy states that the unionized 
employee must be hired from the applicable union out-of-work 
list. Someone who signs up today is going to start right at the 
bottom of that list. Not at the top, Minister, at the bottom. And 
that means current union members from Saskatoon and Regina 
are going to get the preference over workers from Maple Creek,  

even on jobs right in that area or in my riding. 
 
Now how is that possibly fair, Mr. Minister? How is it fair that 
local workers in my riding are going to have to be at the bottom 
of the list for jobs that are done in their local area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well simply speaking, Mr. 
Speaker, it is fair because what the member describes is 
inaccurate and that is not the way it's going to work. He says in 
his comments and then in his question that construction 
workers will be forced to be unionized. That is absolutely, 
completely untrue. 
 
In fact the normal certification process would have to take 
place, as has always been the case in order for a certification of 
a union. And it would not just be on the construction site, but 
within that particular class of workers it would have to be done 
province wide. 
 
So the process is the same as it always has been. This will not 
in any way enhance or assist that process. It's a lengthy process 
and the signing up of cards still has to take place, just like it 
always has been. That does not change. And I want the member 
to understand that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
once again, I guess you and I are going to agree to disagree. For 
two years you told us that there wouldn't be a union-preference 
tendering policy and now we have one. 
 
Quite frankly, I don't think anybody is going to quite trust you 
any more. Mr. Minister, I want you to picture yourself as a 
construction worker in rural Saskatchewan. Forget that you are 
a Regina cabinet minister. Forget that you have a million dollar 
pension coming that pads your future very nicely. Think of 
yourself as a construction worker who's just going to work to 
support your family. I know that'll be hard, but try to put 
yourself in those shoes. 
 
Now what would you do if you joined the union because you 
want to work on government projects, you go right to the 
bottom of the list. So there's no guarantee you're going to get 
work anyway. Meanwhile, you may be pricing yourself right out 
of the market for any other job in the locality. If you don't join 
the union, then it's guaranteed that you won't be eligible for 
three-quarters of the jobs on Crown sites. This is the choice 
you're facing people with and they have to make that choice in 
their lives now because of you and your policy. 
 
So I want to know what would you do, Mr. Minister, if you're 
that worker in Maple Creek? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well probably . . . Mr. Speaker,  



March 24, 1995 

 
1108 

clearly that worker in Maple Creek will be working probably a 
lot more than he used to work in the 1980s because this 
government, because this government, Mr. Speaker, has turned 
. . . because this government has turned the financial disaster, 
which the previous government created in Saskatchewan, into a 
financial success story which is a model for the rest of Canada. 
 
And that's good from the point of view of confidence, and 
therefore will provide into the future security for that worker 
which he would not possibly have had under the kind of debt 
and deficit situation created by the members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to also respond to the other part of 
the member's question, who keeps talking about union 
preference contracts in government projects. 
 
First of all, this does not apply to government projects. It only 
applies to certain Crown corporation projects and not to 
anything else. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is an open tendering process which is 
based on lowest qualified bidder, which is the way any 
construction contract should be, and that's the way it's going to 
be operating in Saskatchewan from here on in. 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
guess I'd have to agree with the Minister of Justice on one 
point: that everyone in this province questions the credibility of 
the Conservatives, given the scope of the investigations they 
face in their own ranks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are pleased that the Justice minister 
appears willing to consider a more sensible approach to 
Phoenix Advertising investigation. 
 
I'm concerned that the minister does not understand what the 
public wants to see. It is critical that the review of the 
prosecutor's report be the starting point, and I repeat that the 
review must be conducted by someone outside our borders who 
cannot be influenced or be seen to be influenced by this 
administration. To the Justice minister: will the minister assure 
us that the independent body will indeed be from outside the 
provincial boundaries? 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The name will be announced shortly. 
Let me just say in response, general response to the member's 
question, that I do find myself in agreement with the member to 
this extent. The person we appoint must be competent and 
credible and be seen to be both. And those are certainly 
qualifications which are . . . which must be found in the special 
prosecutor. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question, 
Mr. Minister, was whether he'd be from outside the province, or 
whether that body would be. 

It is equally important that this investigation examine the 
legality and the ethics of the relationship between Phoenix 
Group and the NDP elected members. Mr. Speaker, Phoenix 
Advertising has admitted that kicking back political donations 
in exchange for advertising paid by NDP MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) communication budgets was common 
practice. Common practice, Mr. Speaker. It has been admitted 
that a practice which resulted in a fraud conviction of one NDP 
cabinet minister was a common practice. 
 
The public wants an independent review of how this 
investigation has . . . was conducted because they want to know 
if all the MLAs who dealt with Phoenix were thoroughly 
scrutinized as to the ethics and the legality of their dealings 
with Phoenix. 
 
To the Justice minister: will this independent review have the 
mandate to order an investigation into all the transactions 
between all sitting NDP MLAs and the Phoenix Group? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I want to just comment to the 
member opposite that if you were to make that statement 
outside the House, I'm satisfied that you wouldn't survive 24 
hours without being involved in libel litigation. The 
irresponsibility of members opposite really does appal me; it 
truly is appalling. 
 
Let me repeat what I said about the investigation: appalling or 
otherwise, responsibly or otherwise, you have called into 
question the integrity of the public prosecutors who made a 
decision. I said earlier, I believe justice would have been better 
served and I think the public would have been better served if 
we had accepted the public prosecutors' decision for what it 
was: an honest decision arrived at on a complex issue — but 
was not the case. 
 
We are therefore going to have that decision reviewed. That's 
what you asked for; that's what you'll get. 
 
I now see distinct signs that members opposite are a little 
uncomfortable that perhaps there never was anything to this 
allegation, and now you seek to expand it to other questions. 
You're getting the investigation you asked for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, this review must be done 
quickly and efficiently to ensure the people know the whole 
story before an election is called. There is also a need for this 
government to ensure that all dealings with the Phoenix Group 
be suspended until the review is completed. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Justice: will you agree to 
suspend all dealings with the Phoenix Group until this 
investigation is complete? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, such was the  



March 24, 1995 

 
1109 

appreciative response to your comments, I'm afraid I couldn't 
hear them. Perhaps you'll have to . . . I couldn't hear your last 
question; perhaps you'll have to repeat it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Mr. Speaker. Just for the Justice 
minister — I guess he didn't hear the question. 
 
Will you agree to suspend all dealings with Phoenix 
Advertising Group until this investigation is complete? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I repeat my comment: members 
opposite have made an allegation; we're going to investigate it. 
You've got to live with that. You cannot, now that you're getting 
uncomfortable . . . Now that you're uncomfortable with the 
probable result, you cannot now begin to expand it to include a 
whole lot of other questions. You're getting the review you 
asked for; you've got to live with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transportation Partnerships Corporation 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
propose to take and ask an original question here now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And my question is for the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Mr. Minister of Highways, your government is in a great hurry 
this session to pass Bill 22, Mr. Speaker, an Act creating your 
new highways Crown. A new Crown corporation to dole out 
highways contracts, in my opinion, in our opinion, is 
completely unnecessary. So we have come to the conclusion 
that there must be some kind of political purpose for being in 
such a hurry to pass this Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Minister of Highways, once this new Crown is created, 
will it fall under the union-preference tendering policy? We 
have just heard the minister of the Crown Investments 
Corporation say that this legislation is intended for only Crown 
corporation projects. So then, Mr. Minister, are highway 
construction projects going to be subject to your union 
preference policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me 
categorically answer the question. And the answer is no, it will 
not apply. Because as has been indicated in the explanation of 
the policy, there are many exemptions, and some of them are 
made on the basis of making sure that the costs would not 
increase because of the policy that's there. 
 
In this particular case, road construction, highway construction, 
municipal construction, school board construction, and  

government-proper construction, is not part of this agreement. 
What I find, Mr. Speaker, that the members find humorous . . . 
and sometimes I find politics humorous. But what I find so 
disappointing in the members opposite that they seem to think 
that everything that happens has to be relegated to political 
terms. 
 
Well that's the mentality of the Conservative government, Mr. 
Speaker. I'm sorry, but that has changed since 1991, in 
November of 1991. We now deal things on the basis of what is 
good public policy rather than simply on the basis of things that 
are just simple politics, as the Tories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

 Crown Life Rights Offering 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to make an announcement of great importance to 
Saskatchewan. In 1991, the previous administration issued a 
$355 million loan guarantee to HARO Financial Corporation of 
Regina. HARO used this guarantee to secure the financing to 
invest in Crown Life. The loan guarantee and investment was 
conditional upon Crown Life relocating its head office to 
Saskatchewan. In 1992, these arrangements were renegotiated. 
The $355 million loan guarantee in HARO was replaced with a 
$271 million direct loan. The effect was to reduce 
Saskatchewan's exposure by over $80 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since the original loan guarantees were 
issued, Crown Life has relocated to Saskatchewan. This created 
over 1,000 direct jobs and over 900 indirect and induced jobs in 
Saskatchewan. And this has been good for the province, making 
significant contributions to the provincial economy. During the 
past four years, Crown Life has made great progress in 
improving its operations. The relocation to Saskatchewan has 
resulted in greater efficiency and $25 million per year in 
operational savings. It has accounted for the losses in its real 
estate investment portfolio and improved the overall quality of 
its assets. 
 
These improvements are reflected in Crown Life's bottom line. 
In 1991, Crown Life sustained losses of $208 million. In 1994, 
it earned a profit of $45 million, the second highest in its 
history. This is impressive progress. But there is one area where 
Crown Life faces a significant challenge. The company must 
position itself to be a long-term player in an industry that has 
recently been affected by financial uncertainty. The one area 
remaining to be resolved by Crown Life is the strengthening of 
its capital base. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning Crown Life announced that, subject 
to regulatory approval, they will be issuing a rights offering to 
existing common stockholders. This rights offering allows 
shareholders to purchase interest-bearing debentures carrying 
the interest rate of 90-day bankers' acceptances plus 1.05 per 
cent. The debentures are convertible into common shares at the  



March 24, 1995 

 
1110 

option of the shareholder at any time during the next 10 years 
for the set price of $65 per share. 
 
With this offering Crown Life is setting out to raise the 
additional capital that it requires. The interest and the share 
conversion provisions ensure that those shareholders who 
participate will receive the full benefit of any resulting increase 
in the value of the company. 
 
HARO Financial Corporation is the largest single shareholder 
in Crown Life. It owns 64.5 per cent of Crown Life's common 
voting shares. HARO's participation in the rights offering is 
therefore crucial to its success. Mr. Speaker, I am therefore 
announcing that a memorandum of understanding has been 
signed between the Crown Investments Corporation and 
HARO. With this memorandum, CIC has agreed to lend HARO 
up to $150 million to enable it to participate in Crown Life's 
rights offering. The exact amount of the loan will not be known 
until the rights offering receives regulatory approval and 
minority shareholders decide whether they will participate. 
 
The terms of the loan to HARO are such that CIC will receive 
interest on the loan, paid according to a regular schedule. CIC 
will also be able to benefit of the longer-term increase in the 
value of Crown Life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision to advance this additional loan to 
HARO was made after extremely careful consideration, and 
therefore I would like to table here today the memorandum of 
understanding that has been reached by HARO. I would also 
like to table the results of an independent analysis of the 
financial implications of the transaction that was conducted by 
Wood Gundy, an analysis of the economic impact of Crown 
Life in Saskatchewan, and other documentation on the 
transaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision that is being announced here today 
ensures that Crown Life can continue to prosper and grow in 
Saskatchewan and create further employment, and I think the 
structure of this arrangement is also a good deal for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
response to the minister's statement regarding Crown Life 
Insurance and its important role in the Saskatchewan economy. 
Mr. Speaker, the relocation of Crown Life and FCC (Farm 
Credit Corporation) to our province in 1991 marked a change in 
the traditional out-migration of business and jobs to other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Since that time, Crown Life has been a boon to Regina and 
indeed to the entire province. The company now provides over 
1,100 high-paying jobs to Saskatchewan families and 
contributes nearly one full percentage to the province's entire 
GDP (gross domestic product). 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Dale Eisler pointed out in his recent editorial: 

 (the former administration) . . . invested in projects that 
are now proving to be successful and will have 
long-term economic and revenue benefits for this 
province. 

 
Mr. Eisler cites Hitachi Canadian Industries, the Saferco 
fertilizer plant, and Millar Western Pulp mill and two heavy oil 
upgraders as examples. There are many more, Mr. Speaker, 
including Weyerhaeuser, the potash privatization, Prairie Malt, 
Wascana Energy, and others. 
 
Mr. Eisler's column ends with this quote, "In short, our 
economic future looks bright, thanks in part to the Devine 
government." 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown Life relocation was just one example in 
a long line of successful economic development and job 
creation initiatives and I welcome the minister's comments with 
respect to Crown Life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Government House Leader please 
come to order. If the Government House Leader doesn't know 
the rules of this House then he better start learning them. Order. 
Can we have order, please? Order, order. 
 
(1045) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to establish an Aboriginal 
Courtworkers Commission 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move first reading of The Aboriginal Courtworkers 
Commission Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — An Act 
respecting Private Vocational Schools be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it's a 
pleasure to rise today on this issue. The government has taken 
quite a while in bringing forward a piece of legislation to deal 
with the private vocational schools in the province. Over the  



March 24, 1995 

 
1111 

last number of years there has been a number of these 
institutions which have failed and which have left students with 
their education only half completed, and with funds invested in 
those courses that they have a great deal of difficulty 
recovering. 
 
So the government did a study on the things that were 
happening in the vocational school circumstances across the 
province, and they spent $69,000 on this study, Mr. Speaker. 
And it's nice to see that the government has brought some 
legislation forward to justify the spending of that money. The 
only problem with the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that it doesn't 
go as far as it could. 
 
There are some good things in the Bill. The minister will be 
receiving an annual return and financial statement from the 
vocational schools, and that's all well and good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it's important that we know what is happening with those 
schools, that they are still in a viable position, that they aren't 
about to lose their certifications, and that they will be able to 
provide for the long-term needs of students. 
 
But the problem with that financial statement and return is it's 
not audited by any means by the provincial government to 
ensure that the figures are indeed truly reflective of the financial 
circumstances the school is in. So I think the concern we have 
on that, Mr. Speaker, and we'll need to explore this more, is the 
accountability procedures. 
 
One of the other good items, Mr. Speaker, is that the student 
contracts will now be approved by the department so that 
there'll be a standard contract that all the students will sign that 
the vocational schools will have to honour. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, it's been clarified in this Bill that the 
school operators should not engage in false advertising to 
present themselves as something they are not. And that has been 
a problem in the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, in a few 
circumstances. And so that's all to the well and good. 
 
But the Bill doesn't go far enough, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with 
all of the problems associated with vocational schools and the 
students that deal with them. We've received many phone calls, 
particularly from former students of the Reliance business 
college and from the Avant-Garde students. There's very little 
protection in place for students in cases where the institution 
goes bankrupt, or if they're very slow in dealing with the returns 
that should be given back to students, particularly in the cases 
of student loans. 
 
There seems to be a great deal of difficulty where the vocational 
school . . . a student drops out of their course at some point in 
time and there needs to be a return given to Canada student 
loans for that portion which has already been given to the 
institution, but which is not used. And it seems to be there is a 
great deal of difficulty in getting that money back from the 
institution to Canada student loans and having it recorded. 

What happens at the end of the day is that the financial 
institution that provided the loan is constantly badgering the 
students to provide the money, but the money in reality is 
supposed to have come from the vocational school and has not 
been provided. 
 
The other issue that students deal with, Mr. Speaker, is at some 
point within their sessions the school closes. And so what 
happens to their course? They've spent a large sum of money to 
attend a course of a particular nature, they get half of the 
course, the school closes, their money is gone, and they have no 
education as a benefit of that expense. 
 
So there needs to be some clarification, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Bill does mention it — it does mention that it's an important 
consideration. But the mechanisms to be involved in the 
transfer of students from a course that is dissolved into the 
same/similar type of course with another institution, we will 
have to explore that, Mr. Speaker, much more in depth with the 
minister. 
 
The training completion fund also needs a little more 
explanation, Mr. Speaker. It seems that it's up to the schools to 
develop a training completion program, as I was mentioning 
earlier, to ensure that there's a minimum disruption for students 
when their school closes. And how and what does the minister 
have in mind for this type of thing to operate? A lot of the other 
schools, Mr. Speaker, are going to have their classrooms full of 
their own students, so how do you slide in the students from an 
institution which has closed? It's not clear within this 
legislation. 
 
Further in the minister's second reading speech, she stressed 
how much more protection the students were going to receive in 
this legislation. Yet in the case of school closures we have to 
ask, who gets paid first? When the school goes bankrupt or 
closes, there's a bond in place. But who has first call on that? Is 
it the suppliers? Is it the bank? Is it the students? Or who might 
it be? 
 
Because the students . . . we're trying to protect students within 
this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and it's not outlined as to who is 
going to be designated a secured creditor and who isn't going to 
be. Are the students going to be classified as secured creditors? 
Are the employees going to be classified as secured creditors? 
 
We have a situation presently of a private vocational school that 
has declared bankruptcy and many people are waiting to receive 
their funds — the instructors, the supply companies, and the 
students. And the bond that was in place for this particular 
institution, Mr. Speaker, doesn't come close, not even close at 
all to being able to repay all of the funds that are owed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that the minister didn't seek the 
input of students such as Ross Joorisity and Petria Racette, who 
were in this Assembly in the last session, who have gone 
through the problems associated with the vocational schools 
where they ceased their studies early and the problems that 
resulted, and then having their school change hands and close.  



March 24, 1995 

 
1112 

It meant a great deal of difficulty and they're still in the process 
of, shall we say, debating Canada student loans as to who 
should be paying the money back, Mr. Speaker, and it causes a 
great deal of stress for those students. 
 
These particular students, Mr. Speaker, met with the minister 
last year, met with her staff, and they offered a lot of good ideas 
to the minister on some of the things that should be included in 
this type of legislation; some of the things that could be 
included into regulations that would protect the private 
vocational school students and the institutions also. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it seems that because the ideas 
came from the students, the minister and the departments were 
not prepared to accept them, because very few if any of those 
ideas have actually showed up in this piece of legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a good many questions to ask the 
minister about this particular Bill, about Bill 10, but I believe 
that we can do that in Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, members of the 
legislature, and Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you, 
and through you to other members of this House, a group of 44 
seniors sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. These seniors are 
from the town of Warman which of course is in my 
constituency. 
 
And as I look over the group of 44, I see not only a lot of 
friends, I also see some relatives. But of course in the Rosthern 
constituency, it's not uncommon when a group of 44 get 
together, there have to be some of my relatives in that group. So 
I hope that these people are enjoying what you're seeing. 
 
We're in what we call adjourned debates. It's a Bill dealing with 
private vocational schools and we're in second reading in that. 
And perhaps we can discuss some of the details later on when I 
join you for coffee at 11:30. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all 
members to help me welcome the group from Warman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 21 — An Act 
to amend The Securities Act, 1988 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
few comments to make regarding this Bill. I just want to say 
that it was a good opportunity for myself and one of my staff to 
meet with the Securities Commission in detailing some of the 
observation that they're going to propose in the new Bill. And I 
guess there are . . . The Bill has fairly extensive changes and I'm 
going to point out a few of them to the Assembly and discuss 
them here this morning. 
 
In spite of the size of this Bill, the Securities officials we 
consulted with have assured us that the vast majority of changes 
are very technical and comma shifting and moving of phrases 
and inferences in a general sense. And the majority of the 
technical things consist of providing the majority of the volume 
of the Bill. As such, we have no substantial objection to the 
Bill. 
 
There are however, three main areas of consumer concern 
addressed by this Bill and I think we need to take a look at 
them. First of all, what is going to happen is there's going to 
have to be a registration of commodity traders. The Bill enacts a 
registration, bonding, and training system for commodity 
traders similar to that required for stock traders. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the Assembly, this is 
probably something that should have been done quite some 
time ago. We have had a significant number of concerns raised 
by various individuals that have been short-changed you might 
say — if I was polite in saying that — on how some of the 
small stocks have traded in the commodities and so it has been 
of some significance. 
 
One of the things that has concerned us is that many times the 
involvement of the Winnipeg Stock Exchange has been the only 
limiting factor in relation to these stock traders. Previously, as 
long as you were recognized by that commodity exchange, you 
were a commodity trader. No one could question your 
qualifications because you did not have to have any 
qualifications in order to be a trader. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
was where some of the problems . . . The Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange would set the standard, and provincial jurisdictions 
would then not be in place to police those restrictions, and so it 
became a problem. 
 
The exchange has been anxious to upgrade the standards of its 
traders, since it is essentially a co-op of the people who trade on 
it. They can't impose new rules that might exclude current 
members, and that was a serious concern by the Winnipeg 
Commodity Exchange in relation to the stock traders in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore the exchange has been asking for jurisdictions to 
bring new standards for them into the province of 
Saskatchewan so that these commodity traders would have the 
same standards as those set out by the Winnipeg Stock  



March 24, 1995 

 
1113 

Exchange, or at least that many standards as set out by the 
exchange. 
 
Alberta has already done this. This Bill largely reflects the Act 
already passed there. They haven't proclaimed their Act, but 
their Act sets the limits, and many, many people are adhering to 
that. 
 
These changes will also help the Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange become more like the American, which is a federally 
regulated commodity system. In the U.S. (United Stated), the 
government in Washington dictates the majority of the 
commodities that are traded in United States, and therefore you 
have one system dictating, and the rules apply across the 
system. 
 
In Canada we have a different system, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
very small regulatory body in the federal government, and you 
could almost say there is nothing there. And all of the 
regulations in securities relates to a provincial jurisdiction, and 
that provincial jurisdiction must in fact then meet the 
qualifications on the commodity traders' list of requirements, 
and that Winnipeg Commodity Exchange is just one of those. 
 
(1100) 
 
And we have to have some rules in Saskatchewan that reflect 
the requirements that they have. We also would have to have 
those in Ontario reflect the same as what the requirement in 
Winnipeg would have to be, and therefore it's important for us 
to be involved. 
 
The legislation will require both firms and traders to be licensed 
and bonded. Now, Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, 
the legislation requires that firms for example who have traders 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Humboldt is encouraging me to conclude because people are 
leaving. Well I'll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Humboldt should sit and listen because he would learn 
something too from how the traders in the Winnipeg 
Commodity Exchange would deal with the problems that exist. 
And particularly in his constituency, because he has some very 
important crushing plants and canola in that area  it would be 
good for him to learn to understand how the commodities trade 
in Winnipeg. 
 
Going on with my notes here, Mr. Speaker, the legislation will 
require both firms and traders to be licensed and bonded. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, today, today what occurred, for example Pioneer 
Grain is setting up an office just adjacent to my constituency 
office in Swift Current. Pioneer Grain will have to have its 
licence for a commodity trader . . . to be a commodity trader. 
Pioneer probably already has that, but if this was an 
independent trader, he could set up that same office in any 
community in Saskatchewan and trade with commodities, and 
you and I would not know whether he was licensed or bonded 
with anyone. 
 
So what this does is, it sets up a licensing function and also a  

requirement for being bonded. The traders will have to pass a 
proficiency course, Mr. Speaker, probably something that is 
essential for the various kinds of commodities that trade on the 
Winnipeg Commodity Exchange. And this proficiency course 
will have to be passed by individuals, similar to something like 
the real estate association and their requirements to sell real 
estate, or any of those kinds of agencies. This will be similar. 
 
Another thing that is in this Bill, and it is somewhat onerous, 
and it's investigative reciprocity. Mr. Speaker, the second major 
substantive area of the Bill would allow greater reciprocity for 
investigations from other jurisdictions — for example, if 
Alberta wanted to investigate a securities fraud partially 
occurring in Saskatchewan or vice versa. 
 
I guess this is an important part in the fact that commodities and 
businesses have interprovincial jurisdiction and sometimes 
aren't regulated by each jurisdiction in the same fashion. And 
that creates a substantial problem for the Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange. And I think that it's important for us to consider that. 
 
For example, if Alberta did have significantly less securities 
requirements, people would tend to move to that area in Canada 
which had the least amount of securities requirements in order 
to deal in a way that might not satisfy the public involvement. 
And therefore the securities requirement here will be that they 
be, first of all, licensed and then bonded, and that they will have 
a reciprocity in dealing with the investigation of fraud in other 
provinces and also in our own. 
 
The third major substantive area of the Bill increases penalty 
for fraudulent trading of stock. Right now the main actions that 
the Securities Commission can take is to revoke the licence of 
the person selling the stock or halt the trading of the stock. This 
is often ineffective since the individual involved is often not a 
licensed trader to begin with and by the time the trading of the 
stock has halted, the damage has often been done. 
 
The provisions of this Bill would allow for fines, garnishee of 
income, and criminal investigations. And that is probably a very 
good thing. The fine limit ceiling is set at a hundred thousand 
dollars. This will be paid into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
The Bill will also give the Securities Commission the power to 
remove from corporations directors who have a criminal record 
related to securities fraud and to prevent them from being 
involved in the sale of the company stock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very substantial shift in the direction that 
the Securities Commission is taking. The person is then under 
reverse onus, Mr. Speaker, to prove that he is not involved in a 
securities fraud with a new company. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
changing some of the very fundamental beliefs that we have in 
today's democratic society and that is that the person should be 
innocent until proven guilty. But this brings Saskatchewan 
regulations into line with other jurisdictions whose penalties are 
often much harsher. 
 



March 24, 1995 

 
1114 

In general, the Bill was drafted under the auspices of the 
general, ongoing consensus on regulatory consistency reached 
by the Canadian securities administrators association. And in 
order to bring a Canadian provincial balance to the way 
securities are traded in the commodities, this is an important 
part. 
 
There are some aspects of this that raise some concern with me, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is that many times there is a layer of 
transactions that occur in the province of Saskatchewan where 
people ask for investment and they are not required by the 
Securities Commission to build their prospectus out of the 
Securities Commission's involvement. And what we have a 
concern about is why — and I'll raise it from a question 
perspective — is why do people in this province hesitate, 
number one, in doing business on the commodity exchange? 
 
Number one is they don't trust . . . or they have a hesitation to 
involve their own finances in trading in the commodities. And 
the reason is — it's been a traditional one — people haven't had 
confidence in those people who have been doing the trading. 
And they don't understand it so they say no, I'm not going to be 
involved. 
 
This Bill will help that in providing not only the individual has 
a licence, but that he has had to qualify for that licence by 
taking some courses in the commodities and dealing with how 
he markets them as well. 
 
This Bill is typical of what this government has done. These 
fines are going to be put in the General Revenue Fund, Mr. 
Speaker, and this raises a concern on our part. Should the fines 
go to general revenue, or shouldn't, Mr. Speaker, the fines go to 
a fund that sets aside this money to provide a buffer for those 
people who have been defrauded? 
 
The victims of the fraud are often the reasons why these people 
don't become involved in the commodities in the first place. 
And the rumour goes around that the individual was defrauded 
by a person who wasn't bonded, who wasn't licensed, who 
didn't understand what was going on and couldn't communicate 
his misunderstanding except to say that he wanted to get rich on 
somebody else's back. 
 
And this has happened all over the province, and that's why the 
money should probably flow into a fund that would be directed 
to the victims of the fraud. From our consultations with the 
Securities Commission, it is clear that the Securities 
Commission itself would prefer the latter to the former option. 
 
Given our overall concern for the protection of Saskatchewan 
investors, we will have to support the reverse onus placed on 
directors of companies who have criminal records. For example, 
if a person who is in a commodity-selling occupation and a 
company comes in and wants to do business, the directors will 
have to be approved by the Securities Commission, and they 
will have to have a clean bill of health. 
 
We understand from the Securities Commission that this  

approach is very effective in other jurisdictions at scaring off 
scam artists who usually leave town quickly rather than appeal 
once this measure has been invoked. None the less we think, as 
legislators, we have to recognize that reverse onus is an 
extraordinary measure and certainly not one that any of us 
would like to see become a common measure. Therefore we 
should approach this aspect of the Bill rather cautiously. 
 
Other than these very few points, we see this as a positive, 
progressive Bill, Mr. Speaker. It largely serves to modernize the 
Saskatchewan securities system and bring it into line with other 
jurisdictions. 
 
There's one other item that I want to add to the list here, and 
that is . . . and it deals with the way the administration of the 
Securities Commission is going to be handled. And this deals 
with a certain section of the Bill. I won't identify it, but this 
deals with how cabinet and the Securities Commission are 
going to relate to each other. 
 
The cabinet will have a certain time line in order for it to say to 
the Securities Commission, we do not believe that the 
regulations you're bringing forward are good. And they have the 
right to override them or to say they won't be passed. 
 
However, if cabinet decides that the regulations that are made 
by the Securities Commission are going to be good, they're just 
passed through the system and then the Securities Commission 
can make its own regulations in determining its own course. In 
some respects, Mr. Speaker, this is a good thing. It distances 
cabinet and executive branch of government from the Securities 
Commission. 
 
On the other hand — I raise this as a question that I'll be raising 
with the minister — does an entity in the province of 
Saskatchewan who the province has control of, should they 
have their own ability to raise or set regulations that will drive 
their own agenda? And so, Mr. Speaker, we will be raising this 
question with the Minister of Justice when these things come 
forward. 
 
So on that note we will have these detailed questions for the 
minister during committee, and at this point in time I don't see 
any reason why we would delay moving it through second 
reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 43 — An Act to 
amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I'm 
going to make a few comments on this particular piece of 
legislation. This is a Bill, as most members who've been around  



March 24, 1995 

 
1115 

awhile know, that comes forward every year to the House, 
establishes a level of provincial assistance to be allocated to 
urban and rural municipalities. It's been a long-standing 
tradition in this House. 
 
And it's pleasing to see today, Mr. Speaker, as we go through 
the deliberations on it, that $2 million is going back to 
municipalities that was taken away by the NDP government last 
year over the issue of changes to the SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) fund. And that $2 million is 
now going to be restored to local government, and I think they 
will appreciate that because they certainly didn't appreciate it 
being taken away from them. 
 
The minister said in her second reading speech that: 
 
 Municipalities have made a considerable contribution to 

assisting the government with its balanced budget plan. 
 
That's in Hansard on March 13, Mr. Speaker, and I would just 
say, no kidding. My discussions with urban and rural 
councillors around this province has said that they have made a 
tremendous contribution to balancing the budget in this 
province, and not one that I think has been recognized enough 
by the provincial government in the way that they've treated 
these folks over the last few years. 
 
You can only download so far, Mr. Speaker, and eventually it 
will hit some place where it can't go any further. And that is the 
case with local government. They have legislation that says they 
must balance their books on a yearly basis. And that they do, 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes in a very difficult way. 
 
It would be nice, and I think that's why the Leader of the 
Opposition this session brought in a piece of legislation that 
would make it just as onerous on provincial government to act 
responsibly as our municipal governments do. So they have 
made a tremendous contribution to any surpluses that this 
government may enjoy in the Consolidated Fund of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
Granting has always been a big issue between local government 
and provincial government in particular. And I remember many 
discussions and controversies, Mr. Speaker, when I was in the 
government benches over the level of granting and what should 
be granted; an issue of urban transportation is one that always 
comes up. I think provincial government should not breathe too 
big a sigh of relief with the reaction of urban and rural local 
government to this year's announcement. 
 
And the reason I say that is because many of the fixed costs of 
municipalities in effect will be taking decreases in their funding 
levels once more because there is still a freeze in effect, Mr. 
Speaker. There's still a freeze in effect. And when you think that 
inflation — even though it's low — but fairly significant utility 
rate hikes, union agreements already signed, and union 
agreements, Mr. Speaker, that may in future have pretty  

significant impacts on urban municipalities particularly, you 
understand that those costs are going to keep increasing in the 
many areas of service that urban and rural government deliver. 
 
So even though people out there think that some of the issues 
have been resolved, they haven't because they're going to have 
to make do with less. And I think some of the suggestions that 
local government have come forward on, as far as changing the 
way that the revenue pool and its distribution are made up, are 
still valid points that senior government has to be prepared to sit 
down and listen to the points they make. 
 
And that some of the initiatives that local government is doing 
in order to keep their costs down . . . they're doing more 
contracting out; they're owning less infrastructure. They are, in 
effect, downsizing government . . . are lessons that this 
provincial government had better look at because the size of 
government has not decreased at all. There has not, in my view, 
been enough contracting out. And this provincial government 
could be doing the taxpayers of this province a huge favour, a 
huge favour, Mr. Speaker, by downsizing the Crown 
corporation sector further, not adding two more to it in 
contracting out more services and shrinking the size. And then 
local government will not be the one that always has to be 
shrunk and downsized and unloaded upon, at the whim of 
provincial politicians. 
 
I think the questions that we need to ask, Mr. Speaker, about 
those increasing costs to local government are best answered by 
the minister in committee. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move that this Bill proceed to that stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 44 — An Act to 
amend The Local Government Election Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill deals with 
some existing provisions in the Act having to do with the 
deposits posted by candidates in both local and school board 
elections. 
 
In 1993 the Saskatchewan urban municipalities requested an 
amendment requiring candidates who were running for seats on 
a council or school board in the four largest cities to make a 
financial deposit of $100. And I think, realistically, all of us in 
this Assembly understand that principle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've all had to post deposits when we sought election to this 
Assembly, and there's a formula in place that you can get your 
deposit back if you get a certain percentage of the vote, and it's 
been well understood at both the provincial and federal levels 
for a long period of time. It was decided in 1993, before the 
municipal elections of the following year, that an individual  



March 24, 1995 

 
1116 

who put their name up should receive at least 10 per cent of the 
vote, in other words, be a darn serious candidate, prepared to do 
what it needs to do in order to talk about public issues and not 
just be frivolous and that they would then have to garner 10 per 
cent of the vote in order to get their deposit back. 
 
That amendment, Mr. Speaker, didn't cause any problem for 
anyone running for one office, i.e., the mayor or a specific 
councillor. And I understand that the formula was looked at by 
Justice and everything else and . . .They didn't understand, I 
guess, that when you run in an at-large election, Mr. Speaker, 
that — particularly school boards — that it might be very 
difficult to attain 10 per cent of the vote. 
 
Voting is very low in some jurisdictions for some of these 
positions. In fact, we have a great deal of difficulty in some of 
our communities asking people to give themselves to public 
service as it is. So a lot of people in at-large elections did not 
receive the 10 per cent of the vote. And, as I understand the 
Bill, it modifies the legislation to ensure that losing candidates 
will retain their deposits. It will be retroactive back to 1993, and 
in the four major cities these particular deposits will be 
returned. It will cost the cities approximately $4,000 in order to 
fulfil that, and most of that will go to school board candidates. 
 
Moose Jaw has never chosen to use the ward system. And I 
believe in their circumstances they've chosen the right decision; 
they understand their city very well. And they also will be 
available to work with this legislation once it goes through the 
House, to make sure that those deposits are refunded. 
 
The question I guess that I will ask the most questions about, 
Mr. Speaker, is that when the problem was identified and 
nothing was done about it, why did we go through this whole 
process of asking people to run, put up deposits, lose, not get 
the 10 per cent . . . and now we have to come back to the House 
here and pass legislation so that people can get their money 
back retroactively two years after the fact. 
 
And that question I think begs asking, Mr. Speaker. And the 
best place to do that is when the minister comes in here with 
officials and can answer some of those questions. So I think it 
would be appropriate for us at this time to move from this stage 
of the Bill on to the next. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Renaud that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation and 
to enact a Consequential Amendment be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
pleasure for me to finally get a chance to speak on Bill 22, An 
Act to establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation  

and to enact a Consequential Amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say finally because, as this House recognizes, 
most of our members have risen and spoken on this legislation. 
We oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We oppose it on the grounds 
that it's not needed. We feel that this Bill is not needed because 
we don't believe we need another Crown corporation, 
particularly in the province of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
has, as far as we are concerned, a big enough family. 
 
The NDP's family of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, we feel 
is quite big enough. And we also believe that there are ways to 
control the size of families. And we also believe that the NDP 
should take a look at the ways of doing that because there 
comes a time when a family gets too big. And this is one of 
them that we feel is not necessary to enlarge the size of the 
family in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, being that the NDP don't seem to know, I'm 
here to remind them that they can hardly afford the Crowns that 
do exist. The people of Saskatchewan cannot afford the cost of 
any more Crowns. 
 
I think the members opposite should go out and speak to the 
people out in the country more often, Mr. Speaker. Or are they 
conceding rural Saskatchewan back to the PCs (Progressive 
Conservative) so you don't need to pay any attention to the 
harm you're doing to those people in the country? If they are 
conceding that, then this Bill makes some kind of sense. If 
they're not abandoning rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, then I 
think they should take another look at it. 
 
I think what they should do when they go out there and talk to 
the people out in the country, Mr. Speaker, is ask to them a few 
simple questions. Ask them, are you quite happy in paying a 
higher tax load? Are you happy in the utility rates? Ask them, 
Mr. Speaker, if they agree with the fact that the government can 
arbitrarily increase utility rates at their whim. Few simple, 
common sense, down-to-earth questions. 
 
And I think the other thing they should be doing while they're 
out there is tell them how much money the Crowns made in the 
last fiscal year. And then tell them that not one red cent was 
paid back into the General Revenue Fund. Where did that 
money go? Well, Mr. Speaker, it went into CIC. And I think 
they should make sure to explain that the money the Crowns 
made is being held in CIC just in case — just in case there's an 
election, Mr. Speaker, and they need a whole ton of money to 
pull out and use to enhance their chances of winning the next 
election. 
 
And the reason we say that, Mr. Speaker, is because there was 
not one red cent pulled out of CIC in the last budget. And there 
was many hundreds of million dollars went in there. So we are 
of the opinion that there's a ton of monies sitting there waiting 
just in case. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I believe the members opposite should 
mention that another Crown is being created, and this Crown is  



March 24, 1995 

 
1117 

receiving its money from the General Revenue Fund and not 
from CIC. The new highways Crown isn't being created with 
CIC money; it's being created on money taken out of the 
General Revenue Fund. The new Crown is going to take on 
duties currently being conducted by employees at the 
Department of Highways. The question is, why? 
 
The minister claims the new Crown doesn't have the authority 
to hire staff but will have six persons on the board. That begs 
another question, Mr. Speaker. It makes me wonder if the board 
members will actually do anything, or will the six-person board 
simply have the power to delegate additional work upon 
departmental staff? These things have to be answered before 
this Bill can go very much farther, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or another question you could ask, Mr. Speaker: will the 
departmental staff be reduced because the board has taken on 
some civil servant's job? These are again questions that have to 
be answered before this Bill can pass in this House. And I 
wonder . . . Another thing is, I wonder if the unions have been 
consulted on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the NDP came to power, they have been 
adding to their family of Crown corporations. They have been 
busy making sure that the public has no ability to scrutinize 
their actions. And the way that works, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Crown corporations are not subject to the audit. There is about 
40 per cent of the spending of this province today is not subject 
to an audit, not subject to the scrutiny of the Provincial Auditor. 
Now if you take the Highways department and put that into a 
Crown, there is another department that will not have to be 
subject to an auditor scrutiny. 
 
And I would ask you to look at the health boards. Every time a 
member of this Assembly asks a question about a district health 
. . . the Minister of Health sloughs it off to the health board. We 
can never get a straight answer because the minister is hiding 
behind the health board, which also indicates that if this Bill 
passed, they can hide behind the Crowns and will not have to 
show the people of Saskatchewan where and how the money 
was spent. 
 
Soon, Mr. Speaker, the government will be evading questions 
on highway construction tendering practices. Mr. Speaker, we 
feel on this side of the House that the writing is on the wall, but 
the writing is not in the Act. That is why we must get some 
answers to some questions that are bothering us on this side of 
the House. And the more and more time goes by and more and 
more contractors look at this Bill, more and more of them are 
phoning us and saying, we don't like this. 
 
Right now the Department of Highways must follow a low bid 
tendering process, and it's right in the highway legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. And we agree with that, we agree with that. But the 
NDP has a union preference policy for Crown construction. Is it 
a coincidence that now, because they have the union preference 
trade Act in any contract let out to a Crown, the best way to 
control that is to make another Crown and to bring all of the 
spending under Crown corporations? 

(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Highway department has a large capital 
construction budget, and they must follow low tendering. So 
what did the NDP do? They put through a legislation creating a 
Crown, a highways Crown, Mr. Speaker. Why? We feel the 
NDP want to make sure that the highways construction work 
goes to unionized companies. And we say, Mr. Speaker, that is 
outrageous. That is outrageous in a democratic society. 
 
I am of the view, from information that has been given to me, 
that the ratio between unionized labour and non-unionized 
labour is about 80 per cent un-unionized, 20 per cent unionized. 
Where is the fairness? Where is the fairness where 80 per cent 
of any group have to bow to the wills and the whims of 20 per 
cent? Mr. Speaker, it is not fair, and I don't believe it should 
happen in a province like Saskatchewan. 
 
We need only to look at the Sask Water fiasco at Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker, to see how much more expensive a unionized contract 
or a unionized company can be. They cost more, Mr. Speaker, 
primarily because of the high wages demanded by the workers. 
Now no one in this Assembly is suggesting that union labour is 
less efficient that non-union labour is, but I'm saying that it's a 
far sight more expensive. And we believe on this side of the 
House, on the lowest qualified tender system which would 
make all workers be productive, do their best, and do it at the 
least cost, particularly when we're talking about government 
money. 
 
And that's a phrase we shouldn't use, Mr. Speaker. When we 
talk about taxpayers' money, we say government money; it is 
not government money, it is taxpayers' money. And we are 
supposed to be guiding the spending of that money to the best 
we can get out of it. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, unions are more expensive because 
they seem to need more workers and they seem to need more 
time to do it. Mr. Speaker, that is not necessarily a criticism as 
much as it is facing reality. And we could go into a very . . . a 
lot of incidents where under a unionized contract some simple 
little job that has to be done to keep the project going, has to 
stand still until the person that is supposed to do that job can be 
brought forward to do a 10- or 15-minute job, which holds up 
the whole contract for sometimes many hours. That is a reality, 
Mr. Speaker, and it is part of the reason that costs go up when 
projects are unionized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that the government has already 
implemented a union preference policy for the Crown sector in 
the province. Why can't they leave the highway jobs alone? Or, 
Mr. Speaker, are their intentions to force the highway people to 
join the union, or the contractors to join the union? And I think 
that goes against the charter of rights, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where are our non-union friends going to work once the NDP 
takes away all job opportunities? That's a question: where do 
they go? Well I'll tell you where they will be working if we 
carry on with this kind of legislation; they'll be in Alberta.  



March 24, 1995 

 
1118 

Either Alberta or B.C. (British Columbia) or Manitoba — 
wherever they can find work. Because as one of our members 
mentioned prior today, if you do join the union you get down to 
the bottom of the pile. You have to sit there and wait until your 
name comes up so you can have a job. Mr. Speaker, our 
non-union friends will be fleeing this province, we feel, in 
droves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can't and we can't, on this side of the House, 
understand why this government cannot work for the people, all 
of the people, rather than just work for the benefit of unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not support this legislation. And there are 
many questions to be asked — many, many more questions that 
need to be asked in this legislation. And as I said, I do not 
support this, but at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:37 a.m. until 11:47 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Boyd Martens Goohsen 
D'Autremont Britton Bergman 
McPherson   

— 7 
Nays 

 
Van Mulligen Thompson Shillington 
Simard Penner Upshall 
Hagel Koenker Lorje 
Teichrob Crofford Trew 
Draper Serby Whitmore 
Sonntag Flavel Scott 
Knezacek Harper  

— 20 
 
The division bells rang from 11:50 a.m. until 12:20 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Van Mulligen Thompson Tchorzewski 
Shillington Penner Upshall 
Hagel Koenker Lorje 
Teichrob Crofford Trew 
Draper Serby Whitmore 
Sonntag Flavel Scott 
Knezacek Harper  

— 20 
Nays 

 
Boyd Neudorf Martens 
Goohsen D'Autremont Britton 
Bergman McPherson  

— 8 
 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, could we ask the 
minister to please reintroduce the officials who have joined us 
here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. Today I have with me 
Brian Woodcock, president of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation); John Law, senior vice-president, 
finance and accommodation; Al Moffatt, vice-president of 
commercial services; and Rob Isbister, director of financial 
planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, it's good to get back at this Saskatchewan Property 
Management estimate process, so that we can find out what's 
going on with all the property that the government owns and 
controls in this province. 
 
As you may recall, Madam Minister, we had asked you for 
several pieces of information in our last deliberation, and unless 
they got lost in the confusion, I haven't really seen that. So I 
was wondering if you have that with you today, or if we lost it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would be happy to hand across 
information that has been compiled to date. We don't have all of 
it yet, but there's a good portion of it here. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We will put our study 
on that as quickly as possible. It would have made our questions 
a little easier if we'd have had that sooner but better late than 
never, as usual. 
 
I understood the other day that you had made some commitment 
to us that you would let us know when the Saskatchewan 
Property Management would be auctioning off things that they 
do auction off. I just had someone whisper in my ear here a few 
minutes ago that there is supposedly an auction going on in this 
city today of Saskatchewan Property Management property 
that's being sold and I have no idea what's going on and I'd like 
you to tell us about this auction and how people become aware 
of it and what's being sold. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We had made that commitment last 
week and this particular auction was advertised last week, but 
any new ones, certainly, you will be on the list. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Madam Minister, welcome to your officials. 
When government departments began the process of budget 
preparation last fall, you must have had some direction from the  



March 24, 1995 

 
1119 

Department of Finance on how to go about planning your 
budgets for the year. Could you tell me, please, what those 
directions from Finance were, including what the spending 
areas were that you were instructed to look for spending cuts or 
efficiencies. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I apologize for taking a few minutes 
there. The directive to SPMC was the same as to all 
departments. It was an overall budgetary directive. And the 
two-year target was put in place so that the budget targets had 
to be met over a two-year period. 
 
Based on this year's current estimates, our budget has remained 
unchanged at 10.3 million in this year. And we did discuss and 
contemplate some increase for capital improvements but we've 
stayed within the 10.3 million total figure. 
 
There were efficiencies achieved in the corporation. Over the 
past three years, the operating expenses have been reduced by 
33 million, which is 20 per cent of the operating expense 
budget. And positions have been reduced by 230 over that time 
period. 
 
(1230) 
 
This year we've instituted a voluntary early retirement which 
will save 1.1 million, and there's 35 staff that have that option. 
And in energy savings there's been $110,000 in power savings 
due to changes in energy management. 
 
Excuse me, there was just an error in printing here . . . 500,000 
in savings in accommodation cost and more than 60,000 square 
feet returned to date since the start of the fiscal year. And 
SPMC's own move cut another lease by 600,000 annually. We 
gave employees the mandate to cut their budgets by 2 per cent 
this year. And I think that would about cover the kinds of 
efficiencies that are occurring. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — You say your budget is unchanged for this 
year, but the efficiencies resulted as a result of what you did? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The particular cost, for example for 
space and what not, would actually be in departmental budgets. 
So although we're responsible for instituting the efficiencies, 
the actual people who benefit are the departments themselves. 
And that would be why we don't actually experience ourselves 
the huge dollar change when that occurs; it's the departments 
themselves that get the benefit of that efficiency. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Did you 
conduct any internal spending audits to determine where 
specific areas of saving might be achieved. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll provide you with a list. But we 
did do quite a few and I'll just give you some examples for 
today. There was . . . mail was done; records handling; photo 
services; payroll and process audits. So there were a number of 
audits that were done and we'll give you a complete list of 
those. 

Mrs. Bergman: — We appreciate that list. 
 
Madam Minister, documents your predecessor provided this 
Assembly last year showed that $34 million would be spent for 
salaries and the total number of full-time equivalents for last 
year were 1,047. Can you please advise me what the total salary 
amount is this year, and the number of employees, and explain 
any changes that there are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We were discussing the figure of 
full-time that you had provided of 1,047, and our figures would 
indicate that that includes more than just full-time, that that's a 
full body count of the number of people. 
 
Now I will give you comparative figures from last year and this 
year. This year's salaries are at 33.875 million, which is a 
reduction of 450,000 from last year. And the positions have 
gone from 957 last year to 931 full-time equivalents. And the 
savings are not as great as it might be reflected, due to, again, 
changes in increments and what not. But there was about 1 
million in early retirement savings that was achieved through 
that process. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. One of the common complaints 
that we hear from people who work with and in SPMC is that 
there is a disproportionate amount of vice-presidents and 
executives at SPMC. Could you tell me what your proportion of 
management to staff is and how that might compare with 
government departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I wouldn't be able to give you an 
answer how it compares to other government departments 
because I don't know their figures, but in the out of scope, we 
have 166 out of the total of 931 full time that I mentioned. Out 
of those, four are vice-presidents. And it's about 17 per cent. 
We just did some quick calculations here. 
 
In 1992, when there was a significant reduction of staff, the 
bulk of those reductions were in the out-of-scope, in the 
management categories. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. I realize I made you do some 
quick calculations. And if you could do a careful calculation, I'd 
appreciate that. 
 
Before we leave the matter of salaries, could you tell me if any 
of the people on the list that we'll send over to you are 
employed by your department; and if yes, provide me with 
complete details on when you hired them, their salary, and their 
job description. And I'll send that over. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll have to compare this with the 
employee list, but there's only one name we recognize on here 
as potentially working with SPMC. The rest aren't. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. And I'd appreciate your 
confirming that. 
 
Madam Minister, how many people are involved in the  



March 24, 1995 

 
1120 

communications function in your department; what are their 
salaries and position titles and descriptions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's only one person who works in 
that position. It was filled through a publicly advertised, open 
competition. Margaret Duffy was the successful person who 
obtained that position, and I actually believe that one of your 
members asked this question last week and we gave a detailed 
answer to it then. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Okay. Has your department done any work 
with Phoenix Advertising in the 1994-95 fiscal year, say to the 
end of December? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, the short answer to that is no. 
That's not an advertiser that we've been using but we will check 
the detailed pay list to make sure. We're just about at year end 
and then we'll do up, you know, for the year-end report the list 
of all payees, but at this point the answer would be no. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — What are all of the fees for licences, 
inspections, and other things that form sources of revenue for 
your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll get this copied and send it across 
to you, but we only have one copy here, so I'll just get that 
provided. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — In the papers you're sending over, does that 
. . . what I would like to know about is the changes, either 
increases or decreases that have taken place in those fees over 
the past year or are planned for this year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There were no increases, and they are 
unchanged from last year. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Can you provide me with a breakdown of 
each change in any of the fees since 1992? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — None of that is relevant to this year's 
estimates, but there's no reason why we can't go back and 
provide that to you. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Madam Minister, could you 
please explain in detail the change in billing that has taken 
place in Executive Air recently? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The new pricing policy was based on a 
couple of principles, that I'll outline here, to simplify the 
administration and end confusing billing practices, but also to 
encourage more efficient use of the Executive Air fleet by 
bringing variable charges in line with true costs. The billable 
cost of using air is lower if the flight has several passengers. 
 
Now the specific changes are grants from the Consolidated 
Fund which provide base-level funding. The grant of 250,000 in 
1994-95 was 35 percent lower than 1993-94, reflecting  

improvements in operational efficiency. 
 
The annual assessment of 23,000 recovers stand-by operating 
costs associated with the service, and these are assessed to 
cabinet members. And mileage changes of $1.20 per mile 
recover variable operating expenses, and these are assessed 
equally among all passengers on each flight. 
 
So the main principle being to assign the costs where the costs 
are incurred and to have an accurate picture reflective of the 
real costs of providing the service. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Minister. 
What was the old rate for billing passengers for use of 
Executive Air? And what is the new rate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The essential difference that took place 
. . . let's see, I'll just check here. The current charge is $1.20 per 
mile. And there used to be a two-price system where ministers 
actually were charged less than other passengers. And now it's 
been evened out so that all passengers pay the same amount of 
$1.20 per mile. No matter who you are, you pay the same 
amount to travel. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Could you tell me what the old rates were 
for ministers and ordinary people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don't have the other figures with 
us, and we'd want to  if it's on the record  would want to be 
accurate, so we'll have to check on that. It was $1.11 per mile 
for ministers before, so the new rate is slightly higher for 
ministers, but lower for total passengers. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — What is the change in volume from last year 
to this year? Specifically, how much usage is being made of 
Executive Air by for example SaskPower employees this year as 
compared to last? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The total miles are up 16 per cent; but 
if there are specific details that you would want, we would 
likely have to provide those. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Would you then commit to providing the 
details on the changes in volume specifically? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we can do that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Does SPMC receive a grant 
from the general . . . Actually you just answered this question, 
but you said it was 35 per cent lower, the grant from the 
Consolidated Fund. What was the amount before and what is 
the amount now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the Consolidated Fund, 1994-95 
grant of 248,000 is down from 330,000 in 1993-94. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Minister, would you please 
provide me with a copy of the March 23, 1994 memo from 
Brian Woodcock to permanent heads regarding usage of  



March 24, 1995 

 
1121 

Executive Air? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we can do that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Minister, is the government 
purchasing a new airplane? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In terms of Exec Air, no. We have no 
intention right now of changing the Executive Air planes that 
we have. But we do have a request that we're working on and 
we have no decision on it and no idea what the decision would 
be. But the current non-pressurized Piper Navajo does not meet 
the standards set by Saskatchewan Health for transporting 
acutely ill patients. So SPMC has proposed buying a 
second-hand pressurized aircraft to handle this, but there hasn't 
been a decision on it. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Have tenders been put out? And what are 
the specifications of that tender? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We wouldn't put tenders out until we 
had approval for that kind of expenditure, so there is no 
approval so we wouldn't do that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, what is the 
government's intention with regard to its policy regarding 
government-owned airplanes? Do they realize that they are in 
direct competition with private airlines who are suffering 
because of this competition? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We do also charter and we have a 
significant volume that goes to the private sector. And in any 
analysis that we've looked at, at the whole thing in terms of the 
staff costs involved, the time costs involved, it just at this point 
has been assessed as being more taxpayer friendly to do the 
flights in this way and to use the charters as well. So we've got a 
mixed system right now that we're using. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 
 
 


