






















































March 23, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 23, 1995 

 

 
1073 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petition I 
present today, the prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan and specifically firearms owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Watson,, Leroy, Spalding, 
Englefeld area of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Swift 
Current, Gull Lake, Webb, Frontier, and Regina and Bracken 
areas of the province. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these on behalf of the constituents of 
southern Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. I'll read the prayer. It's as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituents that filled out this petition are all 
from my home town of Shaunavon. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 
allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the 
double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, special guests that are with us this afternoon in the 
west gallery  13 students from Mexico, who are visiting in 
Saskatchewan, and in particular in the Saltcoats constituency. 
 
These young men and women have completed their education 
in their home country, and they're in Saskatchewan on a 
six-month to twelve-month stint in order to expand their 
English skills and English language. And throughout the stay, 
they will be studying Saskatchewan and Canadian culture, the 
government and governments and the education system and 
whatever else they can be exposed to during their stay here. 
Once they return back to their country, I understand that many 
of them will be entering post-secondary education. 
 
I was planning on introducing them individually, but because of 
the time factor I won't. But I do want to mention that there are 
five students from the Churchbridge High School, so I'd like 
those five individuals to please stand up. There are also five 
attending the Esterhazy high school, and if those five would 
stand please; and three that are attending the Langenburg High 
School. 
 
And also accompanying them is Mr. Norm Overland who is the 
principal of the Esterhazy high school. He is also my former 
boss in my previous world of teaching. So I welcome them all 
here this afternoon. 
 
I do want to say I hope you enjoy your visit here today to the 
legislature and to Regina. And when it comes time for you to 
return home, please have a safe trip and may your experiences 
here in Saskatchewan have been great ones. 
 
Also following question period, I'll be meeting with these 
students in room 255. If anyone can spare a few minutes, drop 
over and say hello; that would be much appreciated. So please 
welcome our friends from Mexico. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 23, 1995 

 
1074 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the MLA from Kinistino and 
the MLA from Humboldt, I have the opportunity today to 
answer questions on behalf of this group that I wish to 
introduce — 41 grade 8 students from Cudworth and Bruno 
schools that are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They're 
accompanied today by their teachers, Therese McCann, Jake 
Mjaeff, and Marie Moore. 
 
I have to add, Mr. Speaker, they came with a list of very 
important and thoughtful questions. And I might add that it 
makes question period look very tame compared to the 
questions they asked today. I think the opposition could take 
lessons from these people. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Agriculture Week Activities 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, this week 
is Agriculture Week, the week we officially notice the 
year-round bedrock of our economy and our society. 
 
Some events connected to this week have been mentioned in 
this Assembly. I want to mention a few more. To remind us that 
farming has indeed joined the high-tech revolution, yesterday 
the Prairie Swine Centre annual spring conference series was 
made available by satellite to 16 separate communities — from 
Yorkton to Kindersley, from Nipawin to Weyburn. 
 
Also yesterday in the town of Kuroki, the Department of 
Agriculture presented an advanced seeding course. Today in 
Saskatoon an alliance-for-success workshop is taking place, a 
workshop to develop strategies for growth and development in 
small and medium-sized businesses connected to agriculture. 
And tomorrow, also in Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Food 
Processors Association annual meeting will take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is celebrated year-round in our 
province through fairs, exhibitions, and other programs. This is 
as it should be. But these events and others this week, remind 
us of the importance of agriculture and of how progressive it 
has become. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expression of Support for the Member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
accepting the challenge of elected representation, MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) also accept the fact that 
in public life you share the good with the bad at every turn. 
With progress, comes frustration; with praise, comes ridicule; 
with triumph, comes defeat. Each of these dichotomies exacts a  

toll on each of us as MLAs. 
 
As such, when a colleague draws ill, we must rally to their side. 
And in this spirit, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of the official 
opposition, I would like to express our sincerest wishes for a 
speedy recovery to the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Our thoughts are with him and his family, and trust he will be 
able to return to his duties in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Focus on Agriculture Week in Indian Head 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
recognize the history and importance of agriculture to Indian 
Head during Agriculture Week. 
 
In the early 1880s, the largest farm in the world was located at 
Indian Head. The Bell farm, where the historic brown barn still 
stands, consisted of 64,000 acres. 
 
Near the turn of the century, more wheat was shipped from 
Indian Head than from any other point in the world. 
 
The federal experimental farm created in 1887 has a long 
history of agricultural achievements. 
 
In 1902, the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) 
tree nursery station was established to provide millions of trees 
to farmers across the Prairies. This year alone, more than 7 
million trees will be sent out. 
 
More recently, the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association 
has established its headquarters at Indian Head. 
 
AgrEvo Canada has set up a field research station. And the NM 
Paterson & Company has built its first inland grain export 
terminal at Indian Head. 
 
Jim Halford is busy manufacturing the Zero Till ConservaPak 
seeders which are used across the Prairies and as far away as 
Australia. 
 
In addition, the Indian Head Agriculture Research Foundation 
was recently organized. Cattle feedlots, berry farms, PMU 
(pregnant mares’ urine) farms, are also part of the agricultural 
scene in the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture has been and continues to be the 
backbone of our economy. Saskatchewan farmers have not only 
kept pace with changes in the agriculture industry but have led 
the way in diversifying the industry. 
 
It is a pleasure and honour for me as a farmer and MLA from 
Indian Head to salute the farmers and ranchers of Saskatchewan 
during Agriculture Week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 23, 1995 

 
1075 

Martens' Ranch Limited Featured in Saskatchewan 
Tourism Publication 

 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It isn't always what 
you advertise; it's how you advertise it. This is the reason I was 
pleased to receive one of the recent householders from 
Saskatchewan Tourism entitled, Saskatchewan Vacation 
Adventure. 
 
Few sites are as beautiful as the sun setting on the 
Saskatchewan plains. The spectacular red and yellows, the 
purples and blues stretching as far as the eye can see. At sunset 
in the south-west part of our province it is a familiar sight to see 
a cowboy riding his favourite horse quietly across the prairie 
after a day's work is done. 
 
Both of these sights have been captured on the front of the 
Vacation Adventure advertisement. 
 
The Reader's Digest features, in a centrefold spread, a sunset, a 
sliver of the new moon, and a silhouette against the sky — Joe 
riding Wally, Hugh riding Marty, and Curt riding Hi Boy. 
 
The significance of all of this, Mr. Speaker, is this: that these 
photos were taken in south-west Saskatchewan on Martens' 
Ranch Limited and have been featured in Reader's Digest and 
the upcoming tourism booklet entitled, the Get-Away, and 
coming up in Maclean's magazine. 
 
I am proud and pleased to be a part of drawing tourists to our 
province, part of teaching individuals from all over the world 
about life in Saskatchewan. I am also pleased to be able to 
attract, even temporarily, some of the people that have left our 
province over the past years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1996 Summer Games Agreement 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many organizations 
and individuals in my riding have been busy making 
arrangements for the city of Moose Jaw to host the 1996 
Saskatchewan Summer Games. There is strong community 
support for these games, which will be held from August 4 to 
10 of next year. 
 
The games received a financial boost from the province this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, through a multi-party agreement. This 
agreement was signed by my colleague, the Minister for 
Municipal Government, along with Moose Jaw mayor, Ray 
Boughen, who is also Chair of the Summer Games organizing 
committee, and Norbert Thurmeier, Chair of the Saskatchewan 
Games Council. The host committee was presented with a 
cheque for over $117,000 as part of a $235,000 commitment to 
the games, funded through the lottery proceeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when these games begin, athletes will be 
competing in 12 different sports, and I'm pleased to note there 
will be events for athletes with disabilities and Special Olympic  

athletes. 
 
The city of Moose Jaw is ready for this challenge of hosting 
over 2,000 athletes, coaches, managers, and officials, making it 
the largest and one of the premier amateur sporting events in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I extend my thanks and best wishes to the organizing committee 
and volunteers who will make these the best games ever in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to plan 
to get their summer kicks in '96 in Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Drama Festival in the North 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, there is an important event 
about to take place in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Churchill High School in La Ronge will be hosting the regional 
drama festival for the North. Performances will be held at 
Precam Elementary School from March 24 to 26. It will feature 
nine drama groups from six northern communities, including 
senior and junior drama groups from Churchill High School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one of the 12 regional festivals for 
school drama across the province. The winner from each region 
will compete at the provincial festival in Yorkton in May. As 
well, the best actor and actress and the best technician from 
each region are invited to participate in a showcase at the 
provincial festival. 
 
Some of the communities that will have representation at the 
drama festival include Beauval, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Big River, 
Meath Park, and La Ronge. I would like to extend my best 
wishes to all of the participants, and I know the public will be 
entertained thoroughly during the festival. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Food Bank Donations 
 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
couple of weeks ago the opposition introduced a private 
members' Bill to make it easier to donate food to the food 
banks. Those involved in food banks and other food programs 
were hoping that this legislation could be passed right away. 
But the Minister of Social Services said he had to check the 
legislation, even though the same legislation is working 
effectively in five other provinces. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
have you completed your research on this legislation, and can 
we proceed with it immediately, as food banks and other food 
organizations were hoping? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 23, 1995 

 
1076 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I appreciate the question. I thought, Mr. Speaker, that I had kept 
the member involved along the way. I think last Friday I 
indicated to you that in the next two or three days we would be 
in a position to get back to you with our decision . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, it's the next two or three days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, you know, if they'll let me answer 
. . . And I would like to say to him that we have approved it. We 
have approved it. Now it's a private members' Bill. If you'd like 
to do it today, we can have leave I guess to do it today, because 
a private members' Bill, we're looking at next Tuesday. 
 
I had a couple of friendly amendments just to clean up the Bill a 
little bit, and I know that you lifted the Bill from Ontario, and I 
assume that you will be supportive to those friendly 
amendments. So I think we're being consistent. We don't write 
Bills on the backs of envelopes like you used to do, and we 
have to consult with the people. And I congratulated you before 
on bringing forth that, unlike the Liberals, who just criticize. So 
if you give us leave we'll do it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I thank 
you for your . . . I understand from what you're saying you are 
fully behind this Bill. Okay? We have provided you with letters 
documenting how the food donations have increased 
dramatically in Ontario since this Bill was passed. The food 
banks support this legislation; restaurants, hotels, all support 
this legislation. And it's a common sense solution and it doesn't 
cost a cent. So I am saying to you, sir, if you are fully behind 
this Bill then maybe we should get at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would 
. . . I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, I had indicated earlier that 
with leave, we'll do it today. But I want to say to the member 
that in the 1980s, when you were in the bench and your member 
from Estevan was the premier, poverty quadrupled in this 
province. There were no food banks before the member from 
Estevan came to power. 
 
You didn't provide support to low income people; in fact you 
devastated social programs for 10 solid years. You didn't even 
admit that poverty existed until 1991. You didn't even admit it 
existed. When you left, 10 food banks were in place. You have 
voted against every piece of legislation in this House that was 
designed to help low income people. 
 
Now in exchange for this agreement will you support the child 
development nutrition program? Will you support the child 
action plan? Will you support new initiatives in this very 
budget, like employment to youth strategies that help get young 
people back to work and provide educational opportunities for 
our students? Will you support those things, if you're really 
sincere about helping low income people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it certainly 
would be interesting getting into more of a debate on the food 
Bill and we trust the minister is more than prepared to come 
forward with this Act even this afternoon. But, Mr. Minister, 
Mr. Speaker, I have another question on my mind. 
 
You don't need a law degree to know that on the face of it, if it's 
an offence to take a kickback, it's an offence to give it. Mr. 
Speaker, this quote isn't from any of us in the official 
opposition; it isn't from a person with any sort of political 
motivation; it isn't from an individual who is ignorant of the 
law. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this statement comes from one of the 
Premier's own back-bench MLAs, the NDP member from 
Regina Albert South speaking in reference to the NDP 
advertising agency of record, Phoenix Advertising, and their 
kickbacks to an NDP (New Democratic Party) cabinet minister. 
 
The member was a senior Crown prosecutor, Mr. Speaker, and 
he echoes the comments of the former minister of Justice. My 
question is to the Minister of Justice: Mr. Minister, you are the 
current Attorney General. Why don't you give us your legal 
opinion of this matter? Do you agree with your NDP 
colleagues, one a former senior Crown prosecutor, the other a 
former Justice minister. Very simply, Mr. Minister, do you 
believe it is illegal to offer or to give a kickback? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
noted with interest the questions of the member from Wilkie 
and the rather high tone of those questions. In some ways it's a 
shame that rather high-mindedness didn't continue. I want 
members opposite to reflect upon the gravity of what you've 
been doing over the past few days. 
 
For some time the justice system has prosecuted a senior 
member of cabinet without the slightest suggestion of any 
political interference. Why? Because it wasn't in the political 
interest to do so. Now on a related matter with the same 
prosecutors, a decision as to whether or not to prosecute an ad 
agency, suddenly you find political interference. 
 
Members opposite, for the crassest of political reasons, have, 
without a shred of evidence . . . are calling into question the 
integrity of this province's judicial system. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with the utmost reluctance that I've come to the conclusion that 
if we're to prevent real damage occurring to this province's 
judicial system, I must put an end to the political games 
opposite and I want it known I'm calling you and you on these 
political games. 
 
I am hereby announcing that there will be an independent 
special prosecutor who will review this matter. And I say to 
members opposite . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I say to members opposite that we 
now have an independent prosecutor reviewing it. If there is  



March 23, 1995 

 
1077 

even a shred of decency left in members opposite, I hope you 
will let the system do its work without any further attempt to 
politicize the judicial system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
Minister. First of all, I note it was interesting that the minister 
began by accusing the opposition of scare tactics and running 
down a profession before he reached the point of actually 
admitting and indicating to this Assembly that he had come to a 
decision that maybe it would be appropriate to follow the 
urging of his colleagues and of this opposition in appointing an 
independent prosecutor. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would at least have the 
courtesy of indicating to us who that prosecutor will be and 
how that prosecutor will be appointed or has been appointed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I say to the member from Moosomin, 
we will be announcing the name of the special prosecutor 
relatively soon. And I think we'll have the report plenty soon 
enough for members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, will you at least allow us the opportunity of knowing 
who that prosecutor is, how you've arrived at the decision, what 
the parameters will be for the prosecutor, and when his report 
will be available to the Assembly, if that's what you're telling us 
today. Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll ignore 
some of the comments of the member opposite and just say that 
within the next few days, within the next few days I'll be 
announcing the name of the special prosecutor and the terms of 
. . . who it is and so on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contaminated Water Supply 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I'm asking 
a question on behalf of my constituents in Regina North West, 
concerning the possible contamination of the Regina aquifer by 
the city of Regina's sewage treatment plant. 
 
The drinking water from Regina North West, as well as the rest 
of the city, comes from wells drilled into the Regina aquifer, 
mixed with water coming from the city's pipeline. 
 
In the late 1980s, Sask Water commissioned reports to develop 
an allocation plan for the Regina and area groundwater 
resources. The results of those reports, Mr. Speaker, indicated 
that the Regina aquifer was stressed and over-allocated. That 
means that too much water was being pumped from that aquifer 
and that the city of Regina's sewage system leaks into the 
Regina aquifer. 

My question is to the minister responsible for Sask Water. Mr. 
Minister, has Sask Water monitored and remedied this source of 
contamination since it received the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, this, as is indicated by the 
nature of the question, that this study overlaps a number of the 
departments. In the description of the question, it overlaps 
Water and Health and Environment. And the issue is under 
review, and we'll report at an appropriate time. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the management and 
allocation of the Regina area’s groundwater is the responsibility 
of Sask Water. Large groundwater users such as the city of 
Regina must register their wells and apply for water allocation. 
 
Under the law, Mr. Speaker, the first users of a groundwater 
source must be protected. In 1989 the city of Regina agreed to 
remain at its 1989 groundwater allocation, and also agreed that 
future water increases would be dealt with by pipeline 
expansion rather than further pressure on an over-allocated 
groundwater. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that further licences have been 
issued to the city of Regina for increased allocation of these 
stressed groundwaters, thereby increasing the risk of rural users 
as well as the people of Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I will report back as soon as 
I can confirm or deny the comments of the member. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
Department of Environment has made a big do about the buried 
tanks. This is an extremely important matter, and I'd ask you to 
answer the question. 
 
One of the recharge points for the Regina aquifer is at Wascana 
Creek near the city of Regina sewage treatment plant. 
According to the 1988 Saskatchewan Research Council report, 
this is an area of contamination of the aquifer and of great 
concern today for the users of the water, including those 
farmers drawing their water from the Regina aquifer as well as 
the residents of north-west Regina. 
 
Can the minister assure both the groundwater users and 
residents of Regina that this source of contamination does not 
make their water unsafe for human consumption? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — As I'd said earlier, this question has been 
under review for a significant amount of . . . has been examined 
with a significant amount of detail and I'll report back fully as 
soon as I have the full report. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and my  



March 23, 1995 

 
1078 

question is to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I wondered if you would like to continue on with 
the raving and ranting that obviously went with the touchy 
questions the media asked you last night in regards to 
agriculture and your federal NDP colleagues. I found it rather 
strange, Premier, as a politician who has made a career out of 
attacking federal governments and federal parties — and that's 
always meant Tories and Liberals because, thank goodness, 
we've never had an NDP federal government — the fact is that 
when someone asks you to defend the actions of your federal 
brethren, you start to come unglued because you can't defend 
the indefensible, Mr. Premier. The actions of your federal 
cohorts in the House of Commons were indefensible in the 
action regarding the rail strike. 
 
Why is it okay, Premier, for you to attack and to make a career 
over the last 25 years of attacking federal Tory and Liberal 
governments and not call your own federal brethren to account 
when they affect your province more dramatically than they 
affect any other province in Canada when it comes to a national 
rail strike? Why is that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I find this a particularly 
amusing question on this day of all days to come from the 
Conservative Party. 
 
I have here in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a clipping — I think it's 
from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix — and the headline, Mr. 
Speaker, says: "Sask. Tories to axe ties with federal 
counterparts." 
 
Apparently it's okay for the Tories to axe ties with the federal 
Tories and therefore not to defend the federal Tories, but it's not 
okay for the provincial New Democratic Party government to 
take another position. Get real, Mr. Member, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The big question is, 
Premier, are you prepared, on behalf of thousands of farm 
families in this province, to sever your ties when your federal 
cohorts and your union leader friends obviously have been more 
important to you than agriculture in this province? 
 
And, Mr. Premier, the record's fairly straight. And I understand 
why you're so touchy, when you're the guy that tore up the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts, you're the 
guy that has attacked rural Saskatchewan time and time again 
through the last three and a half years. So I can understand how 
touchy you are, Mr. Premier; why you will not sever your ties 
with the federal NDP as they attack rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So the question is: if it upsets you so much, Mr. Premier, will 
you now do what you just asked us to do? Will you sever those 
ties and categorically say that Saskatchewan farm families come 
before your federal cohorts and your union leader  

friends? Will you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we have truly reached 
the silly season of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
First of all, the leader of the provincial Liberal Party attacks the 
Prime Minister of Canada and says that she's not out there to 
defend the federal Liberal policies and the federal Liberal 
government actions. She says that she is going to defend only 
her own positions, but with several exceptions of course. 
 
Then this morning in the front page of the Leader-Post, I didn't 
advocate that you should sever your ties with the federal PCs 
(Progressive Conservative); you said you're going to sever the 
ties with the federal PCs. You get up and you follow the Liberal 
lead, and you sever the ties with the federal PCs. 
 
Now look, if you're a Liberal and you have this budget which 
destroys the Crow and attacks western Canada, I can see why 
you're ashamed of defending the Liberals. And if you're a Tory 
and you have the record of the government federally, I can see 
why you're ashamed of being a Tory. 
 
I tell you we're not severing the connections of the New 
Democratic Party. Our philosophy is right. I disagree with what 
the federal NDP did on Monday with respect to the railway 
strike. I have taken the position one full week before that time 
at SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
that the grain should be moving. Yes, I did. The former premier 
says I didn't, and I did; it's on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) record. I've repeated it over again and over again. 
And what irritates you people over there is that I've done 
exactly what you have not had the courage to do: to stand up for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan including farmers. 
 
Good luck to you in your severances. Good luck to you in your 
severances. God bless you, but I don't think the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to buy it for one moment. A Tory is a 
Tory is a Tory, and a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Repetition isn't 
going to save the Premier because he repeated — he repeated in 
1991 time and again in rural Saskatchewan and in rallies around 
this province — that all Saskatchewan farm families had to do 
was vote for him and their problems would be solved . . . that a 
billion dollars a year was nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And instead what have we seen? And that is why they do not 
believe the Premier today, when he protested so loudly that he 
is not in the back pocket of his union friends and the federal 
NDP politicians who struck out against rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say to the Premier, all of the promises that you made in '91 
that you've broken, you tell Saskatchewan farm families why  



March 23, 1995 

 
1079 

they should believe you now when you say they're on your side, 
when you obviously have not been in the past. Why should they 
believe you, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan will in due 
course make up their own minds as to what they believe with 
respect to our government's actions. And we'll be having a 
chance to have that debate in the country in due course. So 
those arguments can be saved at the appropriate time. 
 
The member is obviously scrounging around for some form of 
question, but I repeat again that, scratching as he might be 
about this angle, I don't know what it is that bothers the 
member. We've passed how many motions, Mr. House Leader? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Three motions, unanimously. Mind 
you, the Liberal Party has ducked on at least two of them. 
They've scurried off. Their divorce from the federal Liberals is 
kind of like hide-and-seek. Peekaboo, you see them sometimes, 
and sometimes you don't. At least you people  I give you the 
courage — you're in the House. We voted unanimously on at 
least two or three occasions on the rail strike and the need for 
the grain to move to protect the family farmers. What in the 
world more could be done? 
 
And the hon. member knows this, and what he's trying to do is 
to play a little bit of a small game which I wish he would do it 
in a humorous way; at least we'd have a little bit of a smile out 
of it. But he actually, I think, is serious about this question, and 
it’s pretty hard for anybody else in Saskatchewan to be serious 
about his question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the Premier 
thinks it's a bit of a humorous matter. But I, like a lot of other 
farmers in this province, have to go and seed a crop this spring. 
And the actions of this government and the federal Liberals 
leaves me in a great deal of doubt. 
 
So I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture because the 
Minister of Agriculture has made a decision which affects, once 
again, thousands of people in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
understand, Minister, that you have ordered that the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation and other government agencies 
which leased land to farmers in this province, that you have 
ordered that they delay the leasing process for two weeks 
because of your inaction in dealing with the federal Liberal 
government and the amount of money that is coming to the 
province of Saskatchewan with the Crow payout. Is that true, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what I would suggest to 
the hon. member because I do take this seriously . . . I just find  

it a little bit difficult that the nature of the question, the way it 
started out, to be serious. But I would say to the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, I would even say to the Leader of the 
Liberal Party — but I have less hope that this would take place 
— why not, in the next several days, try to come up with some 
Saskatchewan voice to try to clarify the tangled mess created by 
Mr. Goodale and Mr. Martin on the Crow buy-out which of 
course impedes your decision as to what to plan. It's not only 
your decision but the farmers'. 
 
This is an absolute confused chaotic situation out there that Mr. 
Goodale has failed to clarify. So far as I know, his position still 
is that it's to the landlord — full stop period. And nobody really 
knows. The Leader of the Liberal Party in her off-the-divorce 
mode says for the moment, that she's going to talk Mr. Goodale 
into everything else being on the table to amend the landlord 
situation. But thus far we haven't seen that liaison produce any 
benefit, tangible results for the people of Saskatchewan. So 
therefore the result is confusion. 
 
And they're seeding well in the next couple of weeks. So you're 
dead right. I say quite seriously, what I will do is I'll ask the 
House Leader, I'll ask the Minister of Agriculture to sit down 
with the Leader of the Opposition, even the Leader of the 
Liberal Party — if any Liberals are around in the House at the 
time. Let's try to work out some sort of a pay-out which helps 
our people. 
 
And in this context we're very interested in cooperating with 
you. And it can involve ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) because it is also confused by this tangled 
web that has been weaved by an incompetent federal Liberal 
budget — a hurtful federal Liberal budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I'm glad to see 
the Premier stand up on an agricultural issue and at least try to 
demonstrate some leadership. 
 
We have asked your Minister of Agriculture, the man you've 
chosen to represent agriculture around your cabinet table, 
question after question over the last month, and we have 
received absolutely no answers, no assurance that this 
individual understands what's going on at all, Premier. 
 
So I'm glad to see that you're taking interest finally because 
there's a lot of questions about the Crow buy-out. When is it 
going to be paid? How is it going to be paid? Who is going to 
receive the money: the landowner or the producer? We asked 
him last week in estimates, and he shrugged his shoulders. 
 
Mr. Premier, your minister evidently has said there will be a 
two week delay in leasing. Why two weeks? Does he know that 
there's going to be an answer in two weeks? Is it three weeks? Is 
it four weeks? The minister doesn't understand. 
 
Premier, can you tell farm families in this province what the 
time lines are, what the deadlines are, and what you expect out  



March 23, 1995 

 
1080 

of it, Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
answer on behalf of the government because I think  if I may 
say so, with the greatest respect to the member opposite  he is 
on to something here. But he is not on to the right attack point, 
namely us. 
 
This is the problem of Ralph Goodale. This is the problem of 
Ralph Goodale and the Liberals. They have set the rules of 
doing away with the Crow. They have failed to clarify the 
method of the buy-out and the pay-out. It is they who have not 
told the farm leaders any of the answers which you raise. 
 
We have been asking the federal people to give us the details. 
They don't give us any of the details in any more particularity or 
specificity than they do the farm leaders or the community at 
large. It is a tangled mess out there. I didn't cancel the Crow 
rate. You didn't cancel the Crow rate. The Liberals killed the 
Crow rate. The Liberals threw rural Saskatchewan into 
confusion. The Liberals said to western Canada, here's a big 
poke in the eye. 
 
Now I agree with you, but you're coming after the wrong 
people. We're prepared to work with you. We're even prepared 
to see if the divorce is really on  to work with the Liberals  
to see if they can work up something here. 
 
But I can't answer those questions. It's not our policy. So I say 
to you and to the Leader of the PC Party, we should look at 
questions of interim payment, try to figure out leasing 
arrangements. All of these things we should try to help out 
because obviously the Liberals are at sea, and they know 
absolutely nothing about rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Agricultural Operations 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move 
that an Act respecting Agricultural Operations be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund 

The Chair: — This was before the Committee of the Whole 
yesterday, and it's not necessary to reintroduce the officials. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday when we were dealing with this item, I asked you a 
number of questions about the board and its make-up, what type 
of individuals or companies would be eligible, what constituted 
a primary producer, what constituted a secondary producer. And 
you seemed to be very vague through most of that questioning. 
 
I'm wondering  now that you've had time to think about it, 
and you've thought about the kind of people that are going to 
have access to this $91 million over the next four years, 27 
million of it in the current budget year — if you've got some 
better examples to give me of what you have in mind, and if 
you have thought about this issue of who should control the 
board. 
 
Should it be primary producers in the province of Saskatchewan 
who are facing untold changes in the agricultural make-up of 
this province or if it should be the folks that are already . . . the 
Minister of Economic Development has been flying around the 
world looking at secondary processing, which they're very good 
at. 
 
So have you thought about it? Are your answers still the same? 
Can you give us a better understanding of what this $27 million 
and this board which you are going to appoint is actually going 
to do for the farm families of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me run 
through the board structure one more time for the member. This 
board will, as laid out in the legislation, will have 12 members, 
six appointed by the federal government and six appointed by 
the provincial government. The legislation sets out a minimum 
of one-quarter of the board being actual people from the 
industry and producers. We anticipate that in all likelihood 
there will be eight out of twelve who will be industry 
participants. 
 
We certainly anticipate some primary producers and some 
secondary, some people who are in the food processing 
industry. If the people like Drake Meats and Thomson Meats 
and the greenhouse at Biggar and those sorts of industries will 
be accessing some of this money . . . and certainly we need the 
sort of expertise coming from some of those as well as from 
primary producers. 
 
If it helps the member opposite, I'll try not to appoint people 
who flew with the Minister of Economic Development, if that 
makes you feel better. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Just a moment. I may have been 
premature. I had one of the members of the committee ask if 
there were officials here today who were not here yesterday, 
and if there are, I'd ask the minister to introduce officials who  



March 23, 1995 

 
1081 

are here today and weren't yesterday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, 
we have Dale Sigurdson, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
Agriculture who was not here yesterday. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. See, Minister, the 
problem I have is once again — and I hate to refer to past 
history — but when the issue came up around the monies that 
were associated with the beef industry in this province and what 
should be done with the residuals that were there from the old 
tripartite agreements from some of the feeder programs that 
were around, the various things that were rolled into a fund that 
was to go to enhance the beef industry, you basically told 
people in that industry that if they didn't do it your way, you 
were going to put things to a vote. And you were going to insist 
that Sask Wheat Pool  who, as far as I know, don't grow one 
single cow in the province of Saskatchewan; they own lots of 
them because they have them out on contracts with people — 
had to be a part of that structure. And you absolutely insisted 
that there was no give on issues like that. 
 
And I think people in the past have said to me, and I'm sure 
they've said to you, is there really any point in designing a new 
fund, an ag innovation fund in this province, like some of the 
ones that have been around in the past, where we have 
academics . . . we have plant breeders . . . I mean, I'm a 
registered seed-grower. I know how it works. You know the 
guy that's designing the new breed of seed doesn't necessarily 
worry about the marketability of the product down the road. 
 
We've have a recent example of the wheat, Grandin, and its 
temporary licensing and then its pull-back. I mean nobody, 
Minister, thought about what the guys growing the product 
were going to have to do with it down the road because the 
committee, that said that it should come in, was from another 
part of the industry. That's what farmers fear, and they fear it 
from you because of the way you've handled things in the past. 
 
So now we're going into an election year. We've got 27 million 
bucks, 91 million over four years. You've got the right to 
appoint the board. Your record is as dismal as all get out in that 
regard because you've always stacked them up with political 
folks. And then you say, trust me. You come in here and give 
me the same answer today as you gave me yesterday — just 
trust me. You don't give me a definition of a primary or a 
secondary. Just trust me. 
 
Well I'm sorry. Forget that I'm a politician. As a farmer, I don't 
trust you. You tore up my contracts. You've done lots of things 
to change the way that I do my business that had more politics 
involved in it than it did anything else. So I don't trust you — 
either as a farmer or as a politician. 
 
Until you can give me some concrete examples and some 
assurances of the kind of people that would make this thing 
work, that will be free of interference and will be free of simply  

some type of political chicanery during an election year in this 
province and until you can justify that to this House, I think this 
is going to go on for a very, very long time because this Bill is 
very, very broad and evasive when it comes to those kinds of 
answers. And you're going to have to do better than you did in 
the past in order to get this thing passed in any short time at all. 
 
So maybe you'd like to take another stab at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I think it would be 
inappropriate and wrong to bring names into the House for a 
board that has not yet passed into legislation. The member 
opposite criticizes the board that has not yet been appointed. 
The legislation sets out quite clearly that there will be industry 
representatives on it. It makes allowances for committees and 
subcommittees which is absolutely necessary in that there will 
be a whole lot of new and emerging industries which not a lot 
of people have a lot of knowledge about. And they will need to 
be consulted with industry people in those specific sectors. 
 
And short of having a board of hundreds of people, you can't 
put all of those interests on a board, so there will be structures 
set up so that they can be consulted and that proposals brought 
forward can be evaluated by primary people who are in the 
industry, and as well as the farmer who is growing the grain, as 
well as the people who are processing the grain, as well as some 
of the people who are doing the scientific research on doing the 
new varieties. 
 
And I think you cannot get a balanced board nor a board that 
has knowledge and is competent without having a cross-section 
of people who are involved. And that is what has been 
happening in the agricultural industry that the member opposite 
probably has not taken note of . . . is that there are a lot of 
cooperative efforts happening within industries. And producers 
are cooperating with processors, and processors are cooperating 
with marketers. And people are working together in order to 
break into particularly world markets where Saskatchewan has 
to be in order to be successful. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I cannot give a list of people that are going 
to be on the board today, particularly without having asked 
them. This is a board; the structure is there. There are six 
federal and six provincial people who will be on the board. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Minister, let's try this a little bit 
differently. Have you had any indications from the federal 
government about the kind of people that they're going to put 
on the board? Are they going to follow the same criteria as you? 
Are they going to consult with you before these appointments 
are made? Is Ralph Goodale, the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, who must be paying the other part of the shot . . . 
have you had any indication from them of what type of people 
they would like to have on the board? 
 
Obviously this board of 12 is going to have to work fairly well; 
you get six, he gets six. You and Mr. Goodale are going to have 
to have some discussions on that. Can you give us any 
indication of what the federal government thinks would be  



March 23, 1995 

 
1082 

appropriate in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, obviously we have had 
consultation with the federal government, and certainly will be 
consulting with them. It wouldn't do for us to have overlaps, 
and then us both appoint somebody from the same sector and 
not somebody from another sector. 
 
Some of the general principles that we looked at is that we want 
gender equality if possible. We want sector representation on 
the board. We want tie-ins with other funds. If we can have an 
overlap with a fund like ADF (Agriculture Development Fund), 
that will prevent overlap and duplication, and keep a close tie-in 
so that everybody knows what's happening in the industry. We 
want somebody from food processing and value added. And we 
want primary producers. 
 
So we've had a good deal of discussion as to who's going to be 
on the board. But there certainly will be a good deal more 
discussion before the board is appointed. And if the member 
opposite has names of people that he thinks should be on the 
board, give them to me and we will certainly give them due 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well we're making progress, Minister. Could 
you tell us the time line that you and the federal minister have 
agreed to for this board to be announced and start up. And that 
maybe will give us some indication of when you anticipate 
these people all getting together, and the make-up and the 
various requirements that you just outlined. Give us your best 
shot at when this thing is going to be operational. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it depends to 
start with how fast the Bill goes through the House and how 
quickly the federal government can get their representation in 
place. We will certainly have to have some consultation, as the 
member has pointed out, that needs to happen. Our best guess 
would probably be May or June, we should have a board in 
place. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So has the federal minister . . . has not said 
any . . . or his officials have not given you a definite time line of 
when they want to name their people? They're obviously going 
to have to make some order in council appointments themselves 
in order to get this done. Are they also waiting on their 
budgetary process to be done in the House of Commons? Or 
have they allocated the money already and therefore they don't 
have to go through the House for their funding? The federal 
minister must have indicated to you some type of a date and I'd 
really appreciate if you would share that with the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Once this is passed it will give us 
the authority to sign the federal-provincial agreement. So that 
needs to be done. Our money is available immediately. The 
federal money will not be available that quickly. It's in their 
'95-96 budget. Again we have made strong submissions that 
this be done as quickly as possible. We're pushing it from our 
end as quickly as we can. And so far we've had reasonable 
cooperation from the federal government. And hopefully we  

will get this up and running as quickly as we possibly can. And 
again we anticipate May to June to have a board in place. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you've just told me is that you want 
to get the board named and that you will be operating on 
provincial funds until such time as the federal government gets 
its budgetary process finished. Is that basically what you're 
saying, that they need to go through House of Commons before 
that they can start to allocate any monies to this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Actually the agreement is that we 
would use the federal government money first. When the board 
is up . . . and we'll have to take applications, we'll have to assess 
them. And by the time there's approval of applications and 
money flowing out, the federal money should be available by 
that time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, those time lines tell me then, Minister, 
that if we have a June election in this province that there isn't 
even the slimmest chance that you'd be making any 
announcements from this board on projects, because they 
obviously wouldn't have had time to do their due diligence or 
receive any federal money. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the member speculates on a 
June election. If that's the case then obviously this will not have 
money out or announcements out pre-election. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well you could have told me that several 
sentences ago, Minister, and we could have cleared that a long 
time ago, because I asked that yesterday. And it's nice that 
you're on the record . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
mean, I was asking you questions about that; you could have 
just said, well no, that's out of the question. You've relieved the 
anxiety of a lot of people in rural Saskatchewan with that 
simple statement today. 
 
I want to go on to the powers; I notice in here you've indicated 
that they can second or they can hire or they can do a number of 
things as far as staffing in order to gain expertise in various 
areas. As you said, these things take years to come to fruition 
and they need intensive study. 
 
Can you give me your best shot of what percentage of the funds 
allocated will go toward this staffing component or to an 
ancillary type of hiring that would be done by the board in order 
to further its work. What is your best guess at what percentage 
of the $91 million will go toward that portion of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The agreement we have with the 
federal government, that staffing will be handled by the federal 
and provincial governments and this board will not have 
employees. It will have the ability to hire a consultant and an 
engineer for some particular purpose, but it's not allowed to hire 
a staff. The staffing will be the responsibility of the 
governments. 
 



March 23, 1995 

 
1083 

The payments for the board members themselves will come out 
of the fund, and as I said, if we're in a situation where the board 
needs to have an engineer to verify some data or some study or 
whatever, that would be eligible for funding from the fund. But 
it won't have any employees. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Minister, you didn't tell me what your 
best guess was as to a percentage of the $91 million going 
toward the staffing side of the equation, work of the board. 
How much of the money will be used up in administration, your 
best guess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That will be, we anticipate, a very 
nominal amount, because we will be staffing it from 
Department of Agriculture from our side and from the federal 
government's side. So it won't be hiring any employees. And so 
my officials say that they anticipate it to be somewhere less than 
1 per cent will go to administration. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — The reasons I ask these questions, Minister, 
because I reread the Bill again this morning, and it, the Bill, 
specifically gives the minister the sole discretion over the hiring 
of employees. And yet at the same time it says, in a later 
section, that the fund has the power to hire and pay for — and 
it's clearly delineated in there — advisers, specialists, or 
consultants. And these are very broad terms, Mr. Minister. And 
in my view, they completely undermine section 9(1). 
 
So I'm wondering why you bothered with 9(1) when you put 
this broad mandate out for the board to get into the business of 
hiring these folks, and yet you say you should have sole 
discretion over the hiring of employees. And it's contradictory 
and I don't understand why you've got the two dichotomies in 
there. 
 
And then you tell me that less than 1 per cent of the 91 million 
is going to that side of it when, if the board has that ability, that 
simply won't be the case, Minister. Why have you done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we did this to 
give the board some flexibility. We deliberately put in there that 
the board cannot hire employees. And that, to be quite frank, is 
to be sure that the federal government doesn't offload part of 
their agricultural budget onto this fund. And we do not want to 
have federal employees transferred into the fund. We have no 
intention of transferring provincial employees into the fund. 
And that's put in there specifically to deal with that. 
 
On the other hand, the board does need the flexibility from time 
to time to be able to hire an engineer or a food consultant or 
some such expertise that they need to evaluate, help them 
evaluate, a certain project or to do some quick intelligence for 
them. And that was put in there to give the board the flexibility 
to do that. 
 
I certainly don't anticipate that being any significant portion of 
the board's expenses, but I think it would hamper the board's 
ability to act in certain situations if we don't allow them to have 
the power to do those things. 

Mr. Swenson: — So just that I'm straight here . . . that all of 
these expenses will be paid out of the fund. There will be 
nothing out of the Department of Agriculture, nothing from the 
minister's office because the minister obviously is . . . you're 
telling me that you're retaining the right to sort of have the final 
veto on this situation, at least according to the Act. The minister 
has the final say, that all of any hiring done will be done strictly 
out of the fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, if you read 
section 10(1), the fund may hire people, but that will be the 
board. The minister does not have the authority to hire those 
people. Only the board does, and the board is, as you recall, is 
appointed half by the federal government and half by the 
provincial government. So the minister will not have the 
authority to use any of those funds to hire anybody. That will be 
a board decision if they need particular expertise to hire people 
to do it for them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm glad to see that you are going to stay 
out of their business, but I don't know why you would then try 
and tell the Assembly that you expect less than 1 per cent of the 
budget will go toward hiring. I mean obviously the board will 
have to make that decision, Minister, if they set 5 per cent or 10 
per cent or whatever of their budget to go out and hire 
consultants or . . . What else did you call them? Special 
advisers, consultants, whatever. 
 
I guess they'll make that determination. Is that correct that they 
then will set their yearly budgets, and if they want to take a guy 
on to bring on a new breed of canola or some such thing that 
. . . and they need him for three or four years, that they'll go out 
and hire him on a contract, and they'll have him there for three 
or four years. Is that the process as you see it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly that's not the 
process as we see it. What I would anticipate is that some group 
would come forward, if it's for researching of a new saskatoon 
berry or whatever it is, some group would come forward — of 
industry or producer organizations — asking for money to do 
research on a particular project. And the board would approve 
the funds. They would not be hiring somebody to do those 
things for them. It would only be in the instance of something 
that they needed possibly to evaluate the proposal that's in front 
of them, that they thought they needed some information or 
some consulting. And so that's why I anticipate it to be a very 
small percentage, although the member is correct — that 
decision will rest with the board. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That raises another interesting question, 
Minister. You talked about the secondary producers being, 
possibly vertically integrated agri-food business being, someone 
that might be on the board. And can you see something in the 
Act that would prevent you or the federal government of 
appointing one of these entities, these secondary producers who 
could be a very large agri-food business . . . having a seat on the 
board of directors and also having a particular product or . . . 
 



March 23, 1995 

 
1084 

And you mentioned several the other day. You talked about the 
meat industry. You talked about people in the fruit industry. 
You talked about people in the flax fibre industry having a 
particular project that they wanted to undertake and maybe 
offset the cost of some of their R&D (research and 
development) in that area. 
 
Can you tell me what provisions there are to prevent that, that 
the board cannot turn around and hire people who would have a 
direct result on the business interests of one of these secondary 
producers that you would put on the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly the board will have 
. . . will adapt standard conflict of interest guidelines. This has 
always been a problem in Saskatchewan with an industry that's 
new and growing. We have the same problem on ADF boards, 
on any boards in the province. And if you . . . remembering that 
producers or members of the board are one out of twelve and 
there will be conflict of interest guidelines that they will need to 
comply with. 
 
Certainly we wouldn't want to eliminate anybody who might at 
some point want to apply to the board from being on the board 
because those are the very people who have the expertise in the 
area. And so . . . that right down to primary producers and 
farmers who are interested in expanding their farm and value 
added on the farm are the very people who may well at some 
point want to apply for the . . . apply for money. 
 
So hopefully that doesn't arise too often and the conflict of 
interest guidelines work. But certainly that is a concern in a 
small industry, a small and new industry that we have in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So I understand this clearly, the conflict of 
interest form — the one that we were discussing in the House 
the other day when we were dealing with the individual from 
ACS working with the private credit agency, the private bill 
collector — that that same conflict of interest form will be 
applicable to everyone who's appointed to the board? And will 
your conflict of interest regulations apply to the federal 
members of this particular board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The conflict of interests will be 
adapted by the board. It will be a very standard . . . all boards 
operate in this manner. Anybody who wants to apply to the 
board is not ruled out, only they must declare their conflict of 
interest and not vote on issues that are pertaining to any interest 
that they have that might be in conflict with the fund. 
 
So that's very much the same as the ADF board works or any 
number of boards around the province work. If anybody has a 
conflict of interest they will be expected to declare those 
interests. And that would apply to all members of the board 
whether they're appointed by us or appointed by the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That's good to hear, Minister. I'm wondering 
if you would mind supplying me with a copy of the anticipated  

conflict of interest guidelines which you will be presenting on 
behalf of the provincial government to the newly nominated 
members of this board. I'm sure you must have something that's 
prepared for them because you're going to name them fairly 
soon, as I understand you. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we can get you . . . we'll get 
you something. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you. Well now that we've cleared up 
some of these issues surrounding the board, I want to get back 
to the object and purposes and some definition, I guess, of . . . 
because people have already asked me, for instance, how large 
of an individual do I have to be to qualify? 
 
If I'm on an acreage, for instance, if I'm an intensive livestock 
individual but I don't have a large land base, do I qualify to 
apply? Is there any limits here on the type of primary producer 
or secondary producer, the type of people that would apply for 
this thing to have access to the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There are certainly no restrictions 
on the size of individuals. They have to go through the normal 
process and talk through the sector committee, or however these 
are going to be brought forward. So they would have to follow 
standard procedures. Although it doesn't spell it out in the Act, 
the board may find ways to deal with small loans. I believe 
ADF has a special program that fast-tracks some smaller 
proposals that make it easier to access for smaller producers. 
 
But certainly there's no restrictions as to how small; in fact 
that's very much what the priority of this fund is going to be — 
it's rural Saskatchewan and value added right back to smallest 
level we can get, including some right on the farm. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just continuing on 
in that discussion, Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask some questions 
about the process that you perceive to be . . . or that will be in 
place with regard to making application for this money. Would 
there be limits, ceilings? Would it be prorated according to the 
value of the project? And if you could give me some of those 
kinds of answers, I'd like to hear them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Those will be determined by the 
board. What we anticipate is sector committees in different . . . 
six or seven sectors that I outlined yesterday that we think are 
priorities. And those sectors would come up with strategies and 
recommendations to the board as to how they best see targeting 
the money in individual sectors. So between the work of the 
industry itself in the different sectors and the board, those 
issues will be determined after the board is up. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well if I was to use an analogy, somebody 
maybe growing blueberries down at Eastend, Saskatchewan  
is that the kind of project that might get $150 because the 
project is smaller? Or would a biotechnical consideration from  



March 23, 1995 

 
1085 

say the university of Saskatoon or a research station somewhere 
in Saskatchewan with a project that will cost a million and a 
half dollars, will that receive different volumes of funding? And 
that's kind of the question I have. What do you use as a guide 
when people will be asking you to provide funding? In what I 
perceive to be a grant system, what do you hold as your view of 
what the world should be. Have you got parameters for that? 
That's what I'm asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This fund, by and large, will not be 
giving out grants to individual producers to actually produce 
things. What they're looking at is things that will help out the 
industry as a whole. So what they're more likely to do is to 
approve a project to research new varieties of blueberries or a 
mechanical harvester for blueberries, those sorts of things that 
will help the industry as a whole rather than helping one 
producer as opposed to another producer. 
 
And again those priorities will be discussed with the 
horticultural sector and where they think the . . . how that 
money should be targeted, be discussed with the board, the 
board will have a general strategy, and then proposals will be 
fitted into the strategy that the board has on an individual basis. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So kind of what you're suggesting then is that 
it would operate on the same basis as the Saskatchewan 
conservation group where they have this money allocated and 
then they divvy it out. Somewhere along the line the producer is 
going to get some impact on it, and he's going to get maybe an 
indirect reception of taxpayers' dollars. 
 
But is that the way you anticipate this working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I think that's a fairly general 
description. In general I think that's a fairly accurate 
description. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In what areas . . . you said that there were six 
areas. Could you give them to me again so that I could ask some 
questions about each one of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly. The six areas that we've 
targeted as priorities are: special crops, special livestock, 
horticulture, biotechnology, crop processing, food processing, 
and sustainable agriculture. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In the Bill it talks about general 
infrastructure. What's your definition of what that will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Some of the infrastructure that 
might be dealt with would be something for the biotechnology 
industry that is useful to the whole industry. Those sorts of food 
incubation centres that I talked about that we think might work, 
where we'd have some little plant or facility where somebody in 
the food processing business could go to get services such as 
pilot-scale processing or labelling or those sorts of things, lab 
facilities for some situations. Those are the sort of things, 
infrastructure, that might be eligible. 
 

Mr. Martens: — So you're talking in general infrastructure. 
You're talking about physical entities. You're not talking about 
people in an infrastructure and management. You're talking 
about a physical plant or something physical that people will 
use in a general sense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In the Bill you also talk about training. What 
is, in your mind, the requirement to increase the training 
component here? I guess in my mind there would be a lot of 
things that could be done — all the way from how to grow 
specialty crops in different areas. There's a lot of specialty crops 
being grown in the south-west; canola is moving in there fairly 
significantly and lentils and some of them. 
 
Is that the training process that you envision in this, and could 
you explain that a little bit to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that sort of training where it's 
training specifically to help with those sorts of things — special 
livestock, how to deal with ostriches, all of those sorts of things 
as the member has pointed out, plus training maybe for people 
to work in some sectors. An example of that might be at the 
Microgro greenhouse at Biggar; there's a need for quite a 
specialized labour force to grow with micropropagation of 
plants, and that probably isn't around. And so those sorts of 
needs could be dealt with from this fund. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Would there be an opportunity for training in 
dealing with the marketing of some of these specialty crops? 
For example, we have all kinds of things that have to be done 
when you shift from just traditionally growing wheat and durum 
and barley in the south-west to growing canola and how you 
market and deliver in those areas, and marketing opportunities. 
Would the money be able to be funded into that sort of a 
program as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly if that particular sector 
can identify the need for that and places it as a priority, yes it 
certainly would fall. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There are, as I recall, significant amount of 
training requirements, I guess you could put it that way, training 
requirements in the livestock sector as well. And I've travelled 
to different feedlots in Alberta — and I don't think we have too 
many that would be of comparable size to the ones I visited — 
but there they hedge the American dollar; they hedge the 
different other aspects like barley. They'll contract-buy their 
yearlings and their calves and they'll do all of those things. And 
that kind of training, I believe, is absolutely necessary. 
 
The other thing that I've discovered as I've gone to these places 
is that the majority of these people who are there are former 
residents of Saskatchewan. That's what I find the most 
interesting. I know that I visited at least a half a dozen of these 
feedlots, Strathmore, High River. If you take one of the big, 
classic ones that we often hear about, it's Lakeside Packers, and 
Garnet Altwasser is from Weyburn and his family is from there  



March 23, 1995 

 
1086 

— and those are Saskatchewan people, and there are lots of 
them there. So would that be also included as a part of this kind 
of a development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, it certainly would be 
included. On the cattle industry in particular there's $22 million 
in a western development fund that was set up last year and one 
of their targets is training for the industry. So it may be dealt 
with through that sort of funding right now, but certainly that's 
the . . . if an industry needs that sort of help and they identify it, 
that certainly would be one of the uses of the fund. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In many of the aspects of livestock, we have 
specialty livestock coming in, like you mentioned ostriches and 
we got elk and we got bison or buffalo. But what we need 
probably more than anything else is how to market these 
products in different places. And I know that the cattle industry 
has sent people to Korea, for example, to market. Is the market 
opportunity also a part of how you see this money being spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, certainly. And that is an 
obvious need for many of the sectors and so we anticipate that 
that would be one of the uses of it. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Martens: — In dealing with horticulture, I know that there 
were many times when the greenhouse industry was kind of left 
outside, you might say, of the normal agricultural process. And 
they have worked hard to become a part of the mainstream of 
agriculture, which I believe they should be. And yet it's 
technically very difficult sometimes to put a 20-acre 
horticulture or market-gardening enterprise in the same category 
as a thousand-acre farm or whatever. 
 
Is this . . . in your mind, does this have an opportunity for a 
strategy to develop a process whereby various things like their 
marketing opportunities could be developed, their financing 
opportunities could be developed, setting up a strategy on how 
to do that? Is that also in place in this instance in this 
development that we have in this agri-food innovation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, absolutely. One of the sectors 
is horticulture and it's certainly one that we have strong support 
of and feel it has a good potential and it's growing rather 
rapidly. Horticulture is, I think last year, something over $14 
million in product, which is certainly not large in comparison to 
other agricultural sectors, but has huge potential for growth as 
there are markets available in that industry. 
 
And so the fund will be working with the industry to try to 
figure out a strategy that meets all the needs of the . . . any 
roadblocks that are in place of that industry developing would 
be eligible for funding to overcome them. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I know that 
they've had a serious concern about a couple of areas. One is 
whether in the horticulture and in the market gardening . . . I 
recall a few years ago when we had a hailstorm go through the  

valley at Lumsden and almost totally destroyed . . . well it did 
destroy the majority of those people's products, and there was 
nothing available for them to recoup their losses either in crop 
insurance or anything like that. 
 
Would the minister think that some of these funds could be 
used to develop something that would be able to maintain the 
same level of protection that a grain farmer has in dealing with 
this? Would there be a way that individuals could access this 
opportunity to develop something that would be working for 
them as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I don't see that as being something 
that would come under the fund. I don't think it would be large 
enough to do that. We have been working in Crop Insurance to 
try to spread the coverage, and we introduced an option that 
would let some crops be covered, and we'll continue to work 
with Crop Insurance. 
 
As the member knows, Crop Insurance is up for review in a 
year, and hopefully we will be able to make it — if we can 
possibly design it — make it more and more responsive to other 
crops so that they at least are on a level playing-field with 
traditional agriculture. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I guess what I would have something of a 
concern about, in relation to this discussion, would be what 
kind of role are major players going to have in the dynamics of 
this fund? For example, Sask Wheat Pool, UGG (United Grain 
Growers Limited), large chemical companies; what kind of role 
will they have and what kind of access will they have? I know 
they will be able to deliver a lot of the, what you would call 
infrastructure, in dealing with personnel. But also in research, 
they'd be able to develop some of that. 
 
Will there be an opportunity to have, say, the smaller groups of 
people be able to access this equally as well as those larger 
ones? And what proportion of funding will you be looking at 
when you take a look at some of these major players, for 
example Pool and UGG and Pioneer and Cargill? Will they be 
required to put up a certain amount of funds in order to get 
funds out of here in dealing with various things that they want 
to research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The emphasis of this fund will be 
on the small industry players and will be on things that benefit 
the industry as a whole, and not business specific. Although 
you know if you were to do the food incubation centre or 
whatever, that might help specific businesses with specific 
projects. 
 
I think . . . and certainly there may be cases where large 
companies will want some help with research on a particular 
mechanical research thing, or whatever, that they are doing at 
the time. But there's less need for help with marketing and 
business plans and the sorts of things that small industry will 
need to get going. 
 
So very much the emphasis of this will be in the emerging  



March 23, 1995 

 
1087 

sectors and on the small-scale operations who will need the 
kind of help with getting together an operation and getting it off 
the ground, rather than large operations who can quite well do 
most of those things themselves. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Without getting into specific kinds of . . . or 
agencies that have made application to this, could you give us 
an overview of some of the things that have been either applied 
for or people you've talked to that would have some indication 
to you already that they would be interested in this sort of 
thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We certainly had a good number 
of inquiries and we have some ideas that we think would work, 
and some of the sector programs or the sector committees are 
identifying needs in the industry. But we don't have any 
applications at this point and there won't be any until the board 
is up and prepared to take them. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well you must have some premonition of 
what's going to be coming forward, otherwise you wouldn't 
have done this just on the sense that maybe there's going to be. I 
think you probably know which direction the products are going 
and which way they will be generally asking for you to provide 
funding for. And I was just wondering whether you could give 
the Assembly any kind of an overview of what has transpired so 
far. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly there are a number 
of needs that have been identified. 
 
One of the things that we hear a lot about, and as I have 
mentioned several times in the discussion here, is a food 
incubation centre. We have an awful lot of small food 
processors who are either very small and wanting to expand or 
are beginning . . . We have a person in Kelvington, close to my 
home town, that's making chocolate bars in his basement. And 
the need there is to help with packaging and marketing and 
labelling, and those sorts of issues. So the whole food 
incubation centre, some place to have some of those services in 
one spot. 
 
Horticulture has identified needs for mechanical harvesters for 
berries, a need for a specialized labour force. 
 
So going through the list, there certainly are a lot of ideas 
brought to us. A crop development centre who I met with 
yesterday is saying that they will need funds to develop varieties 
of new crops. They are into breeding chick-peas and fababeans 
and white beans and a whole list of crops where they, you 
know, used to have a fairly restricted number of crops. Now 
there are being demands for new varieties of a whole list of 
things. And so there may be a need for more funding in some of 
those areas. 
 
So certainly the member is right. There is a need there, and 
that's why we're trying to fill that need and we're setting up the 
fund. But the board and the industry will determine the 
priorities. I'm sure there will be more applicants than there are  

money and somebody will have to priorize, and that will be the 
board. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I know that there is a gentleman from a 
machining business in Swift Current that does market 
harvesters into different places for cutting small plots. For 
example, in other countries — India is where he's been, 
Pakistan  they don't have great big fields where they do their 
harvesting, and he's had to develop these plot harvesters almost 
like we would do on our research project here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Is this research and development component, could that be a 
part of that funding for infrastructure in allowing, for example, 
somebody to set up a plant, not knowing entirely how to do it, 
would there be money to be put into that kind of a 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly there might be. 
Again the focus of this fund is on value added and sort of food 
processing. So if it's machinery manufacturing for some other 
area, it's likely out of the scope. But if it's for some machine 
that can be manufactured for use in Saskatchewan for some of 
the new crops, then obviously it would qualify. And it might 
involve a grant to PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute) to help him develop prototypes of whatever. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
and officials. I'd like to ask you some questions related to the 
members of the fund, and perhaps you have answered questions 
on that already; I'm not sure. But it says within the Bill that at 
least one-third of whom are to be primary or secondary 
producers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find that one-third to be somewhat on the small 
side when you consider that Saskatchewan is a primary 
agricultural producer, that while we do have some secondary 
manufacturing — we certainly encourage more of it — that 
only one-third would be within that category. Why is the 
number so low, and who else would be sitting as a member of 
the fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the member is right; we have 
gone through this quite extensively. There will be 12 members. 
The Bill outlines that at least one-third must be producers in 
industry. That's a minimum. We anticipate there will probably 
be eight members that would be primary and secondary 
producers and four members who would be government 
officials — two from the federal government and two from the 
provincial government. That's the likely structure that we're 
trying to negotiate with the federal government. 
 
But the Bill itself sets out a minimum amount of one-third. We 
certainly anticipate that to be a higher amount. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you anticipate the 
number being eight primary or secondary producers and four 
from the government, what's the justification for having the 
government members on there? Can you please justify why it 
should be necessary to have the government members on there? 



March 23, 1995 

 
1088 

Other boards of a similar nature — I'm thinking of the horned 
cattle trust fund and that type, the red meat funds — are made 
up entirely of producers. Why, in this particular case, is it 
necessary to have appointees from the government? 
 
When we look at the health boards, it's certainly understandable 
why the government wants to retain the appointees on the 
health boards to carry out their reforms in rural Saskatchewan 
with health, because they're not popular with the people. 
 
But in this particular case, Mr. Minister, where in all likelihood 
quite a few of these things will be supported and promoted by 
the producers and the secondary manufacturers, is it necessary 
to have such a heavy representation from the government? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this Act 
hinges on a federal-provincial agreement. The federal 
government insisted on some representation on the board of 
government officials. We certainly wanted to be equally 
represented. We will be doing an awful lot of work in providing 
staff for the fund. I think we have, obviously, our strategy in 
agriculture that we're trying to carry out and we feel we need 
some input into that as well. 
 
We're negotiating with the federal government to keep the 
amount of government officials to a minimum in order to have 
a good representation of producers. I think, with the idea of 
working with industry sectors, we will get an awful lot of input 
from industry and from the different sectors not only by board 
members but by working with the industry through the sector 
groups. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. If you are 
going to have government people on the board — which I do 
disagree with — why not have one then each from the federal 
government; one from the provincial government? 
 
You say you need staff on there. Mr. Minister, staff are people 
you hire, not the ones that are on the board. So, Mr. Minister, if 
you want to have government people on there it should be no 
more than one federal and one provincial. And so why don't you 
mandate it; that at least eight of the people on here must be 
primary or secondary producers. Rather than one-third, make it 
two-thirds so that the people of Saskatchewan have the real 
representation on this kind of a board rather than government, 
both federal and provincial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well to begin with, Mr. Chairman, 
the board, as I pointed out earlier to your colleagues, is not 
going to hire staff. The Departments of Agriculture will provide 
staff and pay for them, and therefore that becomes important, 
but we cannot . . . as I pointed out earlier as well, this is a 
federal-provincial agreement. 
 
We cannot mandate how many people the federal government 
will have on the board if we still want to get their money. So 
this hasn't been just us designing this fund and Act; it's been in  

conjunction with the federal government. And they certainly 
want some representation on the board and we would like to at 
least have equal representation with them. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may indeed like 
to have members on the board. So when you're sitting down in 
negotiations with the Liberals from Ottawa, why do you 
negotiate that they get a third of the board, you get a third of the 
board, and the producer gets a third of the board? In your 
negotiations with them, negotiate one fed and one provincial, 
and the rest of them are the producers and the secondary 
manufacturers. 
 
Mr. Minister, you're the one who said that you had to have staff 
there on the boards. And I disagree, Mr. Minister. Staff are the 
people you hire. Now if that comes out of the Department of 
Agriculture, fine. But the board members should be 
independent of the department, of your administration. 
 
It's bad enough that they're being appointed by Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, the cabinet. But, Mr. Minister, they 
should at least be independent of your department and the other 
departments in government. So one person from the feds, one 
person from the province, and the rest from the general public 
as producers and secondary manufacturers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it's easy for 
the member opposite to negotiate when he doesn't have to sit at 
the table and do the real negotiation. 
 
Where we're starting from is tripartites and other things where 
it's always been a third, a third, a third on the board. We're 
moving the federal government to move more to producers and 
less to having government representation on the board. 
 
The member opposite says one from each government is the 
proper amount. We think two is not bad from each government. 
The federal government initially wanted a third. I think they 
have agreed that we will end up with eight producers and four 
government representatives on the board, which is better than 
we've had in past boards that have been structured in 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you said it's easy to 
negotiate from this side of the Assembly because I don't have to 
sit there. Well it seems to be pretty easy from your side too. 
 
You just admitted that the federal government asked for 
one-third and that's what you gave them. So what's so difficult 
about negotiating that? It doesn't sound to me like you 
negotiated anything. You simply . . . They said, we want a third, 
and you said, okay, fine, here's your third; away you go. 
 
Mr. Minister, negotiation means you start at what their level is 
at, one-third, and you get something different. So, Mr. Minister, 
if the federal government is prepared to accept two, is what 
you've said now, and you want two, well then let's change the 
Act so that two-thirds are producers or . . . are primary or 
secondary producers. You've admitted that the feds have agreed  



March 23, 1995 

 
1089 

to that. You want the same thing. So why don't we put in an 
amendment to change that then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The Act doesn't say one-third; the 
Act says a minimum of one-third. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — That's right, Mr. Minister, a minimum of 
one-third. So that means that you and the feds can both have a 
third on there. So why don't we change the Act and say that the 
primary producers will be a minimum of two-thirds? Which is 
what you said that they've agreed to now, and you want the 
same thing that they have. So that's two and two — that's 
one-third. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we 
negotiated one-third when we initially started. We have them 
now moved to two-thirds. I don't know that . . . at least they've 
agreed to do that. I don't know that they would agree to have the 
Bill changed so that it would be cast in statute. 
 
So if we get eight producers on a board that is all — as I might 
remind the member -- all government money, that, I think is a 
pretty fair representation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well you're wrong, Mr. Minister. It's not 
all government money; it's all taxpayers' money. And the 
taxpayers should be the ones that are represented on here. And 
in this particular board, that's the producers — primary and 
secondary. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you said you were negotiating. The federal 
government initially came down with a proposal of one-third 
and you accepted it. So, Mr. Minister, where was the 
negotiation in there? Now is the time to go back to them and 
say, we want this. You've agreed that government 
representation will only be one-third on the board; let's put it in 
the Bill. Why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the Bill includes 
$91 million. I think there are . . . that was not the most 
important part of the Bill. I think if we can get eight people on 
the board, eight producers on the board, that I think will work 
well. And whether or not it's cast in the statute or not, and if the 
federal government's not comfortable with casting it in the 
statute I would hate to risk $91 million over that issue. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, did you even ask? 
Did you even ask that the Bill be presented with two-thirds 
producer representation on the board? Did you even ask the 
federal government for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We have continuously negotiated 
for the largest number of producers that we could get on the 
board. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, what was your 
starting negotiating place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As many as possible. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — So am I to interpret then, Mr. Minister, 
that you started at 12 as the position you wanted to see as 
producers on the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we have negotiated 
this issue. We think we've got the best deal that we can get. The 
federal government has something like four branches of 
agriculture that they would like all represented on the board. 
 
And I think boards, tripartite boards in the past have worked 
with a third, a third, a third. I think with eight members from 
the industry and four from the government, we feel this will be 
a good board and it will be functional and that this will work 
quite adequately. 
 
And if the federal government had said it would go with one, 
we would certainly have welcomed that. They didn't, and I think 
this is still a very good mix of structure. And the industry will 
certainly get input. 
 
And as I point out, much of the input from industry will come 
from the industry itself — different sectors who will make 
recommendations to the board. So I think the industry will be 
well represented and this fund will do the job that it set out to 
do. We'll have reasonable people around the table, and they will 
make very reasonable decisions about where we go with new 
sectors in agriculture. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'd like to determine 
where you started these negotiations from. What position? Was 
it a position of that we'll accept whatever the federal 
government is proposing, or did you have an independent 
position as the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well if the member had paid any 
attention to the news, he would know that this was negotiated 
over a very long period of time and a very difficult, very 
difficult and very tough negotiation; and that the federal 
government at the last moment backed out of the safety net 
package and delayed five or six months while they did federal 
reviews in the Finance department and others in Ottawa 
reviewed the tentative agreement that we had. And we finally 
got an agreement signed. 
 
So this was obviously a long and tough negotiation, and I think 
if you look at the overall package that we've negotiated, 
compare it to what Alberta and Manitoba are now stuck with, 
with no NISA (net income stabilization account) for their 
livestock sector, only the one, two; one, one . . . two NISA for 
cattle . . . for the grains and oil-seed sector being out of the 
GRIP program when nothing to replace it and no $91 million ag 
innovation fund in either of those provinces, I think the fact that 
we might have one more government member on the board than 
the member opposite would like to see is a rather insignificant 
point. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you raised a couple 
of interesting points there before I go back to my original one. 
The NISA that you negotiated, Mr. Minister, the red meat  



March 23, 1995 

 
1090 

industry doesn't want it. They're not interested in it. They don't 
want your money. They want to be left alone. So you negotiated 
something there that they weren't interested in. 
 
The other point, Mr. Minister, you talk about what happened in 
Alberta and Manitoba with concern to GRIP. Well, Mr. 
Minister, the farmers in Manitoba and the farmers in Alberta 
got their GRIP money. They didn't have to worry about 
negotiating another agreement. They got it in their hip pocket. 
They went down and paid for their feed and their seed grain and 
their combine. 
 
But the farmers in Saskatchewan haven't got the money. You 
used it to balance the budget and ship $320 million back to the 
feds that they're turning around and saying, well we're going to 
give you back 300 or $350 million for transportation initiatives. 
 
Mr. Minister, that was our money. That was the farmers of 
Saskatchewan’s money — that the farmers in Manitoba and 
Alberta have in their jean pockets right now. 
 
So when you're talking about your negotiations, Mr. Minister, 
they were darn easy negotiations. Whatever the feds wanted, 
you gave them. And you turned around and gave them the 
money back to boot. That's what you did in negotiations, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And now I'm simply asking you: what was your starting 
position on board members when you entered these 
negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, from my 
understanding the federal government started out with the 
position of there being all government members on the board. 
We said that's not acceptable, and in the end we ended up with 
only four government members. 
 
So that's, I think, a pretty good compromise, and again, point 
out this fund is very important to the province of Saskatchewan. 
This fund is going to help our agricultural industry. We have 
$91 million and we will have a board that will spend this fund 
wisely and reasonably. And I don't know why the member 
would fight against what they pay lip service to in the House — 
that we should change, that we should diversify, and we should 
have value added, but, by the way, they would like to go back to 
'91 GRIP and they don't like a fund that helps farmers do that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, we found out finally 
at least what the federal government started off with as a 
position — all government members on the board. So that's the 
federal position. 
 
But what was the Saskatchewan position, Mr. Minister? Did 
you not have one? Did you just simply walk in there and say to 
Ralph Goodale: well, Ralph, what are you proposing; what are 
you giving us? Mr. Minister, what was Saskatchewan's position 
on board members on this Crown corporation? 
 

(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, as I've pointed out 
earlier, we wanted the most possible producer representation on 
the board that we could get. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Mr. Minister, was your opening 
position 12 board members for producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, our opening 
position was as many board members as we could get. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes or no, Mr. Minister, 12? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite has gone to extreme ridicule in his questioning. We 
started out trying to get as many producers on the board as we 
could get. I don't think that there was any hope or anybody 
would have expected the federal government to let us have 12 
producers on a board where they supply half the money to a 
provincial fund. They insisted on some board representation. I 
think we've got them down to two federal members on the 
board, and I think that was a pretty adequate negotiation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it's obvious you 
don't know what your starting position was, because you simply 
can't say, other than saying, well we wanted all we could get. 
That's hardly a starting position, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are glad though that you did get it down to at 
least two federal members on the board and then two from the 
provincial government. Fewer than that would have been better. 
But, Mr. Minister, we don't trust the federal government and we 
don't trust your government to maintain that level on the board. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, why don't you put that in the legislation, that 
it will be four government members — two feds, two 
provincial? You're saying that it has to be right now a minimum 
of one-third producers. Why don't you say it should be a 
minimum two-thirds producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Because, Mr. Chairman, we don't 
believe the federal government would agree to that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps you don't 
believe that, but have you ever asked them? Have you tried to 
negotiate with them? Have you approached them on that 
particular issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we could 
negotiate for the next six months over how many and who was 
on the board. Our main priority is to get $91 million, get it in 
the fund, get the board up, get the projects in, get the 
applications approved, and get on with improving agriculture in 
this province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, have you asked them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, this negotiation  



March 23, 1995 

 
1091 

took a long time; there were many, many negotiations over a 
long period of time. And as I've pointed out to the member, this 
was a very big package, a very comprehensive safety net. This 
was one small part that was negotiated in the whole deal. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure it's very 
comforting for the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, to know that our Department of Agriculture 
simply takes the word of the federal government and accepts 
their recommendations. And when they say, within what is 
supposedly called negotiations, this is what we want, we just 
simply stand up, salute, and say, yes, sir. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, under the board of directors where it says 
that: 
 
 The Lieutenant Governor in Council (which is the 

cabinet) may fix the quorum of the board. 
 
What are you proposing in that manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we would obviously take a 
recommendation from the board. I would anticipate likely 
would be 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 
definitive answer: likely 50 per cent. Mr. Minister, I think it 
needs to be a little stronger than that. So if someday the board 
shows up and they have five members present, what do they 
do? Phone over to cabinet office and say, can we have a change 
on that right today, because we've only got five people here and 
we want to have a board meeting? 
 
It's either one or the other, Mr. Minister. You have to make it 
definitive. What's the answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — When the board is established, we 
will meet with the board. We will get their input and we will 
establish a quorum by OC (order in council). If the quorum is 
established and it's not met, they obviously don't have a quorum 
and can't have a meeting. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you make the 
quorum of one and somebody shows up, they can have a 
meeting. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you're making the consideration for the 
quorum of the board, will you give some consideration to 
ensuring that 50 per cent of the primary and secondary 
producers are part of that quorum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If the board members feel that that 
would be helpful and useful, we could certainly do that. We do 
not want to hamper the board because the member opposite is 
worried about bogymen under the bed. We will give a quorum 
that's similar to other boards and it will function in that fashion. 
And again I assure the member if we have reasonable people, 
this board will function in a reasonable manner. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, the producers, have no problems with bogymen. 
They do have a problem with Liberals and NDPers though. And 
if they have the opportunity, Mr. Minister, to represent a 
significant portion of the quorum at any meeting, will be very 
important. 
 
If you designated at 50 per cent or one-third, as you seem to 
want to do in the other part of the Bill, then the government 
members, Mr. Minister, can simply control the board and the 
producers will have no say. 
 
But if the producers are at least . . . at least 50 per cent of the 
producers are represented in a quorum, then they do have an 
opportunity for input, Mr. Minister, which they may not 
necessarily have if you set the quorum too low and say that it 
doesn't matter who is there, because the producers might not be 
there when those decisions are made which will reflect on them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, it would seem 
strange that we would set up a board and go to the problem of 
putting producers on there if we wanted to somehow end run 
them and make decisions from a government point of view. 
 
This is very much industry driven. Again the mandates will be 
set up by sectors of the industry. Strategies will be developed by 
the industry. Needs will be assessed by the industry. The board 
will respond to specific projects within those mandates. The 
industry will be represented on the board. We're having again 
eight industry people on a board of twelve, which is certainly 
different than tripartite boards that we had with equal numbers 
from each of the two governments and the industry. 
 
So I think this goes one step farther than we have in the past 
with having more producers on the board, and certainly this will 
be reflected in the decision making of the board. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
when you were doing this negotiation, why would you allow the 
federal government to have the sole power to determine the 
winding-down in the fund? What kind of a negotiation is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what 
section the member opposite is referring to. If he's referring to 
section "12(e): the winding up of the Fund and the distribution 
of assets on winding up;" — what that clause says is that: 
 
 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may authorize the 

minister to enter into an agreement with the Government 
of Canada respecting the . . . operation of the Fund. 

 
And it may enter into an agreement to wind up the fund. If the 
provincial government has money in the fund and the federal 
government has money in a fund, it would seem to me to be fair 
that they could enter into an agreement to wind down the fund. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I found it rather strange, Minister, that you've 
told us you had this long negotiation because the safety net  



March 23, 1995 

 
1092 

structure had been significantly changed, that you guys had 
cancelled the GRIP contracts, and the feds wanted to get into a 
different ball game, and it's so much superior to everything else, 
and the outcome of this was this fund and some other things. 
And yet we have right in the Bill the fact that if one or the other 
party doesn't want to continue this fund, you can simply wind it 
up and split the assets. I mean that's not much different than you 
did with the GRIP money, Minister. 
 
So how in the world are we supposed to have any confidence in 
this negotiation you've gone into when, at the end of the day, 
you tell farmers that there's $91 million out there to be spent on 
ag diversification, and yet you both give yourselves an out so 
that one year from now, two years from now, whatever happens 
to fit the whim or the fancy of either one of you, you can just 
dissolve it and split the cash just like you did with GRIP. 
 
And I don't know why you wouldn't want to commit, Minister, 
that this money was cast in stone. I mean when you see what's 
been taken away and so little put back, why you would want to 
have the federal government with an out or yourselves with an 
out or anything else, given all the talk you've given in here 
about the long-term need for R&D and all of those things that 
are associated with bringing on a project like your flax fibre 
plant or all of the other ones you announced . . . and yet right in 
your own legislation you've got the outs Bill then so the two of 
you can scoot with the cash. Explain to me why you would not 
want to make the commitment, Mr. Minister, to spend this 
money on agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we have made that 
commitment, as has the federal government made that 
commitment, and signed an agreement. 
 
The member may want this fund to go on for ever; however that 
is not usually what happens to government funds. At some 
point . . . In this particular fund, there's $91 million; it's not an 
ongoing funding commitment by anybody. It's $91 million in a 
fund that's to be spent. And in five or ten years from now when 
that money is spent, there will need to be some winding down 
of the operation of this fund, and this provides for doing that. If 
there's $10 left in the fund in 10 years and the member wants to 
keep it in perpetuity, we could probably arrange that. But I 
think it's only prudent that you have a mechanism for winding 
down of operations, particularly ones that are finite in nature. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Or is this because, Mr. Minister, in the last 
three years you've already indicated to the House that the only 
money coming into it will be federal; and if the only money 
coming in is federal and they wish to renege on the 
commitment, that you've built an out for them in the legislation 
to allow them to do that? Is that not the real reason of why this 
is in here? Because the only money is federal money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If the federal government chooses 
to break their agreement and take the money out, they can do 
that. We have an agreement; the money will be there, we're 
assuming. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I just find it surprising that 
there would be any need for this section in here. You could 
have accomplished the same thing with a sunset clause, and you 
just simply said this program shall not exist after such and such 
a date four years from now and it will be sunsetted and it will 
be open to renegotiation. That would have been easy to do. That 
after the monies are expended over the four-year course, this 
fund will automatically cease to exist — not clauses that give 
either one of you a chance to cut and run, as you've done with 
some other agreements. 
 
And you may deny that you've done that, but in fact you have. 
There isn't a farmer in the province that doesn't believe that 
you've done that, that you reneged on an agreement and you cut 
and run and you split up the cash — which you did, you split up 
the cash. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, why would you put this in here and not just 
simply say at the end of the four-year period in time after the 
money's expended, this particular legislation is sunsetted and 
will be renegotiated, something to that effect? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well because, Mr. Chairman, the 
fund won't be spent in four years. The fund will be spent . . . the 
money will be put into the fund over four years. Probably many 
of these research projects will be approved over a five-year 
period and maybe a longer period. And I think for us to at this 
point say that the fund expires and ceases and desists at a 
certain date, is not possible. 
 
This will allow the fund to . . . the monies to be spent over a 
reasonable period of time. It will give what the research 
community has always asked us for, some reliable, long-term 
funding. So I'm certain that when this board is up that they will 
approve some long-term projects, and the fund needs to exist 
until those projects are done. And at some point, when the 
money is expended and there needs to be a winding down of the 
fund, and to get it off everybody's books. So that's all that that 
clause does. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, you just berated me for 
suggesting that I wanted this fund to go on for ever. I 
understand the commitments, and I didn't ask you about the 
commitments. If you've made a commitment, I fully expect you 
to live up to that commitment. What I'm saying is that at the end 
of the four-year period of time, you've made your commitments, 
that you would not make any further commitments. And I 
understand that. 
 
But I'm wondering why we needed this legislation with this out 
built into it. Because as I understand it — the sections here — if 
either one of you decide to pull the pin, you not only can pull it 
on the fund and divvy up the assets, but you can also pull the 
funding associated with third parties. That you can pull the 
funding associated with third parties. Because I see nothing in 
here that says that that commitment has to be lived up to. 
 



March 23, 1995 

 
1093 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That clause only deals with 
wind-up of the fund, and that is only prudent to have a wind-up 
clause in every agreement. And I think you'll find that, or 
should find that, in every agreement that governments do. 
Because if there's a federal-provincial agreement, and 10 years 
from now or 15 years from now, that is coasting along on the 
books and the auditors are saying wind this thing up, if there's 
small deficits or small amounts of money that need to be paid 
out, this allows us to enter into an agreement to wind them 
down. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — What you're saying to me is you're denying 
that the federal government, if they have a budgetary change 
two years from now and they are the only people putting 
continual funding into the program in '97-98, '98-99, if they 
make a decision to stop that funding, that they cannot do so? 
That they cannot invoke this section of the Act and withdraw 
from the fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, they have a statutory 
commitment to that money. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, you just said to me that you 
anticipate agreements being signed with third parties that may 
go beyond the length of the fund. Are you leaving that entire 
discretion to the members of the board to sign those contractual 
arrangements that would go beyond the predetermined length of 
this thing or will there be your ability through ministerial order 
in council to effect those contractual arrangements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, the Act gives that power only 
to the board. And we certainly would anticipate in the final year 
of the agreement, when there's $10 million coming into the 
fund, that some of that may well go out in projects that are 
funded over a five-year period, so it will take some time before 
the money's all expended. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, in order to maintain accountability in 
the tracking of that, if the fund is wound down in four years 
time by mutual agreement, you have contractual obligations that 
the board entered into, would those then show up in the 
Department of Agriculture, or would they go off to a different 
fund, or how would you maintain the integrity of the money as 
it is dispersed over those contractual periods of time if the fund 
is wound down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The fund would continue to be in 
place and continue to issue annual statements as long as there 
were funding in the fund that was going out over a period of 
time. It wouldn't . . . There would be no new money coming in, 
but if there was $10 million put in in the last year and some of 
that is spent out over a five-year time period, the fund would 
continue to issue annual statements until it's wound down. And 
that's when wind-up would occur — when all the project is 
done and all the money has been spent, then the fund needs to 
be wound down and the Act taken out of existence. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I was asked this very question at noon hour 
today, Minister, by a commodity group who were here on  

budget day, listened to the budget being presented, I believe 
lauded the government on innovation in agriculture that day, 
but have found it very difficult since then to get any straight 
answers as to the very questions I've been asking you because 
their particular industry will need a longer window to develop 
some things than what this fund would have in place. And they 
have said that there is just no answers at all coming out of your 
department or the federal people or anybody else as to the 
process and the guarantees that if they are successful with their 
particular project, the process that it will go through. And I'm 
glad today you're starting to tell us some of these things because 
obviously there's a lot of uncertainty out there. 
 
Have you or your officials made any indications to these people 
how quickly the review process is anticipated, how quickly that 
you think particular projects will get a look-see and sort of the 
pecking order that will occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As I indicated earlier, until we get 
the Act passed and agreements signed, we don't know exactly 
the time lines. As I said earlier, our best guess is probably 
May-June; we'll have a board in place. They will have an initial 
meeting. And the board will set the processes in place. We're 
not going to insist on the board having particular processes. So 
sometime after that, they will be receiving applications and 
reviewing them. 
 
So that very much will be in the hands of the board, as to what 
process they set up and how long it takes. Certainly we would 
want a process that is as short as we can get that still does an 
adequate job of properly reviewing applications. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I would like to introduce to the Assembly, 
through you, two friends: Werner Froese and his wife Suzanna. 
Werner is the executive director of the Mennonite Central 
Committee out of Saskatoon. They are here for a SCIC 
(Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation) 
reception this afternoon and evening and we welcome them to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — And why is the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Cline: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chairman, just not to be upstaged by the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose, I want to say that Mr. and Mrs.  



March 23, 1995 

 
1094 

Froese are constituents of mine so I want to join with him in 
welcoming them, and in fact I'll be having dinner with them at 
the SCIC banquet tonight at Da Lat By Night Restaurant. And I 
look forward to that as well as seeing their display in room 218 
which anyone can see between 4 o'clock and 6 o'clock. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister . . . and I 
had to leave the House for a short while and the member from 
Morse may have brought this up, but it is also a concern to 
commodity groups and others who are dealing with federal 
research dollars right now. 
 
As you know, there is a potential cut-back occurring in Ag 
Canada on the research side and there is a lot of shifting going 
on of professional personnel and that type of thing who have 
been dealing with a number of value added projects — plant 
breeding, other things in the province of Saskatchewan — 
which are now in some question and jeopardy. 
 
I know Swift Current research station and others are really 
starting to scramble. Do you have assurances from the federal 
government that none of that offloading on the research side, 
which they are now downsizing, will not end up as part of the 
commitments of this fund, to pick up existing research and 
secondary processing contracts which the federal government 
through its various agencies — PFRA and others — have been 
involved in but now because of budget cuts appear to be 
starting to back out of? Do you have an assurance that these 
will not enter into this in the way of offloading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we have that assurance. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. Because it's something 
that is troubling to farm groups in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Minister, is there anything in the recent federal budget, the 
federal Department of Agriculture budget or associated 
agencies, that you see as being problematic with implementing 
some of your planned initiatives here? 
 
There are announcements coming out almost on a daily basis of 
things that are changing. Do you see anything at all in the 
federal budget changes that could affect implementation of 
some of these strategies, either through this specifically or Ag 
2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well there is a $60 million 
adjustment fund that they've announced for western Canada, 
and we're certainly wanting to be awful sure that we get our 
share of that. And we're going to fight very hard that we don't  

. . . we get at least . . . we get our share, because we're certainly 
being the ones that were most hit by the federal budget in terms 
of Crow. 
 
Certainly cuts to WDO (western diversification office) may 
hurt, slow down the carrying on of our Ag 2000 strategy in that 
there may be less capital available for some of the new projects. 
The Crow is going to take capital out of Saskatchewan. You 
take $320 million out. 
 
I think it heightens the need for us to move ahead with these 
sorts of things, heightens the need for us to carry out our 
strategy. But it will also probably reduce the amount of capital 
available and maybe the optimism in some areas of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So certainly there aren't any direct hits in research. They've 
assured us that they won't offload because of this fund. And we 
certainly see problems on the horizon, but we've made progress 
in the last two years on Ag 2000 and we absolutely need to 
make more progress in the next few years. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Could you elaborate, just so that I'm more 
knowledgeable when speaking. You mentioned the $60 million 
transition, and I presume that you're talking about money that is 
being provided because of the changes in safety nets and other 
things. Could you elaborate further on that $60 million for me, 
and the parameters that it's going to work under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The details on that, as are details 
on most of the federal budget, very vague at this time. We know 
that there's a $60 million fund. There's another $300 million for 
transportation adjustment. We know very little about that, either 
in specifics or when the money will be available or exactly what 
the priorities and criteria will be. We're talking to the federal 
government on an ongoing basis to try to determine what those 
are. But at this time it's very vague. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Can we assume, Minister, that your — we 
spent some time on bargaining positions here — that your 
bargaining position in regard to that would be at least similar to 
Saskatchewan's traditional share, for instance, of the 
agricultural land in western Canada or traditional share of the 
Crow benefit? Or have you come to some conclusions as to 
where you would start negotiating so that down the road when 
that thing finally comes to this House, whenever it is, that we 
have some idea of sort of where you're coming from on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The $60 million is a national fund 
so, you know, we will certainly struggle. I think traditionally on 
safety nets we, in Saskatchewan, have gotten close to a third of 
national safety-net money. And so we'll use that as a basis. 
 
On the $300 million on the transportation adjustment, 
Saskatchewan traditionally has gotten about 56 to 58 per cent of 
the Crow benefit. We feel we should get a higher percentage of 
that than that of the $300 million. We have most of the branch  



March 23, 1995 

 
1095 

lines, and obviously we're going to have the biggest adjustment. 
And therefore we think we need the lion's share of that money, 
and we'll be arguing for that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Do you anticipate, Minister, the $60 million, 
which is a national program, when it is finally parcelled out, to 
be in the hands of government or in the hands of actual 
producer groups affected by the changes? Sixty million dollars 
across Canada isn't a lot of money if we end up with our 
traditional allotment, which you said would be a third, which 
would be approximately $20 million. Do you anticipate that 
coming back into Department of Agriculture, or would that be 
targeted by mutual consent or agreement to specific areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We wouldn't anticipate it coming 
to provinces, nor would it likely be paid out to individual 
producers. It might be to replace the programs that they've cut 
— AIMS (Agriculture Institute of Management in 
Saskatchewan, Inc.) program, the Farm Debt Review Board, 
some of the things that they're cutting — maybe for replacement 
programs for those for all we know. 
 
But it might be for something in the biotechnology industry or 
. . . and I don't really know what the criteria are for it. As you 
say, $60 million for the whole of Canada in agriculture is a 
very, very small amount of money and the criteria so far are 
very vague. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, this question was also asked of me, 
actually at lunch today. The mandate of the Bill is fairly broad. 
Would there be room, do you believe — and I understand the 
board will make the final decision — but do you believe there 
would be room on the ag innovation side to deal with issues 
surrounding transportation of value added goods from the 
province of Saskatchewan out of our jurisdiction? 
 
Do you think that that would fit the mandate as you have laid 
out in this particular piece of legislation? Because I understand 
that the negotiation period for this was done prior to the 
changes to the Western Grain Transportation Act. And I'm 
wondering if your mandate is sufficiently broad to cope with 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly we wouldn't envision 
this as being a transportation subsidy that would be paid out. 
But it could be used for transportation things if there were some 
need to run a short-line railroad and need some research into 
how to run it in order to market a certain product, or how you 
containerize herbs and spices or raspberry jelly or whatever in 
order to get it to market. In transportation, in that sort of area, it 
certainly would qualify. 
 
But we don't envision this thing as being a subsidy and certainly 
it's not a big enough fund to replace the Crow benefit or 
anything of that nature. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — It was specifically aimed at some of the 
north-south transportation corridors which are being developed 
in conjunction with municipalities, route associations, and  

others that are looking for alternative ways of moving product 
to market out of this province, as opposed to either going to the 
west coast or out the St. Lawrence Seaway. And these groups 
are very active, especially now, and have known about this fund 
since budget day. 
 
And I was specifically asked if the criteria would be such that 
the movement of . . . and most of these are value added goods 
that they're talking about — not raw grain, for instance — 
moving into those north-south corridors that till now have not 
had large volumes of material moving. But because of the 
transportation costs now looking more attractive, they are being 
actively considered. 
 
But they are very light on the cash end to be able to do some of 
the research that's necessary to start moving products that didn't 
traditionally go that way. But they are now saying that that has 
to be a viable alternative for producers in this province in order 
to do the diversification that they need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If they're talking about research for 
setting up transportation systems or finding markets there, then 
certainly that would qualify. Wouldn't qualify for building roads 
or paying a producer subsidy. But certainly, if you're talking 
about research into transportation and how to move the 
products out, that certainly fits very well into the mandate of the 
fund. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay. And I go back to a question I asked 
you the other day. We at present in this province have a 
problem, and there's a number of producers have run up against 
it where they are running counter to the Canadian Wheat Board 
Act. 
 
And I think of flour-milling and some other initiatives 
surrounding value added products of board grains that at 
present are being prohibited from marketing those products 
outside of the boundaries of Saskatchewan. Some of these 
individuals are the ones that are very instrumental in moving 
. . . trying to look for different marketing methods, of moving 
their product more cost-effectively than they've done at present. 
 
And I asked you, would there be any bias in the research and 
stuff done with this money if it was that issue that was part of 
the problem. And you said I shouldn't be against the Canadian 
Wheat Board. And in my mind it's got nothing to do with 
whether I agree with the Wheat Board or not. We've got some 
jurisdictional problems that are preventing producers in this 
province from moving product. And I'm wondering if there's a 
built-in bias in this $91 million that says that those type of 
people should not apply or should not even think about having 
access to this money because of the conflict with The Canadian 
Wheat Board Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well to begin with, I believe the 
Canadian Wheat Board is reviewing some of their policies, and 
hopefully you will make room and accommodate those sorts of 
things. But if the food processing industry deems that that 
research is necessary, then certainly it would be eligible and  



March 23, 1995 

 
1096 

there would be no bias against it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm glad to hear that, Minister, because I 
think you very well might get people applying to this fund to 
have some assistance in doing that. Some of these people have 
identified some pretty lucrative markets, both in North America 
and outside North America, and they have to get this product 
across international boundaries, and they have to get it in places 
where it can be used. 
 
And right now they're prohibited from doing that, and I'm glad 
that you've given me assurance that there will be no bias at all 
from either yourselves or the federal government to have them 
apply to this fund and have the same type of recognition that 
others do. 
 
And I think that you could probably set a pretty good example if 
we led the way in pushing some of these issues. I find the 
Wheat Board to be rather . . . very bureaucratic and slow 
moving at times when it comes to issues concerning its own 
internal workings, and change has not been something that has 
been easily achieved with those people without an awful lot of 
pushing and shoving. 
 
Minister, I want you to clarify something I asked you yesterday. 
You said that the $18 million came from the '94-95 budget year 
and was moved over in the '95-96 budget year with a further $9 
million from this budget year being attached to it. 
 
Is it your anticipation that the board will be prepared to use a 
good majority of that money in the early stages of its mandate 
to get some things happening rather than sort of wading into 
latter years and then obviously running into contractual 
arrangements that may run well beyond the mandate of the 
board. Is it your hope, I guess, that they would be very active in 
taking the majority of that principal and starting initiatives with 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly that would be our hope. 
As I said earlier, with the change that's occurring in rural 
Saskatchewan with the demise of the Crow, we will need to 
move as quickly as we possibly can on this. And I think as long 
as there are a lot of good ideas coming forward, the money will 
get spent quickly. And I believe there certainly are a lot of good 
ideas out there that can use up the money. 
 
Just to clarify the member's . . . yesterday he asked about where 
the $18 million shows up. It is statutory, but it shows up not in 
Finance's budget, but if you look in the Supplementary 
Estimates for '94-5, it shows up in the Department of 
Agriculture as $18 million. So that was a question that we 
weren't able to answer yesterday. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So that money will show up as a vote then, a 
separate vote in the Department of Agriculture. Is that what 
you're saying, that when your estimates come forward, that's the 
way that you'll bring it forward in this particular budget year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The 9 million will show up in a  

separate subvote in the '95-6 budget. The 18 million will show 
up in the supplements of '94-5 budget. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In those 
supplements . . . I don't believe they've been tabled yet, or have 
they? Do you know whether they have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, it's my understanding they 
have been tabled. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Going back to the role of the board in dealing 
with some of their responsibilities, a thought came to me about 
marketing . . . and I'm in favour of all the initiatives that we can 
get in the marketing side of agriculture because I believe that 
that's the way to go. The horned cattle trust fund I believe has 
people out marketing. Is this going to be able to be used by 
agencies like that in order to do their continuation of their 
marketing? Is that going to drive this as well . . . or be driven by 
this, I guess, could be the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we will be trying to avoid 
doing things that other funds are doing. We are targeting this 
primarily at some of the new and emerging sectors. And as I 
pointed out earlier, there is $22 million in a western 
development fund for beef, and a lot of that will go into 
marketing. So it's not . . . I don't think it's outside the mandate 
of the board, but it may not be a priority. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Since this estimates . . . on the supplementary 
estimates deal with Agriculture and Food . . . and there's $18 
million there. How can you authorize something after the fact in 
relation to the fact that the supplementary estimates have the 
$18 million in them? And the estimates that we'll be talking 
about in the new year, how do you perceive this working? Is 
this carry-over going to be able to be done? 
 
Let's say this Bill hadn't gone through by April 1; is there 
retroactivity in the Bill to provide the opportunity to put the 
money back into the fund if it comes after April 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, there is not retroactivity in the 
Bill as it's drafted. The $18 million is put into estimates 
because, as the member opposite said yesterday, they wanted to 
see this in the light of day and that the auditor needs to see it, 
that the public needs to see it. And there it is, $18 million. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So if this Bill isn't passed by April 1, is the 
legal entity able to receive it after the fact because it's not there 
before April 1? Is there a transfer of the funds to an entity that 
doesn't exist . . . is the question that I have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I don't know what would happen 
to that, where the money would be transferred to. I assume there 
could be a hold-up in getting the fund up and running. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Was the federal government and its 
involvement in the method of funding put in a position where  



March 23, 1995 

 
1097 

they have absolute control of the funding from now on? Like, 
you said two years, 18 and 9, and then it's federal government 
funding from there on. Is there a finish line on what the federal 
government is proposing to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — They will have a commitment of 
$64 million over a four-year period, and I think it's lined out of 
the time they put it in. I think the agreement is that we spend 
their money first so that it has to be put into play before ours 
gets spent in the years where we have overlap. 
 
Mr. Martens: — You're putting 18 in now, and in the next 
fiscal year you're putting another 9 in. Does any of that money 
have to be spent in proportion to the funding that comes from 
the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So what are you anticipating spending in 
1996 . . . or '95-96 out of this fund? If you're thinking that 27 
million has to go the four years that the federal government is 
involved, you're going to have $27 million sitting there for the 
whole period of time. And what's your budget estimate on the 
volume of dollars that you're going to spend in 1995 and 1996 
in the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well by '95-96 we will have in 27 
million. The federal government will have in 10 so that's a 
maximum of 37 million. Again the decision will be up to the 
board, but if there are applications coming forward and 
worthwhile projects, it's certainly possible that most or all of 
that could be spent in '95-6. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So you're anticipating that $37 million is 
going to be spent in '95-96? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well that will be put into the fund, 
and it would be the board's decision whether or not how much 
of it gets spent. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well in your role in relation to the board as 
the minister, are you going to be on that board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So the board will be totally independent. 
They will draw the budgets and do all of the things that are 
related to the responsibilities of the board. They will have the 
decision made up by that whole group. And the 37 million — 
how will that be presented to you? In the form of a budget? Or 
how will you get to have an overview of what's going on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We will receive a business plan 
from the board. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I'm sorry, Mr. Minister; I didn't hear that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We'll receive business plans from 
the board so that we know what their plans are and what they're  

doing. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Does the board have the ability to run a 
deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is it outlined in law that it doesn't? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It doesn't have borrowing 
authority, so it doesn't have the money. It would be very 
difficult for them to run a deficit. 
 
Mr. Martens: — When it sets up its budget, it will then have 
the limitation of the budget in terms of its ability to manage its 
own affairs within its own framework? And because this may 
be a two- or three-year project, your possibility of running a 
budget or not running a . . . sorry, running a deficit is somewhat 
at risk I believe by the fact that you're going to have a staggered 
amount of payments, a staggered amount of contracts coming 
forward, review of new projects coming in. And you can't finish 
off a year on a project and say it's done because lots of these 
projects are going to take two or three years to have a complete 
evolution of them, or they take that long to evolve. 
 
Is the board . . . do they have the authority to meet those 
requirements by that decision of the board, or do they not have 
the authority to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The board has the authority to 
commit the $91 million over four years. They obviously can't 
spend more than 37 in the first year because that's all the money 
that they will have. So remember these commitments; many of 
them will be over a period of time. But they cannot commit 
more than $91 million, nor can they spend more than the 
amount of money . . . spend the money any faster than it's paid 
in from government. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Will you be putting your deputy minister on 
this board to be the individual who provides the balance 
between what your department is prepared to involve itself and 
the other groups of people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We haven't made that decision yet. 
There will be probably a deputy or assistant deputy or 
somebody of that nature to be on the board. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is he going to be the chairman of that board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We'll likely have a co-chair with 
the federal government, so they will appoint somebody as 
co-chair with somebody from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is it anticipated that that co-chair would be 
from within Saskatchewan? The people who would be 
co-chairing a committee like this should not be from outside of 
Saskatchewan, I believe  number one  and probably 
definitely not from the minister's office in Ottawa or his staff 
there. I think it would have to be somebody here. Have you  



March 23, 1995 

 
1098 

discussed this with them as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we have. And it will . . . 
there's a good probability that it may be the chairman of PFRA. 
But certainly I would anticipate that all the board members 
would be from Saskatchewan, even if they're federal civil 
servants . . . that they would be Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is the audit responsibility going to be handled 
by the Provincial Auditor or the federal auditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Both. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the 18 
million, as I understand it, and the 9 million are to be spent in 
this fiscal year. How long do you expect to have the board start 
up in dealing with getting this whole thing going? 
 
If the 1st of April is the day this thing is proclaimed or the 10th, 
how long do you think that it's going to take before you get the 
board up and running? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I've answered that 
question, I think, three times already. We anticipate having the 
board up by May-June, in that time, so that it'll be functional to 
start taking applications at that time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — You'll be taking applications and they'll be 
providing funding in various areas as it comes through the 
system. How long before you anticipate the board's decisions, 
or the board being made up and the board making some 
decisions on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Anticipate that to be a fair time 
lag. It will take some time. That process will be up to the board. 
Certainly it will take some time. The board will have to meet, 
will have to set up some criteria and develop strategies and then 
take applications and then approve projects. So again it will 
depend on the board. We will be pushing for it happening as 
quickly as possible, but it needs to be done properly, and it will 
take some time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, so if I read 
this from a political perspective, you're going to set the board 
up, and then by the middle of June you're going to start making 
some promises as to what you're going to deliver. That's what's 
going to happen. Sometime after the election then you're going 
to have a conclusion and say well this didn't necessarily pan 
out; we can probably deal with a deficit and the debt problem a 
little bit more rationally if we have this money left over. 
 
So none of the board's recommendations are approved. What do 
you have to say to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I wish the Premier would be 
as free with me as he is with you as to when the election's 
coming. But as I said earlier, the board will be May-June before 
it's established. They will take some time to set up a process and 
set up some strategies as to how they want to deal with  

applications. So I would not anticipate any applications being 
before the board in June. It certainly will be sometime after that 
before they even begin to accept applications. 
 
So if that's the time line, I guess it'll have to miss the election. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well we have had . . . You get $64 million 
from the federal government over four years under this 
program. Can you tell me how much, in comparison, you gave 
back to the federal government on their GRIP premium, their 
share of the GRIP premium? How much did you give back to 
the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I didn't give back anything to the 
federal government. They took back a chunk of their GRIP 
surplus, and some of it they agreed to spend in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Martens: — How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The federal share of the GRIP 
surplus was in the neighbourhood of $320 million. They put 
back into safety nets and ag innovation fund, I believe — and I 
don't have this number handy — but from my recollection it's 
about $153 million. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Martens: — So they took back $320 million. Is that what I 
heard you say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, that's not what you heard me 
say. Their share of the GRIP surplus was in that neighbourhood. 
They spent less than . . . I believe less than half of it on ag 
programs in Saskatchewan, including the $64 million 
enhancements to NISA and the top-ups to NISA and the 
top-ups to the grains and oil-seeds program. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, they were committed to 
that anyway. They were committed to that in any case. And 
what we have here is they gave it up so that they could plug it 
back in and they didn't have to take any more money out of their 
revenue . . . Department of Finance. That's why they did it. 
That's exactly the same reason why you did it. And that's 
exactly the same reason why we have complained about this 
forever and a day. 
 
Now you talk about bringing new money in. It isn't new money, 
Mr. Minister; it's the farmers' money. You picked the pockets of 
farmers. You did it without even blinking. You picked the 
pockets of farmers and you're giving them a nickel back here 
and a nickel back there. They had that money coming from you, 
Mr. Minister, and you took it away on them. 
 
And that's what has the farmers irritated about this. They could 
have . . . would they have given to this kind of a program the 
185 million or 189 million that you took away from them? 
Would they have been prepared to do that? Not likely, because 
that is going to go pay some of their bills. 



March 23, 1995 

 
1099 

The federal government took back theirs — $320 million. And 
you say they gave them back? Well that's not the way the 
farmers have it sized up. That's the new NDP math; that's the 
new Liberal math — we'll take it from you and we'll give back 
half. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or less. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Or less, as the member from Moosomin has 
said. And that's the truth of the matter. 
 
So you get $64 million out of them for this program. It should 
have been $320 million, Mr. Minister. In fact your own 
estimates show that next year that the total revenue . . . or the 
total net farm income is going to be down $300 million. 
 
Wouldn't it have been nice for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan to have had that opportunity to be exactly on the 
same level playing-field with Alberta or Manitoba? But you 
gave that back to the federal government, and you can come in 
here and say oh, we just . . . they took back half . . . or they took 
back their share and they gave us half back. That's the same 
argument you use when you talk about the $189 million. 
 
That's NDP math in my book, and the farmers don't like NDP 
math because they remember the whole program of GRIP in the 
first place. And, Mr. Minister, the people in Alberta and the 
farmers in Manitoba and Alberta, they had a whole different 
view of the world. That, Mr. Chairman, is the reason why we 
have a concern about how you finance this thing. 
 
It's the farmers' money — it's not yours. It's the farmers' money, 
the primary producers who have the total impact in providing 
you with the money. This isn't your money. This is the money 
that you took from the farmers in '92 and '93 and '94. You took 
that from the farmers, and now you're giving them back $27 
million out of $189 million. 
 
Shake your head, Mr. Minister. That's the way they're doing the 
math. You're giving them back $27 million of their money. 
That's their money — it's not yours, except that you took it away 
on them. You took it and pilfered their pocket. You took it 
away on them, $189 million. 
 
And you said to probably . . . this is the discussion that probably 
went on with the Minister of Agriculture: you said, well if you 
take your 320, then I'll blame you for what you did. And I'll take 
my 189, and we'll both go home and give the farmer back his 
share of the premium and then everybody will be happy, and 
maybe we can just kind of slide this through. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the farmers don't like that. And you want to 
know why the budget deficit at zero and surplus didn't sell out 
there? I'll tell you why. Because you didn't tell them straight. 
You didn't tell them what the truth was, Mr. Minister. 
 
You said here it is. And then they went and looked underneath 
and saw it and said 189 million went directly from their 
premiums that they were entitled to and that you took away on  

them and gave it back into the Minister of Finance's pocket. 
 
That's the reason why you balanced the books, Mr. Minister. 
And we say on this side of the House, the farmers in the 
province . . . this money right here is their own money, Mr. 
Minister. And why do you have the right to take it away from 
them, first of all, and then define for them how they would get 
it back? 
 
That's what you're doing. You're taking the money from them in 
the first place, $189 million; you're giving 27 back and saying, 
now I will tell them exactly how I'm going to do it. And if we 
hadn't started asking the questions on how this money was 
supposed to be financed, in which year, you'd even try to sneak 
that through the system. 
 
And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the reason why we are raising 
a concern about this Bill. Because the farmers are getting back 
their own money that they should have had equally distributed, 
not with you defining for them where that money should be 
spent. And that, Mr. Minister, is why we don't like what you're 
doing. 
 
Now should we be against research? No farmer is going to be 
against research. That would be the last thing they would say. 
But you know what? You're doing this, you're doing this, Mr. 
Minister, with their own money. You're doing it with their own 
money. And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why we have a 
complaint about it. And it will be a while before you get this 
legislation through because we're going to talk about this a long 
time. And Mr. Minister, that's the kind of thing that has 
bothered us. 
 
Now you tell me why you wouldn't allow the farmers each to 
have in their own pockets the $27 million that you're going to 
put in this budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't need a 
lecture from the other side on how to do mathematics. At least 
we do our math in black ink, not red ink; I can tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the members 
opposite continue to try to ride both sides of the fence. They're 
saying yes, we need to change, we need diversification, we need 
value added, but we should take the money and put it back into 
the old '91 GRIP program. And that's their policy. 
 
Oh, we're not opposed to research and development, we're not 
opposed to change, but you should take the money and pay 
farmers to grow crops — the wrong crop — and do a poor job 
of growing it. And that's their agriculture policy, Mr. Speaker. I 
don't believe that that has any hope or any exchange at all in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
People are past back to '91 GRIP, back to paying people to 
grow wheat and not to diversify this economy. People out there 
want us to help them diversify, help them to adjust, and help  



March 23, 1995 

 
1100 

them to adapt. And that is exactly what direction we're going. 
 
And the members opposite stand here and say, well we're not 
opposed to research and we're not opposed to change, but we're 
opposed to the Bill that does it. Mr. Speaker, I don't know how 
you square that circle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't have to square it. 
The farmers in the province of Saskatchewan have asked me 
over and over and over again why did you balance the whole 
provincial budget for this year on the fact that you took 189 
million out of their GRIP program. And then, on top of it, Mr. 
Minister, you shuffle 320 million to eastern Canada, and then 
we get 154 back — 154 back. 
 
And the member from Rosetown-Elrose is really irritated by 
this because he is the guy that did it. I don't understand why you 
would defend the kind of things that he did to agriculture. His 
name in the province of Saskatchewan is at the bottom of the 
barrel, Mr. Minister. And I'll tell you what, his position in this 
Assembly is liable to be threatened by the very actions he took 
because in his constituency those are the grain-growing areas of 
the province and they didn't like it, Mr. Minister — and they are 
telling us. I don't even have to go campaign on that basis 
because they are doing it for me. And that is the kind of thing 
that he did. 
 
Now, the research stations across this province are looking for 
money, Mr. Minister. Individuals from the research . . . people 
in the province have said to me, the federal government is 
cutting back. They're cutting back and they're cutting back. Well 
if the farmers are going to give them the money in the first 
place out of their revenue insurance program . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Minister, I have lived in the future 
far more than the member from Rosetown has because he is still 
an NFUer (National Farmers Union) and I have never been one. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is 
the reason why he is still living in the past, because he thinks 
the Canadian Wheat Board should be exclusively one-desk 
selling. And there are a whole lot of people in this province 
who disagree with him — vehemently disagree with him. And 
he's the guy that set up the past in dealing with how the Crow 
should be paid. 
 
There are people across this province who have had a whole lot 
of better ideas than that member from Rosetown-Elrose had, 
and that is the reason why he isn't going to be re-elected in this 
next session of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, people from across this province have called me 
and said . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order, order. Now we seem to have a 
number of members wanting to help the member for Morse ask 
the question, and we seem to have a number of members 
wanting to help the Minister of Agriculture answer the  

questions. And . . . Order. Order. Both members are quite 
capable of doing their task, and I'll ask the members of the 
committee to allow them to do that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to point out 
to the Minister of Agriculture this very simple problem that 
exists in research in this province. You gave back — or you 
took back — 189 million and you shuffled 27 back to the 
farmers — their own money. 
 
Then you turn around and you give back, allow the federal 
government because you set the standard, you set the beginning 
of this. They give you or they take the money back and you give 
or they give $154 million back for the province of 
Saskatchewan, of which this is 64. And that's spread out over 
four years. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the individuals who are in research in this 
province have been cut back significantly this year by the 
federal budget. You didn't even negotiate to the point of giving 
them equivalent to what the farmers gave back in their premium 
of 320 million. The farmers in Saskatchewan now have to 
cough up, of their own money, the volumes of dollars to do 
research in Saskatchewan. 
 
That is ludicrous, Mr. Minister, and the member from Rosetown 
was the guy that started it. The guy that started it and put it into 
place and that's the reason why the people in the province have 
no use for that. And, Mr. Minister, how could you, honestly and 
with some decency and integrity, have negotiated that amount 
of money away from the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
That's my question. Because this research is very little in 
comparison to what we could have done with that 400, $500 
million actually, Mr. Minister, that was entitled to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, it's good to see the 
members opposite laying out their agricultural strategy. Their 
strategy is they would have stayed in '91 GRIP. Our farmers in 
the last two years would have been like Alberta farmers, paying 
8 and $9 premium and getting no money back. 
 
Alberta is now getting out of GRIP. Manitoba will be out of 
GRIP. Everybody will be out of GRIP. The only people who 
still think that GRIP is a good program are sitting there opposite 
and the provincial Liberals. 
 
Those are the only two parties left in the world who still think 
that '91 GRIP is a good program. And I'll tell you if we would 
have had '91 GRIP we wouldn't have money for this Bill. And I 
don't know how you can continually stand up and say, oh yeah, 
we're in favour of change and we're in favour of research but we 
shouldn't spend any money on it; we should have put it all into 
a program that paid farmers to do a poor job of growing the 
wrong crop. 
 



March 23, 1995 

 
1101 

(1645) 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By leave, 
I would move that the Assembly now turn its direction to 
private members' public Bills and orders, under adjourned 
debates, item no. 2, Bill 33 — An Act respecting the Donation 
of Food, be now read a second time. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No 33 

 
The committee resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the 
Donation of Food be now read a second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I had made a few comments on second reading, and I 
just want to just finish my remarks if I might, with just a few 
more wrap-up comments. And I want to indicate again my 
appreciation to the official opposition for this Bill. 
 
We, I think, have indicated clearly along the way that we intend 
to support the Bill. We will make just a few minor punctuation 
suggestions to tighten it up a little bit, but won't recommend 
that we change anything. And I will provide the official 
opposition with a copy of those suggestions tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we of course have done our own consultation 
which we're obligated to do. And we've consulted with the food 
banks in Saskatchewan, with the other provinces in terms of 
this legislation — the five other provinces who have the 
legislation — and I think it's fair to say that there is a fair 
amount of good will in the Bill. 
 
So whether it will make a big impact in terms of the increased 
amount of food I guess remains to be seen. But hopefully that's 
the case. 
 
I guess the main point I want to make today though, Mr. 
Speaker, to reiterate a point I made last time, is that while I 
respect the fact that the Leader of the Official Opposition is 
coming forth with this Bill and I thank him for that, I think it's 
very important to be consistent throughout the session with 
regard to other measures that will help low income people and 
people living in poverty. And I would say that this budget 
which clearly by any objective standard . . . clearly this budget, 
for example, provides more respite services to families. And I 
would expect that the members opposite will be inclined to 
support that kind of initiative. 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the child action plan, specifically the child 
development and nutrition program which is responsible for 
directing about a million dollars to school lunch programs, and 
is very much related to the spirit of this Bill, that is to providing 
support for low income families while we continue to have the 
economic development job creation strategy which is working 
very well. We obviously need some short-term strategies as 
well, as this Bill is designed to do. 
 
But secondly, many of the initiatives in the child action plan 
which are designed to get food to hungry children, I would 
anticipate to be consistent, they will be supportive of that Bill 
as well. 
 
The summer jobs program, the new money going into the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, the new money going into 
northern mining, there's money in this budget that would help in 
the long term, help low income people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that to be 
consistent about his new-found interest in low income people, 
that he might consider withdrawing his Bill where he's 
attempting to take, you know, prorated benefits away from 
part-time people, working people; that he would give some 
though to, if he's going to be consistent, to withdrawing that 
Bill; that he would quit attacking the fair wage policy which 
gives an opportunity for working men and women to access 
employment so they can . . . People want jobs; they don't want 
charity. They want long-term jobs and that's what we think 
we're doing in the budget. 
 
So we will support the Bill, Mr. Speaker. But I will ask the 
members opposite to also be consistent on other measures that 
most Saskatchewan people believe will help low income people 
if you're going to be consistent. So that would be my only plea 
to you. 
 
And I know that you will give these remarks consideration. So 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 p.m. 
 
 


