






















































April 20, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 20, 1995 

 

 
1621 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
today to present from Foam Lake, Sheho, Bankend, Wishart, 
Redvers, Antler, Glen Ewen, Eston areas of the province, Mr. 
Speaker — actually from across the province. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights), which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions that have been sent in from the Maple Creek 
Composite High School. And the prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, these are all from the Maple Creek 
area and were solicited and delivered by the students from the 
Maple Creek Composite High School. And I'm happy to table 
them today. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition here and I'll just read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these signatures are from the Fox Valley, Maple 
Creek, Swift Current, all through that area. I would like to lay 
them on the Table. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
here. The prayer says: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And they're here from Fox Valley, Richmound, and Maple 
Creek. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

adequate funding to the double-laning of Highway No. 
1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to support the proposed Battle Creek dam 
project. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to urge 

SaskTel to expand the Sask Valley long-distance 
boundary. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
session I began by introducing some of my family. This year I'm 
going to start on the second half, and that's not . . . this won't be 
all of them by a long ways yet. 
 
But first of all, one of my twin sisters — this is a bit confusing, 
because she's actually my sister who is a twin but not actually 
my twin sister — is here from Dawson Creek, B.C. (British 
Columbia). If she'd stand up, with her daughters, Andrea and 
Katrina. And my youngest brother, Ian Sonntag from Goodsoil 
. . . and I see his wife has just walked out with the baby,  



April 20, 1995 

 
1622 

Raquelle, and Jillian and also Paul and Johnathan are here as 
well, who are also outside I guess having a look at the 
legislature. And also with them is Virginia Wilkinson. 
 
So if you could welcome all of them please here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to members 
of this House, a close friend of mine, a constituent of mine, in 
the east gallery. I direct . . . that's that Kenny 
Rogers-looking-fellow up there. His name is Ben Heppner. 
 
And I've known Ben for a long time, Mr. Speaker. He's a 
teacher, having taught in Rosthern, Duck Lake, I believe in 
Hague, in Waldheim. He's the principal of Waldheim right now. 
He's a farmer. He is also part owner of the John Deere 
dealership in Rosthern. I guess nobody's perfect, Ben. But also 
he is the mayor of the town of Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, and after 
the next election I will feel very privileged to be able to be a 
constituent of his. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all of you members to please warmly 
welcome Ben Heppner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Prince Albert Co-operative Association Ltd. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, if there is a group in our 
province that defines us as a society, I would argue that it's our 
co-ops. Founded on the principle of cooperation, mutual 
self-help, and economic efficiency, our co-ops and credit 
unions have been the heart of both our cultural and economic 
development. 
 
In particular, I would like to congratulate the Prince Albert 
Co-operative Association for its economic success and its active 
community involvement. In 1994 the P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Co-op and its six branches in the surrounding communities had 
sales of more than $44 million and profits of $3 million. 
 
The P.A. Co-op paid cash dividends of $1.3 million to members 
in Saskatchewan, not to outside investors. 
 
As the member from Pelly said recently, if our smaller cities 
and towns are declining somebody forgot to tell the P.A. Co-op. 
Its membership grew by 894 members to over 17,000 members 
in total. 
 
And already this year, Mr. Speaker, sales in 1995 are ahead of 
last year's so much that by mid-1996 the co-op expects to be 
completely debt free. As well they put money back in the 
community — $57,000 last year for scholarships, hockey 
tournaments, and student education in the co-op movement. 

I congratulate the members, the board, the management, and 
employees for this success. And I thank them for their 
continued involvement in the life of our community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 
like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly two guests in your gallery this afternoon, Bonnie 
Moncrief and Dorothy Kostyna, both of the Saskatchewan 
landlord association. And they're visiting us this afternoon from 
Saskatoon. If everyone would help me warmly welcome them, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Organ Donor Awareness Week 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Easter is a time we 
reflect on the enduring message of our faiths — that out of 
death comes life. 
 
It is appropriate then that this week be proclaimed Organ Donor 
Awareness Week. Thanks to modern health care, Mr. Speaker, 
the Easter miracle is re-enacted several times. 
 
Currently there are 2,000 Canadians awaiting organ donations. 
They and their families pray constantly that many Canadians 
will consent to being organ donors. By focusing attention on 
this greatest act of charity, it is hoped that many people will 
realize a sudden death may somehow benefit others in a 
miraculous way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several organizations in Saskatchewan 
which do their best to promote organ donations. Among these 
are the Saskatchewan Coalition for Organ Donor Awareness 
and the Saskatchewan Transplant Advisory Committee. These 
people work hard for Saskatchewan citizens awaiting 
transplants, scanning North America's sources for possible 
donors. 
 
At this time I wish to commend all those associated with organ 
donations. Because of their efforts, the Easter miracle lives in 
all of us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 20, 1995 

 
1623 

Youth Science Foundation 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am pleased 
to recognize a grade 12 student in my riding who has achieved 
excellence in the field of science. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may remember that yesterday I made a 
statement on the regional science fair in my area. Well this 
person was the winner of the regional science fair last year and 
participated in the Canadians. And Jason Leuschen of Bruno 
Central High School will be joining 31 other top high school 
science students from across Canada in representing our 
country at the 1995 International Science and Engineering Fair 
in Hamilton, Ontario in May. 
 
This is a great honour for Jason who has won many awards for 
his project entitled: artificial intelligence. Jason has constructed 
a prototype mobile robot to facilitate the testing of artificial 
intelligence programing theories. He then implemented an 
adaptive learning program to test the robot's ability to function 
in an unstructured environment that hopefully one day may lead 
to a breakthrough in intelligence programing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these team Canada members will have an 
excellent opportunity to prove themselves internationally at this 
competition in Hamilton. This science fair will attract 1,000 
high school students from 30 countries. The students will be 
competing for some 600 prizes valued at more than $1 million. 
I would like to extend my best wishes to Jason and his team 
Canada colleagues at this international competition. His science 
and engineering skills are truly amazing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Charges Against MLAs 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
make a few comments about the last couple of days. They have 
been, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly about the hardest days of my 
life. And it seems to me like I'm walking around in a shadow. 
Or it can't be happening to me; it must be happening to 
somebody else. But the reality of it is I am involved. 
 
A person's reputation is built up over many, many years. And as 
I have found, it can come crashing to asunder in a few 
moments. And that has a tremendous impact on me, but 
because of the support of family, friends, we will prevail, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately, an incident like this casts a pall upon all 
politicians at a time when we desperately need the sense of 
integrity and trust in people. Unfortunately it also casts a pall 
upon this institution, an institution that I have over the years 
come to love and appreciate, and also casts a cloud over you, 
my colleagues. And whatever role I have been perceived to 
have played or have played, I just simply want to pass on my 
regrets, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Disabilities Directorate 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 
bring attention to a small yet worthy branch of government, the 
Disabilities Directorate. It is estimated that 19.1 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents have some form of disability. The 
Disabilities Directorate was established to assist these people 
achieve full social and economic integration. 
 
One of the important functions of the directorate is its 
employment referral services. Résumés are kept on file and 
used frequently by the Public Service Commission when 
looking to fill positions targeted under employment equity 
programs. Participants in this service receive information about 
public service careers, résumé preparation, and staffing 
processes. 
 
The Disabilities Directorate works to raise awareness by 
providing workshops, collecting resources, and developing a 
speakers' bureau. It also acts as a contact point for groups 
representing people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several issues face people with disabilities. These 
include access to education, employment, and better 
coordination of government programs. The Disabilities 
Directorate is helping our government to meet the challenge of 
ensuring that disabled persons can participate fully in all 
aspects of society. 
 
For their work on behalf of the disabled, and the government, I 
wish to commend them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wolseley Trade Fair 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Wolseley Chamber 
of Commerce does an excellent job of promoting business in 
the local community and this Saturday the chamber will be 
hosting their annual trade fair. This trade fair will be held at the 
Wolseley sportsplex. I have had the pleasure of attending these 
trade fairs in the past and they offer many valuable services and 
information opportunities for the public. 
 
There will be more than 50 displays at this year's trade fair and 
many communities will be represented including Wolseley, 
Indian Head, Grenfell, Regina, Fort Qu'Appelle, and 
Montmartre. The displays will include such things as 
commercial booths, items for your home, personal care items, 
environmentally friendly materials, and local businesses. 
 
The Wolseley High School SRC (student representative 
council) will be providing entertainment for children 
throughout the day including a puppet show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this trade show will run from 10 in the morning 
until 6 in the evening and I'm sure many people from the local 
area will be attending this event on Saturday at the Wolseley 
sportsplex. 



April 20, 1995 

 
1624 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Charges Against MLAs 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, yesterday 
you released information regarding charges against eight former 
members of this Assembly. This is well before the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) released their communiqué 
this morning. 
 
You also indicated that you knew who the charges were against. 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us when you knew these charges, 
how you came about this information, and why you released it 
to the media before the RCMP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to the member for that question. I was briefed on this matter by 
my deputy minister late on Wednesday afternoon of last week, 
and I was briefed orally. And I believe it is correct that the 
charges were in fact . . . the informations were laid last week, 
although I haven't seen any of them. So I don't personally know 
that. 
 
In the media scrum yesterday, I took it that the media already 
knew that there were 11 charges laid and so I said there were, 
although I refused to disclose the name of any of the members 
who were former members of this House. And I couldn't 
remember them all anyway and I didn't want to start blurting out 
names for fear of naming someone who in fact wasn't charged 
or naming some and not naming others. But I believe that the 
documents were out for service by the RCMP. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly if 
you were being briefed by Justice officials regarding this 
investigation during its four-year span, and can you tell us to 
what extent this information was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I believe that I was not briefed with 
respect to the progress in any of the investigations that are the 
subject of the member's question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, you claim that you had limited 
knowledge of this investigation, that your government did not 
participate directly or indirectly in the laying of the charges. But 
I'm wondering if you could explain to the Assembly today why 
a letter written by the NDP (New Democratic Party) member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on July 28, 1992 in The 
Assiniboia Times . . . and he talks about investigations. 
 
And in his letter, the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) says the investigation and the laying of charges was 
a hot topic amongst caucus members, and he says, and I quote: 
 
 The deeper we dig, the more corruption, the 

malfeasance we are finding. If more arrests and trials are 
indicated, we shall continue to lay charges. 

Now, Mr. Minister, this member lately has had a penchant for 
telling the truth. 
 
Mr. Minister, were you part of the caucus then? And I'm sure 
you were. Did you lead these discussions? Were you part of the 
digging that the member refers to? And if not, can you explain 
this very explicit statement by one of your NDP back-bench 
MLAs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot. I have not seen 
the letter, nor have I participated in nor have I heard any 
discussion among caucus members along the line that the 
member mentions in his question; so I'm at a loss to give any 
explanation at all as to the contents of that letter. 
 
I might add that I have never had any discussion with the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg with respect to any of 
these matters. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, just a minute ago you 
told this Assembly that you have been briefed, not in regards to 
the individuals that you singled out yesterday, but to other parts 
of the investigation. Mr. Minister, obviously this back-bench 
MLA must have been informed about something. 
 
Now you've always assured this Assembly that your 
government and you personally never had anything to do with 
this. It's apparent, Mr. Minister, that over the four years of this 
investigation, that you have known something. And I'm 
wondering if you could tell us why the charges are being laid at 
this particular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — With respect to the last line of the 
question, Mr. Speaker, I have no idea why the charges are being 
laid at this time. I was briefed on this matter, as I have already 
told the House, on Wednesday of last week in the latter part of 
the afternoon. And that was the first indication I had that any 
such charges were being laid. I had absolutely nothing to do 
with the timing, and I just can't provide any information to the 
member as to why charges were laid on one day as compared to 
another or one time as compared to another. 
 
My office, nor any other office in the government system, has 
no knowledge of the conduct of investigations nor the decision 
to lay charges nor the timing of charges. 
 

Health Services Advertising 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question to the Minister of Health, or maybe I should put it 
more appropriately to the Premier of the province. And my 
question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is this. Mr. Premier, your 
government has spent its entire term attacking the health care 
system in this province, and now we see on the eve of an 
election you're trying to tell people what a great job you've been 
doing. And we also note you're using taxpayers' money to push 
that message. 
 
Mr. Premier, why are you sending out brochures to  



April 20, 1995 

 
1625 

Saskatchewan households to try and sell your destruction of the 
health care system; why are you doing it now just before an 
election; and how much are taxpayers paying for this election 
propaganda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I actually 
wasn't anticipating being able to answer this question today but 
I see I have an opportunity. I was out visiting people in my 
constituency and several people brought to my attention the fact 
that they would like to have more information on the new kinds 
of services provided under health care. And I had in fact made a 
note to myself to come back and suggest to the Minister of 
Health that we really needed to do a little more in this area, 
because although there is many new kinds of services available, 
people weren't aware of them. 
 
And of course the important part of any new system is that 
people know how to use it. It's very difficult to proceed with 
setting up a new range of services if you aren't able to access 
them. 
 
I might add that contrary to your view of dismantling, in the 
Nipawin Journal of Wednesday, February 22, a Mr. Ted 
Azevedo, president of a national seniors' organization, 
mentioned that the government should be congratulated because 
for 25 years he fought to get home care and less hospitalization 
and institutions. But the government of the day wasn't interested 
because everybody wanted hospitals, and it took a long time for 
us to smarten up — his comment. 
 
So I would just add that I think as health reform evolves, people 
need to know how to access the system. And the public have 
indicated that they feel that informational materials are a 
responsible and a necessary part of health reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while I 
thank the minister for her comments in place of her colleague, it 
would be apparent that the Premier has ducked the question. 
 
And, Madam Minister, it also would appear that while your 
constituents are asking for some information, I find it very 
convenient that all of a sudden we have a nice, glossy brochure 
floating out to the people of Saskatchewan, talking about a new 
era in health care services. 
 
The unfortunate part, Madam Minister, and Mr. Premier, is you 
neglected to tells the whole story. You forgot to mention the 
number of people across this province that have been affected 
by your cuts. You forgot to mention the 52 hospitals you 
closed. You forgot to mention all the increases — fee increases. 
You forgot to mention all the services you've deinsured. 
 
Madam Minister, or Mr. Premier, why doesn't your brochure 
tell the whole story? Aren't you simply using taxpayers' money 
to try and correct your dismal health record on the eve of a  

provincial election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would 
just seem that you can't win with you fellows. You either don't 
want information, you do want information; you don't want 
change, you do want change. 
 
You know darn well that hospitals weren't closed. There were 
some underutilized critical care beds that were closed. And 
aside from that, there was a number of conversions providing a 
much broader range of health services than were available 
before. So instead of paying $300 a day for an empty bed, we 
now have some actual services in place that people need. 
 
It's been our goal to develop a sustainable health care system. 
And the way that you sustained it was by overspending by a 
billion a year. Now we've made a commitment to people in 
Saskatchewan to live within our means. Health care spending 
was increasing at 8 per cent a year. And what we've tried to do 
is create a sustainable system that will provide people with a 
core of services that meet their needs and develop a healthy 
population. 
 
I just would have to ask you, what is it that you want? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I guess it's unfortunate 
that you're unable to answer that question, that same question 
that most people are asking: what are you offering? 
 
You tell us that you've got such a good record. Well I'm afraid 
the Speaker would cut me off if I tried to go through your 
record through the past number of years. 
 
Talk to the people in Langenburg. Talk to the people in Beechy. 
Talk to the people in Vanguard, Macklin, Kincaid, many 
communities across this province, and ask them if they have a 
better health care system today. 
 
Your brochure, which is political propaganda using taxpayers' 
money, really concentrates on home care. And while home care 
is a good program, it's not the answer for everyone. Your 
brochure doesn't mention all the patients who are being pushed 
onto the home care system even though they really need 
hospital care. Your brochure also mentions your gambling 
addiction services, and we know how those are escalating. You 
forgot to mention it was your government that created the 
problem in the first place. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you only telling half the truth? I 
believe, Madam Minister, all you're doing is just telling the 
half-truth your followers want to hear, not the whole truth. And 
why are you using taxpayers' money to do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1626 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
suggest to the hon. member opposite that he occasionally look 
at newspapers from outside Saskatchewan and get some sense 
of what's happening in the rest of the country. 
 
Who in this country, besides a government that has acted 
proactively as we had, is going to protect medicare against an 
American-style system that's high cost, low coverage? We've 
seen where Mr. Klein is talking about selling hospitals to 
private interests. This is exactly the kind of thing that we're 
trying to prevent here in Saskatchewan. And I suggest that you 
get on board before our system deteriorates to the level of our 
neighbours to the south. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGEU Health Benefits 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we 
raised questions about the contract offered to SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) which includes 
a whole list of health care benefits no longer available to the 
public. 
 
The government has wiped out the prescription drug plan, 
reduced coverage for diabetic supplies, chiropractic treatment, 
and even oxygen, Mr. Speaker. Ordinary people who now have 
less to live on have to pay for critical health services out of their 
own pockets. But, Mr. Speaker, all of these things and more 
will be reinstated for the government employees' union when 
this package is ratified. 
 
Of course my question today is to the minister responsible for 
the Public Service Commission. Mr. Minister, please justify this 
offer to all of the people of Saskatchewan who do not and will 
not have this package. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I would point out to the member what I 
believe she already knows, Mr. Speaker, and that's that the 
package provides a broad menu from which a joint board to be 
composed of equal number of representatives of the employer 
and the SGEU will select up to the limits of the money that is 
available. 
 
So the member, by trying to create the impression that all of 
these benefits are available to all of the people, is creating quite 
the wrong impression, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is that we left it up, as we always do . . . leave it up to 
the unions to determine how they will take the amount that 
we're prepared to pay. We determine the kind of a package that 
we were prepared to offer. They could have taken it in wages. 
They could have taken it in part wages and part benefits. They 
could take it in all benefits. They elected in this case to take it 
all in benefits. 
 
Now we work with them over the course of the next 18 months 
or so to try and work out what particular benefits from among 
this list will they choose to be incorporated into the package for  

them. And I think that is a very reasonable solution to a very 
difficult negotiation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister may try to defend his government's 
offering in this agreement. He's responsible for the offer he 
made, so I understand that he feels obligated to defend it. 
 
But let's look at how this lines up with health care benefits to 
public employees in other provinces across Canada. And in 
particular let's look to our next-door neighbours. Civil servants 
in both of those provinces participate in a Blue Cross program 
for which the employees pay a significant share. 
 
SGEU employees are not the only ones who did not get a pay 
raise in this country and in other provinces. And in fact in those 
next-door neighbouring provinces, they actually had a roll-back 
of their incomes. 
 
Now I would like the minister to explain please, explain to the 
taxpayers of this province, why the Saskatchewan government 
can afford to offer its employees a more costly health care 
benefits package than either Alberta or Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I would seriously doubt, Mr. Speaker, 
whether our package is that much more costly, or more costly at 
all. I would have to . . . I would not take the member's word for 
that; I would require some proof of that. 
 
We have been able now to negotiate two collective agreements 
providing for a lot of zeros and a very, very modest wage 
increase in the third year of the first agreement, and in effect, no 
wage increase now. We calculated that very carefully, and we 
did a lot of comparisons between wage rates in Saskatchewan, 
wage rates in Alberta, wage rates in other jurisdictions, and 
devised a bargaining strategy that we felt would be fair to the 
people who worked for government and yet would be requiring 
them to make the same kind of contribution to the deficit 
problem that we faced when we took office. We think we've 
achieved that. 
 
The cost of living has gone on increasing for years. Public 
servants in this province have lost ground to the cost of living. 
They're in a much worse position now than would apply in 
normal times when wage increases would protect employees 
from increases in the cost of living. 
 
So we're not ashamed of the package. We think we did a good 
job. Furthermore, the collective bargaining system in this 
province worked. We didn't have to come here and legislate any 
roll-backs or legislate any agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, this is simply about fairness. 
It's about fairness in the province of Saskatchewan for all of the 
people here. And it's not incumbent upon me to supply  



April 20, 1995 

 
1627 

information; it's incumbent upon the minister to provide to the 
taxpayers of this province and this House the costs to the 
taxpayer of what is being offered. 
 
Now I'm sure that every MLA in this legislature has received 
the kinds of letters that I have. Letters from diabetics and others 
— people who are struggling to pay for their insulin and other 
supplies. And here's a quote from one of those letters, Mr. 
Minister. I quote: 
 
 My medical costs now cost me three to four shifts of 

what I work a month. Out of the 10 shifts I work a 
month (that he can get) I must feed my children. So 
what should I give up? We need to eat and I need to take 
insulin to survive. 

 
Now there are almost 35,000 diabetics in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, and they all have the same story. 
 
By offering this in this agreement, your government has chosen 
to provide SGEU workers with up to $1,000 per year for 
insulin. And I'm asking you this: how can you possibly pass 
judgement that SGEU employees who are diabetic deserve help 
to pay for insulin more than anybody else in the province of 
Saskatchewan? In other words, why don't you treat people's 
needs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I'll let the minister answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there we go again. 
We're assuming that everything on that list is going to be 
provided. And I tried to explain to the member and I'll do it 
again slowly, slowly. 
 
That is simply a list of benefits that will be considered by the 
joint committee. From that list will be selected those which will 
fit within the parameters of a very modest, a very modest 
amount of money — very, very modest indeed. 
 
Now is the member suggesting that we ought not to have tried 
to get a collective agreement with our employees? Is she 
suggesting that collective bargaining, as between the 
government and the employees, is dead? Is she really criticizing 
us when she knows, Mr. Speaker, when she knows that we're 
delivering government services in this province at substantially 
less cost than our neighbours either to the west or to the east. 
And she knows that to be the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that's not a bad record. We're doing the best we can. We 
believe in the collective bargaining process. We believe in the 
integrity of the public service. There are a lot of men and 
women out there who are working hard, under very difficult 
circumstances, to provide services to the people of this province 
and we want to treat them fairly. Is the member suggesting we 
should not treat them fairly, should not try and reach 
agreements at the table, but instead use some other ham-handed 
approach to trying to resolve this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Canadian Wheat Board Monopoly 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, the province of 
Alberta has recently set up a steering committee to implement a 
plebiscite on changes to the Canadian Wheat Board monopoly. 
 
We know where the NDP government stands on these issues, 
Mr. Speaker. They love the monopoly power and they don't like 
the public to have any input on these issues. So I think we all 
know what the minister's answer will be. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you are contemplating 
a plebiscite question here in Saskatchewan on dual marketing 
and the role of the Canadian Wheat Board? Yes or no, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the 
member for that question. No, we are not contemplating a 
plebiscite in Saskatchewan. We might have a chance in this 
House to have a debate on that, and maybe the members 
opposite would care to put their position on the line as to where 
they stand on Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We believe that the Alberta government is opposed to the 
Canadian Wheat Board, and wants to do away with the 
Canadian Wheat Board, and is manipulating to put a phoney 
question on which will not be a fair question if they do have a 
plebiscite because they know very well who'll win the plebiscite 
if they do it with a fair question. 
 
And we saw that with the advisory elections and other issues, 
that certainly farmers in the province of Saskatchewan support 
the Canadian Wheat Board. We know that and we support our 
farmers here. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You're quoted 
in today's paper as saying you fear the wording in an Alberta 
vote when they offer the option of dual marketing. Mr. 
Minister, if you're so confident that you have the right position, 
why do you fear putting a question to the public in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
To put it your way, if producers want dual marketing, then 
neither you nor any other government should stand in the way. 
That's what you said in the paper. Why not get out of the way, 
Mr. Minister, and let Saskatchewan farmers have that 
plebiscite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, what the government 
in Alberta is trying to have the producers there believe is that 
they can have their cake and eat it too. They believe that you 
can have dual marketing and that they can allow producers to 
cherry-pick the market in the United States when that's higher, 
and then be back in the pool when that's not higher. That won't  



April 20, 1995 

 
1628 

work; it's not a workable system. They know it won't work; they 
just see it as one more step to demolishing the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
If we want to have a plebiscite on the Canadian Wheat Board, 
the question would be very simple — do you want a Canadian 
Wheat Board or don't you want a Canadian Wheat Board? 
 
The answer to that is also very clear — Saskatchewan farmers 
want a Canadian Wheat Board. And if the members opposite 
don't believe that, there's a plebiscite coming up sometime 
within the next year. Put that policy on the line and see how 
many seats you win in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I find it very 
disturbing that you believe you and your government colleagues 
have all the answers, and farmers out there are such dummies 
that they might indeed vote for a dual marketing system. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you so afraid of? You're quoted in the 
paper as saying that any changes to the board should be 
approved by all producers, not just Albertans. Well, Mr. 
Minister, put your money where your mouth is and why not find 
out whether Saskatchewan producers approve of changes to the 
Wheat Board. What are you really so afraid of? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again we are not 
afraid of anything and we do not believe Saskatchewan 
producers are dummies. They developed the Canadian Wheat 
Board; they supported it for years; and it's been a marketing 
system that's worked very well, and they certainly like to have it 
change and keep up to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say the same thing to the members 
opposite that I said to Charlie Mayer when he said to have a 
plebiscite. I said, you have an election; let's have it out there. I 
think the answer was fairly clear on that plebiscite. I think the 
answer will be very clear on the plebiscite that's coming up in 
rural Saskatchewan sometime in the next year or so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negative Option Sales Strategies 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for Justice. Mr. Minister, today I will 
be moving first reading of a Bill to amend The Unsolicited 
Goods and Credit Cards Act (Negative-option strategies.) 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to expand the protection of 
consumers under the existing legislation. To be more specific, 
Mr. Minister, this Bill will prohibit negative-option sales 
strategies within Saskatchewan, and in turn will protect the 
consumers from civil action suits derived from non-payment. 

Now we are all aware of the heavy-handed methods employed 
by Rogers Cablesystems that aroused consumer outrage and 
drew media attention to the problem associated with this 
marketing method. Closer to home, cable customers in 
Lumsden were forced to gather names on a petition to prevent 
their cable company from engaging in similar tactics. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you agree that Saskatchewan residents should 
be protected from negative-option marketing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
that excellent question. 
 
My understanding is that . . . as he has said, they will be 
introducing . . . he will be introducing his legislation into the 
House today. We'll take a long, careful look at that legislation. 
It's a very interesting and very topical question, and we're 
prepared to give it serious consideration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — With leave, to introduce more guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this time my real twin sister has 
just walked in. My sister, Maureen Sonntag, from just out of 
town here, from Kronau, and she also came in with my two 
nephews, Ian's two sons, Johnathan and Paul. And they were 
out looking at the legislature while we were . . . during question 
period, so I'd advise all of you to check your offices because 
there will be fingerprints and things all over the place. 
 
So anyway, if you just stand up, and I would like all of you to 
join in welcoming them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Unsolicited Goods and 
Credit Cards Act (Negative-option strategies) 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of An Act to amend The Unsolicited Goods 
and Credit Cards Act (Negative-option strategies). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1629 

(1415) 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm pleased to rise today to move second reading of a Bill to 
amend The Income Tax Act. This Bill introduces policy 
changes announced in the budget. They are changes which 
provide tax relief to Saskatchewan taxpayers, improve the 
competitiveness of the corporate tax structure for 
Saskatchewan's manufacture and processing sector. Changes 
which I want to say, Mr. Speaker, are producing dramatic 
results, as we witnessed yesterday in Saskatoon with the 
announcement of an expansion in Flexi-Coil which will provide 
100-or-so new jobs, high-paying jobs. These are good jobs  
100-or-so new jobs each year for the next several years. 
 
The Bill also introduces technical amendments required by the 
federal government in its administration of the provincial 
income tax system. 
 
As announced in the budget, the province has entered a new era 
of balanced budgets. This has been accomplished through the 
efforts and hard work of the Saskatchewan people. Everyone 
contributed to eliminating the deficit. In return our government 
gave two commitments. 
 
Our commitment was that we would work to eliminate the 
waste and the reduction . . . and reduce the cost of operating 
government. This is being achieved as evidenced by the 
reduction in the cost of running government by over 75 million 
since 1991. That is a record, Mr. Speaker, which is unparalleled 
and unique in the annals of recent Canadian history. This year 
we further reduced these costs by an additional 5 million. It is 
an achievement which is unique, unparalleled, and one which 
the Saskatchewan public should be very proud of. 
 
As so often has been the case, Mr. Speaker, it is left to one of 
Canada's smaller provinces — Saskatchewan — to give 
leadership to Canadians in showing how to deal with general 
difficult problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Our second commitment was that as 
our fiscal circumstances improved, the tax burden would be 
reduced. I'm therefore pleased to announce that as part of this 
Bill, and as was announced in the budget speech, I'm pleased to 
introduce as part of this Bill an annual reduction in the deficit 
surtax of up to $150 per taxpayer commencing July 1 of this 
year. 
 
This reduction will have the effect of eliminating the surtax for 
approximately 6,000 lower income earners and significantly  

reducing the surtax for middle income earners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Saskatchewan people are beginning 
to reap the benefits of the courage, the steadfastness, which 
they have shown over the last four years in seeing the balanced 
budget plan through to a successful conclusion. 
 
As announced in the budget, with the elimination of the annual 
budget deficits, the government is converting the deficit surtax 
into a debt reduction surtax. The remaining proceeds from the 
debt reduction surtax will be a key element in this government's 
strategy to pay down the province's debt. 
 
Saskatchewan has many competitive advantages which help to 
provide a favourable business investment climate. Since 1991 
the government has expanded Saskatchewan's competitive 
advantages through a series of targeted tax initiatives. These 
initiatives have been designed to encourage investment and job 
creation in selected sectors of the provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recent announcements of projects which are 
creating good jobs, high paying jobs, is not a coincidence. This 
is the blooming of a program which began some four years ago, 
in part through the balanced budget program and the reduction 
of taxes; in part through a program published by the 
Department of Economic Development in the government, 
Partnership for Progress. 
 
The two of these programs coming together have produced in 
the last few months some spectacular results. As a for instance, 
one of the specific initiatives included the exemption of 1-800 
telephone services from education and health tax. And some 
months ago we witnessed the announcement by CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) of an important call 
centre in Saskatchewan, producing — again — good, 
high-paying jobs. 
 
One of the specific initiatives include enhanced price- and 
profit-sensitive royalty structures for oil and natural gas. The 
result, Mr. Speaker, has been a continuation this year of record 
years of production in the natural gas and oil industries. We've 
eliminated the E&H (education and health) tax on direct agents 
consumed in manufacturing and processing. We have reduced 
the small business corporate income tax rate from 10 per cent to 
8 per cent. 
 
As stated in the budget, Mr. Speaker, we're committed to an 
expansion in value added processing to our resources, rather 
than simply exporting processing jobs. 
 
Underlaying the concept, underlaying the program, partners for 
progress, and underlaying these tax reductions, Mr. Speaker, is 
a goal of producing not low productivity, low-wage jobs, what 
we are intent on producing in Saskatchewan is high 
productivity, high-wage jobs. And we're well on the road to 
accomplishing that goal. 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1630 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the accomplishment of that goal 
is not by chance; it's the result of a program, Partnership For 
Progress, coupled with progressive, far-seeing tax changes. 
 
A couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. An example of the benefits 
of value added processing is Canamino. Using biotechnology 
research, this company processes oats into a fine powder which 
is used in cosmetics. The export value of a tonne of raw oats is 
a little over $80, while the value of a tonne of processed 
powder is $9,000. That $9,000, Mr. Speaker, translates into 
good jobs in Saskatchewan — good, high-paying jobs. 
 
Our government is introducing two new initiatives to strengthen 
Saskatchewan's value added industries. First, we're introducing 
a 9 per cent investment tax credit for manufacturing and 
processing. This credit is intended to encourage plant and 
equipment acquisitions for first-time use in manufacturing and 
processing activities in Saskatchewan. The tax credit is 
available to all corporations making manufacturing- and 
processing-related capital investments, and it will reduce 
Saskatchewan's corporate income taxes payable. 
 
Secondly, we're introducing a manufacturing and processing 
profits tax reduction for Saskatchewan-based corporations. This 
measure will allow eligible corporations to reduce 
Saskatchewan's corporate income tax rate on manufacturing and 
processing profits from 17 per cent to as low as 10 per cent. 
This represents the second lowest corporate income tax rate of 
all provinces west of Quebec. And that's one of the reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, why we've been able to witness the announcements of 
recent weeks. 
 
These two corporate tax measures, along with the previously 
introduced initiatives, will provide Saskatchewan 
manufacturing and processing companies with one of the 
lowest effective tax rates in this country. 
 
In relation to other provinces, Saskatchewan's business climate 
for manufacturing and processing companies will compare very 
positively when considering investment criteria such as after-
tax net income and internal rate of return on manufacturing and 
processing capital investments. 
 
I'm confident these corporate tax measures will strengthen 
Saskatchewan's investment climate and will speed us along the 
way to the creation of an economy which is characterized by 
high productivity and high-paying jobs. 
 
In addition to these policy initiatives, this Bill implements 
several technical amendments to The Income Tax Act. These 
amendments represent clarifications of Revenue Canada's 
current administrative practices with respect to The Income Tax 
Act of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the foregoing reasons, it gives me great 
pleasure to move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I never 
thought I'd hear the day when we'd hear a member of an NDP 
government stand up and admonish some of the principles of 
good, solid, sound business. In fact, the member came very 
close to suggesting it was a good, progressive, but he left the 
word conservative, policy out. He came close to it, but he just 
about got there. 
 
The interesting thing I find about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that while this Bill sets a different corporate tax rate, as the 
Premier said last night and as it was brought forward via the 
media, we now have tax islands in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have certain corporations that are going to be given an 
opportunity to find a bit of a tax break and a tax advantage over 
other corporations. This Bill does nothing to address the tax 
load that the average household and the average person in the 
province of Saskatchewan has to carry, and the tax load that has 
risen since this government took power. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we note that people in Saskatchewan, a 
family of four, are now paying on average $4,200 more in taxes 
in this province this year than they were in the year 1991. 
 
The minister talked about the reduction in spending and yet the 
public accounts shows $110 million more in spending this year, 
estimated spending, over the '94-95 fiscal year. And, Mr. 
Speaker, while we applaud the minister for some of the 
initiatives taken, it would have been appropriate for the 
government to expand this and to include all people across this 
province, to include all businesses across this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note, the Finance minister 
when in Swift Current said no, we can't change the taxation 
system, we cannot address the E&H tax, which is a cripplesome 
burden to businesses in small communities along the western 
side of this province and also along the eastern border in many 
of the communities on my side of the province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have seen in many communities small 
businesses have shut the doors simply because they have 
become uncompetitive with the fact that the tax in 
Saskatchewan is 2 per cent higher than it is just 15 miles to the 
east in Manitoba. And it's much easier for people to go to 
Manitoba, purchase their goods, and come across to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So while the government can applaud the changes, on the other 
hand, people themselves are asking, whoop-de-do, what has it 
really done for me? The minister says, well we'll make some 
changes after the next election. Well maybe it's time they started 
letting people know today what kind of changes — not just 
telling us about some changes but actually implementing 
changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Maybe it's time they let the electorate know that yes, it is 
possible to reduce the tax revenue in this province, the E&H 
tax, some of the burdensome taxes. Maybe it is possible. But  



April 20, 1995 

 
1631 

don't just talk about it, do something about it. Give everybody 
else the same break that a few corporations are getting in this 
province. 
 
And I find it also very interesting that this same NDP 
government that complained about the rich corporations getting 
away from paying taxes now find it very convenient to offer tax 
incentives to large corporations. And I don't think corporations 
were looking for means of getting away from tax; all they're 
looking for is fairness. And in some ways there is some fairness 
in this piece of legislation. In other ways, in other portions, 
there isn't a fairness that people are looking for across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are many interesting things that are 
going to be generated as we get into further debate on this piece 
of legislation. We will find that there are many interesting 
comments and certainly questions that will arise as we begin to 
look through Bill No. 58, An Act to amend The Income Tax 
Act. 
 
And so to allow for the process, the review, and an extended 
review of this Bill, this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, I find 
it imperative that at this time we move adjournment of debate. 
And we'll get into a very significant and lengthy debate on this 
Bill as we review it in the future. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1430) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 51 — An Act to 
amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 
1985 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the purpose of Bill 51 is to change the way in which certain 
costs in collecting student loans are paid. Presently the student 
aid program is administered by a branch of the Department of 
Education and all costs associated with the administration of 
the program is included in monies appropriated for the purpose 
by the legislature. 
 
Basically all costs fall under the administrative budget of the 
Department of Education. The Education minister stated that 
this arrangement has worked well in the past except for two 
situations  the first being when a student loan is sent to a 
collection agency, and the second regarding bankruptcies. 
 
The minister stated the department turns loans which are 
seriously in default over to collection agencies since the 
Department of Education does not have the resources to deal 
with these situations. From that point, collection agencies  

charge a fee for their services based upon a percentage of loan 
recovered. For some time all the loans collected by the agencies 
must be deposited in a fund while the agencies' charges must be 
paid out of the department's administrative budget. 
 
She stated that this is impractical because it is difficult to 
predict how much will be collected in any given year and how 
much will have to be paid out in fees to collection agencies. 
 
I mentioned earlier that I'm not sure why this figure is so 
difficult to estimate since it has been that way for several years 
and I'm sure there is an average percentage recovered. But I will 
ask more about this during the Committee of the Whole. 
 
As well in committee, I would like to know exactly how much 
on average is spent on fees to collection agencies; how many of 
the students end up declaring bankruptcy; and how much in the 
end the province has paid to recoup sometimes very small 
loans. 
 
The minister also mentioned that current provisions cause 
difficulty in the case of bankruptcies. Apparently in some, many 
students file bankruptcy on a basis for inability to repay their 
student loans. At this point, the province must retain legal 
counsel to challenge the claimed bankruptcy. 
 
It seems to me that there should be an easier solution to this 
situation. An exemption could be added to the bankruptcy Act 
which would halt claimants from including student loans in 
their liabilities, and in the long run, save all of us time and 
money. 
 
I realize that there are exceptions to this, yet those few 
exceptions are certainly not the rule. It's time that 
straightforward solutions need to be found for these kinds of 
situations. The amendments in Bill 51, according to the 
minister, will alleviate some of the administrative problems. 
Under the new provisions, most administrative costs of the 
student aid program will continue to be budgeted for on an 
annual basis as they are now. 
 
However, monies which has to be collected to third . . . has to 
be paid to third parties, like collection agencies and legal 
counsel under agreements for service related to the collection of 
loans in default, will now be charged on and paid from the fund 
itself. 
 
In other words, the costs associated to the collection of loans 
will be taken from the fund from which the loans were 
originally made and into which the loans are repaid. 
 
The minister has assured the Assembly that the new provisions 
do not transfer any costs from government to other parties, but 
instead just establish a more flexible method of handling some 
of the administrative details required under the program. 
 
I have several questions I would like to pose to the minister, 
and I would move that the Bill 51 go to Committee of the 
Whole. Thank you. 



April 20, 1995 

 
1632 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No 52 — An Act to 
amend The Teachers' Federation Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill 52 seems to be for the most part a housekeeping Bill. The 
Minister of Education and I attended a Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation panel on Tuesday evening. Unfortunately none of 
the Liberal caucus members were in attendance to discuss these 
issues. 
 
One thing was clear at the meeting  the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) has a very wide range of responsibilities 
and obligations. They help set and maintain high standards of 
professional competence and conduct among all teachers in 
Saskatchewan. In some cases, they must administer disciplinary 
action against teachers who violate these standards. 
 
As well, the STF deals with professional development and 
teacher welfare as well as negotiate on behalf of teachers for 
benefits, pensions, and teachers' contracts. 
 
At the meeting, we discussed how the role of teachers has 
expanded over the years. Many must administer medication, 
deal with student violence and young offenders in their 
classrooms, as well as ensure the well-being of those students 
who are malnourished and abused. 
 
Teachers don't have it easy, Mr. Speaker, and no organization 
knows this more than the STF. Bill 52 is designed to overcome 
a few of the internal and professional situations that have come 
up in the past as well. The amendments regarding the internal 
issues have to do with the voting criteria on matters before the 
federation council, the composition of the executive, and 
procedures by which elections of the executive are conducted. 
 
Routine matters before council will now pass with a majority of 
votes cast rather than requiring a majority of those present. 
Teachers who are prepared to step forward and express their 
opinions by voting should be the ones heard by the STF. 
 
It also makes it possible for the executive to maintain a 
consistent number of members in years when the president is 
re-elected and there is no past president. 
 
These amendments are some of those I previously referred to as 
housekeeping provisions. 
 
The second group of amendments deals with more of the 
definition of professional misconduct. One changes a teacher's 
addiction to alcohol or drugs from being defined as professional 
misconduct, to a medical problem. That's not to say that there 
will be no matters for consideration of discipline or  

competence. They just won't be automatic bases for findings of 
guilty of professional misconduct. 
 
As well, a new provision is being added which will make it 
clear that a conviction for a sexual offence under the Criminal 
Code constitutes professional misconduct. It allows the STF to 
adopt a zero tolerance policy in which criminal convictions 
related to sexual assault . . . which will automatically result in 
guilty findings. 
 
In other words, a sexual offence conviction will be defined as 
professional misconduct and automatically be grounds for 
immediate dismissal of a teacher. This is a provision which I 
believe should have been adopted some time ago and I am 
pleased to see it in this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Anyone in the position of authority who uses that position to 
gain the trust of children, and in turn abuse them, should be 
automatically removed from teaching other children. They 
should also be unable to move to another province and begin 
teaching again. 
 
Bill 52 does not address situations where a teacher is found 
guilty of sexual offence in one province, moves to another, and 
is allowed to teach again. We need some sort of interprovincial 
agreement which will protect students against situations such as 
these. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, that jurisdiction doesn't fall under the 
teachers' federation and so must be addressed by the provincial 
government in another area. I will be asking a little more about 
how these situations are dealt with during Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides for a situation where 
teachers avoid disciplinary action by simply resigning as 
teachers and giving up their membership in the federation. The 
federation will now be granted the additional authority to 
discipline a teacher if the teacher was a member at the time 
proceedings against the teacher began, and in the case where 
the teacher ceased to be a member less than two years before 
the proceedings were initiated. 
 
I would like a bit of clarification about the federation's 
disciplining, and if this involves those educators who choose to 
teach during a teachers' strike. Again I will be posing these 
types of questions during Committee of the Whole. 
 
Lastly, Bill 52 deals with updating gender-neutral language. 
Instead of chairman, the Bill reads chairperson, and so forth. 
These are standard changes which should be updated in all 
previous legislation as it comes into the legislature. 
 
In addition to attending the meeting on Tuesday evening, I have 
met with Mr. Fred Herron and Mr. Dwain Drew, the president 
of the STF, to discuss the ramifications of Bill 52. I'm confident 
that these changes are needed in order to make it easier for the 
federation to fulfil its mandate. 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1633 

While I have some questions to ask, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 
can be done in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to repeal The Economic Development 
and Tourism Act 

 
The Chair: — I will ask the minister, if there are any officials 
here who weren't in the House when we last considered this on 
Friday, to introduce them. And in addition to that, if he has any 
comments he'd like to make. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Perrin is with us again today, as 
our one staff person. But I do have some information I want to 
table that was requested by the opposition, so I'll do that at this 
point. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe, Mr. 
Minister, we discussed Bill 35 last week, which deals with a 
similar circumstance to Bill 34 in that it deals with the 
economic development and northern development revolving 
fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe I asked you last week on the other Bill 
why it hadn't been repealed at that time. And I'm still trying to 
get my ducks all in order here between these two particular 
Bills. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could reiterate the reasons 
why this particular Bill was not dealt with last year when the 
previous Bill had gone through the House which repealed the 
northern economic development fund. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well it has to do with, as I 
mentioned, the northern revolving fund, and that is the only 
portion left and that we're dealing with at the present time, the 
repeal of that portion of the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This fund has 
always been under the administration of the Department of 
Economic Development and Tourism. I wonder if you could 
give us a bit of an outline on that. I haven't had a chance to look 
over the information you just passed us as to whether or not it 
covers this area, but when the revolving fund started and its 
history. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned last 
week, the period from 1973 until December of 1983, the 
program was administered as an advance account by the former 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. And then following 
that, under your administration, it became part of the 
Department of Economic Development. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could give us a bit of a run-down on what the assets and 
liabilities of the fund currently are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the amount that we have 
outstanding on loan is 11 million. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — And what types of assets or structures 
are those being lent out for? What is involved? What are you 
holding for security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This would include buildings, some 
buildings; equipment, equipment as it would relate to economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan — not huge structures 
but buildings and equipment related to economic development 
in the northern part of the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — To what degree is the revolving fund a 
model for your new northern development fund, Mr. Minister? 
And to what degree is the new fund an improvement on that 
revolving fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I mentioned the other day, there 
are sort of three or four main areas. First of all, there's a limit on 
the amount of the loan from what was in place  of a million 
dollars; that's now 250,000. 
 
The process of due diligence is much more stringent, that is, 
doing the review on whether or not the applicant is eligible; 
more need for market study in order to ensure that there in fact 
is proper market for the product being produced. 
 
And much less into retail — as I mentioned, under the old 
program, as under our former SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation), Main Street businesses 
were eligible. We have backed away in large part from putting 
money into competing businesses on Main Street in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Your 
comment on due diligence sparked my recall of our debate last 
week. And I wonder if you could outline perhaps the ministerial 
involvement in the due diligence process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There's no ministerial involvement. 
There's professional staff in the department that do the due 
diligence, and so this is done at the staff level as opposed to any 
involvement at the ministerial level. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do any part of 
the decision-making process come to the minister at all, or is it 
all cut off before it reaches the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, I have had no role. I mean no 
issues or applications have ever come before my office, and nor 
is there any allowance for that to take place. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
will you be using the lessons that you have learned from the  



April 20, 1995 

 
1634 

revolving fund in dealing with the implementation of the new 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well again I think the four points I 
covered off would basically show you where we have learned, 
if you want to call it that. By limiting the amount to 250,000  
that's a quarter of what it was when it was $1 million: very 
much restricting retail end of the loan program, more market 
analysis, and more due diligence. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will there be 
any carry-over of staff or resources from the old revolving fund 
to the new one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well under the old program, the 
staff varied significantly. But at one point, there were 15 staff, 
sort of at the upper limit. I believe under the new program, we 
will have seven or eight, and they will basically be a 
continuation of the staff who had been involved. But there may 
be some changes as we move through the next year or two. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you say 
there may be some changes, do you mean there may be some 
changes in the personnel, in that seven or eight that are 
transferring over, or there may be some change in the number of 
personnel involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I'm referring to, there are 
existing vacant positions that we may or may not fill, depending 
on how the program evolves and the uptake on it. But as I 
mentioned, there were at one point 15 staff in this program. 
This means there are some vacant positions and it's just not 
clear whether or not we will have to staff up; it will depend very 
much on the uptake within that program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are all of the 
staff personnel that are currently involved with the revolving 
fund then moving over to the new fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, there are . . . it's not the same 
seven or eight. There would be some change but the majority 
are the same staff. But there is some new management 
personnel in the program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What will be 
happening then with the staff that are currently involved with 
the revolving fund that might not be moving into the new 
program? If you're talking about new management staff, is there 
old management staff that will not be moving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The way the process works, the 
staff component in that program by the time the change came 
was as low as three because of downsizing. As the program was 
completed — because there was a period where it was relatively 
inactive — at that point the staff component went as low as 
three. And so that need to downsize took place some time ago, 
and in fact now they're . . . a couple of new staff have come in. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How will staff  

be replaced into the new program? Will you have an open 
tendering? Will it be done through the Public Service 
Commission? What's the process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, the way the process works is 
through the Public Service Commission competition process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think, 
if I recall correctly, last week on the due diligence process we 
hadn't determined at that time exactly how the due diligence 
process was going to work. There was still some grey areas 
involved in that before we went off on another tangent. I 
wonder if, Mr. Minister, if you could run through the due 
diligence process that the new fund will be dealing with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, there's a number of steps, but 
of course the individual would come in and submit an 
application. There would be a needed requirement for a certain 
percentage of equity. That would obviously have to be met. 
Credit reliability — there would be a review of the credit of the 
individual. A marketing analysis and market study program 
would have to be in place. And then based on those items, the 
loan would either be granted or refused. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the market 
analysis question, there is a need at times to have a fixed 
contract in place to provide comfort level to the lending 
institution, in this case the northern fund, to determine whether 
or not a contract is in place. We talked last week about wild 
rice. That's a developed market out already in place; 
nevertheless, someone new coming into the system may not 
necessarily be able to access that kind of a market because it's 
already filled with people, manufacturers who are supplying the 
product. 
 
If you're going to build the new mousetrap and you don't know 
whether or not that new mousetrap has a market viability, then 
you need to have some market research and some firm 
contracts. So how do you make that evaluation, Mr. Minister, 
whether or not someone is going into a mature market and 
therefore doesn't need a firm and fixed contract in hand as 
compared to someone who may be going into a new marketing 
niche market and that they would need a firm contract in hand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It's an interesting question because 
it varies so much, not unlike in southern Saskatchewan. But 
let's say an individual was starting to fish in a certain area and 
needed some money to get involved in that process. Obviously 
you would need a permit with the fish marketing board. And if 
you didn't have a marketing board permit to market the fish, it 
would be very difficult for you then to come into the northern 
revolving fund . . . or to the new fund, pardon me, and receive a 
loan. 
 
On the other hand if you were doing a tourism project, you 
wouldn't need a signed contract with anyone, but you would 
have to be able to give a pretty good guarantee that you had 
done some marketing, in fact that you had people ready to come 
to your lodge or camp. And so this would be . . . it varies very  



April 20, 1995 

 
1635 

much depending on what area the individual wants to get into. 
 
But our expectation is the loan loss will be much better than it 
was under the old program for the reasons of extra market 
study, extra due diligence, and better security on the loans. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the case of 
someone who's going into the tourism industry, what kind of a 
business plan would they need in place to secure a loan or a 
business projection, that type of thing? How in-depth would 
they need to have this type of documentation? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, my staff tell me it would be a 
minimum of 10 per cent equity in the tourism facility. If it was 
thought to be a greater risk, then that could be increased 
depending on the location and market analysis. But they would 
have to put in at least a minimum of 10 per cent, and that could 
be more. So I don't want to be emphatic about the 10 per cent 
because it could vary, I suppose, between 10 and 50 per cent 
down payment or equity in the project. 
 
And the next step, of course, would be to use the structure or 
the equipment as security on the balance of the loan that would 
be going out, and again the need for some evidence and proof 
that you had sale for the product. For example, if you were 
building 10 wilderness cottages — I just use this by way of an 
example — you would have to have some evidence that you 
had marketed or had the ability to market or could lay out for 
the staff a marketing plan and have to convince the staff that 
that marketing plan was going to arrive at a certain revenue 
stream that would be able to service the loan as well as return a 
living or an income to the individual or individuals involved in 
the project. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
other kinds of levels for different areas, different economic 
development projects, do you have in place? You have 10 per 
cent for tourism as a minimum equity involvement. What would 
you have, say, in the case of crafts in northern Saskatchewan, 
willow weaving or something like that? Or what kind of an 
equity level would be necessary, say, for some form of 
harvesting of blueberries or high bush cranberries or something 
along that line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — In all cases, the range would be 
somewhere between a minimum of 10 and 50 per cent. In the 
case of a craft of course you would want to have a contract and 
security on the goods that were produced, the inventory, which 
would be somewhat different than a tourism camp facility. 
 
So the agreement would be somewhat different in the sense that 
you would have security on inventory, and that would be about 
the only difference. But in terms of the minimum down 
payment or equity, 10 per cent would be the minimum and it 
could vary somewhere between there and 50 per cent. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Economic Development Act, 1993 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, I believe that in this 
particular Act it gives you the opportunity to set interest rates 
and otherwise regulate loans. I wonder if you could explain that 
process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, this will give us the authority 
to set the interest rates. And what we are proposing at the 
present time would be a commercial rate on these loans. And 
while that isn't etched in stone at this point, if you think of a 
commercial rate of about prime plus one, you would be in the 
ballpark. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, will these interest rates be 
flat across the board for everyone at prime plus one or so? Or 
will they vary depending on the risk that would be brought 
forward by the due diligence process to determine whether or 
not this is a lower risk or a higher risk venture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I mentioned the other day about the 
potential of encouraging the other lending institutions to be 
more involved in northern Saskatchewan. And we're actually 
working now on a program of syndicating loans with credit 
unions in northern Saskatchewan, and also the banks; at this 
point, CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) probably 
the most active northern bank, although other banks are 
involved too, so I don't want to put too big of a point on that. 
 
But where there is syndicating of the loan, the interest rate may 
be able to be adjusted marginally downward because the risk is 
being shared over a broader basis. 
 
But at this point, if you keep in mind prime plus one in a 
general application across the piece, you'll be very close to 
where we will end up at. We're just at this point fixing it. That's 
why I can't give you a definitive answer, but it will be about 
prime plus one. Then if you think of it, when we get the 
syndicating part of the program up and running, we may be able 
to marginally lower that as we spread the risk with a 
commercial lending agency like a credit union or a bank. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you're 
dealing with prime, which prime are you talking about? Are you 
talking about Bank of Canada prime? Are you talking about 
prime from one of the major lending institutions? Or just where 
does this prime figure come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — When we say prime, we're referring 
to commercial bank prime. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you very much. I know that  



April 20, 1995 

 
1636 

within some of the . . . particularly the credit union system, their 
prime can fluctuate from different credit unions. Credit union A 
can have a prime at a certain level and credit union B can be at 
a different level. 
 
So when you're dealing with a syndication circumstance, how 
are you going to work with them in determining that prime? 
Because their prime rate at that particular credit union may be 
somewhat different than the commercial bank rate prime. So 
how are you going to work that out with the credit unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well this is where the minor 
fluctuations in fact would come in. And what I was saying, that 
in a general way it will be prime plus 1 where we do the direct 
lending; that will be a general application. 
 
Then you will have nuances of that where there is syndicating. 
And in a general way, we would assume that that would be just 
a very small notch lower because of the syndicating aspect and 
the spread of the risk, but I suppose in some cases it could 
actually be very marginally higher. So there'll be some small 
variance in that program where we're doing syndicating. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — When you're doing the syndications, Mr. 
Minister, are you going to be going out to the lending 
institutions to say: come on board with us on this and provide 
us with your best or lowest interest rate? Or are you simply 
going to be trying to find someone who is prepared to come on 
board and then working with them beyond that point to see 
what you can come up with, and it may not necessarily end up 
with the circumstance where it is the lowest possible interest 
rate being charged? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we've done this at a number of 
levels, but one of the more successful areas that we have been 
able to achieve this kind of cooperation is by meeting directly 
with the Saskatchewan bankers' association, the Canadian 
Bankers' Association, and not only talking about northern 
Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan in general, about making sure 
that we have a broad range of readily available services for 
investors in the province. 
 
For example, one of the major banks is now moving into the oil 
and gas in a fairly big way in a number of centres in 
Saskatchewan that up to this point, if you wanted to invest in oil 
and gas, you basically had to go to the bank in Calgary or 
Edmonton or Alberta. This will change very quickly. 
 
And the same is true in northern Saskatchewan. We meet with 
them; we have been quite successful and encourage them to be 
more involved in direct investment and lending in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But when it comes right down to it, to individual loans, then 
you're talking about something different where there will 
actually be arrangements made with individual credit unions or 
individual banks in the communities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So we're really, if I'm hearing your question accurately, we  

really have dealt with this at two levels. One with the provincial 
and Canadian management of the banking system to talk about 
responsibility in the communities and in the province. But then 
when it comes down to actually syndicating, negotiating loans, 
and here — whether that's with Sask. Opportunities Corporation 
because there are parallels because we're doing syndicating of 
loans there as well — each one will be done on a individual 
basis. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So, Mr. Minister, what you're going to 
do is you're going out and . . . Somebody is going to come to 
the fund and say, I would like to borrow some money. You'll 
then take that application and shop it around to see who was 
prepared to come on board in a syndication with you. Is that the 
process or are you going to have someone already on board that 
says we're prepared to take a lump sum of loans, a lump sum 
number of dollars and be in partnership with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — You're right, but it might also work 
the other way.  
 
And again, not to confuse this issue by including Sask. 
Opportunities Corporation, but where we have that program up 
and running there have been several cases now where the banks 
have approached us and said look, we have company X that 
wants to borrow $500,000; we're interested in picking up 
300,000. Would you be interested in doing the other 200,000? 
Because they're also interested in sharing risk. I mean it's a 
logical way of lending money. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan the same will be true. There will be 
some that we will just do directly because it makes sense to do 
them directly. There'll be others that we want to share the risk. 
We'll shop to the banks and credit unions. 
 
And on the other hand there will be applicants who go to the 
credit union and banks that will come back to us to be 
cross-pollinated or shared and syndicated between the two 
organizations; but it will be at the request of the bank or the 
lending institution. So it will flow both ways. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. You 
mentioned that the total volume of loan available is $250,000 to 
any one particular enterprise or individual. Is there a limit to the 
number of loans that that particular enterprise or individual 
could receive from the development fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. If you take an individual as 
having a ledger with the fund, the maximum it could be, 
regardless of how many individual projects you had, would be 
$250,000. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, what if an individual though had 
a number of corporate identities? Would you take into account 
then the principal owner of the corporation and therefore limit 
him to the 250,000? Or how would that work, Mr. Minister? 
Would you simply be looking at each corporate identity as 
being separate? 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1637 

(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is something we're going to 
have to be cognizant of as we go through this process. Where 
there's one individual who had two or three or four companies, 
they would be limited to 250,000. But where it gets difficult 
and where we'll have to be aware is if an individual has 20 per 
cent of one company and 30 per cent of another; as close as we 
can, we'll have to try to predict and keep the maximum at 
250,000. 
 
But this hasn't been a big problem at this point. But your 
question is important because what we don't want either is 
somebody who is skipping the rule by setting up a number of 
companies and avoiding the cap in that way. 
 
So to review that, we're trying to keep it as much as possible at 
a maximum of 250,000, and where there are the same 
individual or the same company involved in a number of 
companies, we would take their percentage of control in that 
company into consideration in reaching that maximum. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When a 
company comes forward in seeking some assistance, do you ask 
them for a list of major shareholders, or what kind of questions 
do you ask along that line to determine exactly who are the 
shareholders, who is the major shareholder, and who controls 
the operation? You may end up with a number of different 
corporate identities with perhaps the same managers in place; 
that's another possibility. So do you find out that information as 
you do your due diligence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What the loans manager or the 
loans person would do is get a complete asset list from the 
individual much the same as a credit union or bank would do, 
where the company or the individual would have to list out all 
of their assets and liabilities. In that way you can probe and find 
out who controls the company, what percentage that particular 
individual or company controls. 
 
And so this is not very difficult because these are sworn 
statements or signed statements of assets and liabilities. So you 
do check, or the staff do check, very closely to get that 
information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
areas that I do have some serious concerns about in this Bill is 
the shift away from cabinet being the authority in it to the 
minister. And it deals with: 
 
 The minister, for any purpose relating to any matter 

under the minister's administration or for which the 
minister is responsible 

 
rather than having through cabinet supervision as was 
previously done. Mr. Minister, why was this change put into 
place and why is it necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the member raises an  

interesting point. But if you were to look at section 2, even 
though it says "The minister, for any purpose relating to any 
matter under the minister's administration . . .", referring to the 
minister here, you have to keep in mind that if there's any 
spending in the program over $10,000, it requires regulation, 
which is authorized by cabinet, and so you still have the checks 
and balances there that I think you're looking for. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The spending 
of over $10,000 with cabinet approval, is that in the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, it's in the department 
legislation so that if you were to refer . . . I can get the section 
for you, but it's in the actual department legislation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under clause 
16 of the legislation, with the department, it talks about the 
requirement that interest rates and the like be published through 
OCs (order in council). The present changes to the Act don't 
include that. Will those be published, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. The interest rates, when set, 
will be published and gazetted. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will those be 
the actual interest rates charged to the various loans or will they 
be the prime rate only? Because you've talked . . . there may be 
some fluctuations for individual risk, etc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Likely what will be published or in 
fact what will be published is the formula, and so it won't be an 
exact number if you know what I mean. It will be . . . use the 
example again going back to my earlier comment, prime plus 1 
so you won't have the . . . it won't be 9 per cent or 10 per cent or 
eight and three-quarters. It will be the formula as opposed to an 
exact number. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps we 
should have an explanation or an outline of this formula, what 
the breakdown is, and how you end up then with that number 
that is going to be charged against the company or individual 
that's seeking the loan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well what has to happen here, or 
what will happen is, a particular bank will be chosen as the rate 
set for commercial — if you just think about that for a moment 
— and then the rate will be set on a weekly basis. And so if you 
say that at such and such a location this is our prime rate, it will 
be the weekly setting plus 1 per cent. So in fact that will be the 
definition of the formula. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That 
doesn't allow for any fluctuations though. If you're setting it at 
the formula being the weekly prime rate of one of the 
commercial banks, let's say the CIBC in this particular case, 
plus 1 per cent, then that doesn't allow you any fluctuations in 
there that we were talking about earlier when you get into a 
syndication say with a credit union that want . . . that can offer 
you something different. So how do you account for those  



April 20, 1995 

 
1638 

fluctuations that we talked about earlier such as when you go 
into a syndication process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to be real clear here 
because you have to sort of get into your mind that there'll be 
two different rate sets. There'll be the general rate set where 
we're doing the loans on our own without syndicating. That will 
be one particular bank used as the rate-setting agency. And pick 
your bank, and it doesn't . . . for our purposes of discussion it 
won't matter very much which bank or credit union, and then 
say plus 1. Then on the syndicating side, you will have the 
individual bank in northern Saskatchewan that will be involved 
in setting the rate. 
 
So you've got two systems. You've got one where there's 
syndicating taking place where you may have a number of 
different rates within a small range, and you'll have the single 
rate that will apply to all of those loans that are done with the 
agency on its own. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will the 
syndicated interest rates for each particular loan be published 
and gazetted also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, ours will be, the formula 
gazetted. So you'll be able to go to that individual bank, and you 
would be able to check on a weekly basis what it would be. And 
the same would be true of the syndicating bank, if it were 
located in northern Saskatchewan, that their rate sets are a 
matter of public knowledge. 
 
So in fact we probably wouldn't publish all of those northern 
rates, but it certainly would be open to the public to check to 
see what prime rate would be at any one of those institutions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Everyone 
knows that the bank rate fluctuates up and down on a weekly 
basis. But when someone gets a syndicated loan through the 
northern development fund, how will the public have the 
opportunity to check which financial institution that the 
northern development fund was syndicated with? Will that be 
included in an OC or in the Gazette? How will the public be 
able to determine who is the syndicated financial institution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just so we know how this works, 
we have a policy in government that under our information, that 
we are able to release on loans that individuals or companies 
get. This has been true of SEDCO in the past couple of years, 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), and now this 
program  that we would release the total amount of the loan 
principal and the name of the individual or company who 
received the loan, and not details of the structure of the loan. 
 
And this is compatible with what is required by our freedom of 
information law, and also protects the individual or the 
company. Trying to meet the needs of the public, who are the 
taxpayers, who put the money in, but also trying to meet the 
needs of the individual who receives the loan. 
 

And I think this is not unusual, and probably more information 
than you would be able to get from your local credit union or 
Royal Bank if you went in and knocked on the door and asked 
for a list of who has your money out on loan. And so it's trying 
to achieve both of those. But in consulting with business people 
and consulting with communities, this is the line that has been 
drawn. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it's not just the 
bank's money though that we're talking about. We're talking 
about taxpayers' money. The information is available to what 
the formula is, as prime plus 1. The information is available, 
who is borrowing the money. The corporate name of the 
borrower is available to the public. 
 
I think also in this case the name of the financial institution 
with which the northern development fund has been 
coordinated should also be available. It doesn't say what their 
corporate structure is. It doesn't say how their lending policy 
works or any of the internal mechanisms of the financial 
institution. It simply says who else is in partnership here with 
the department, with the northern development fund. It gives no 
secret information in that sense as to who is involved here. 
 
In fact it may be very well beneficial for some corporate entity, 
a bank or a credit union, to have it known that they are prepared 
to go into partnerships with the northern development fund to 
provide loans into northern Saskatchewan. They might find it in 
fact beneficial to have that information available. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would think that it could be and should be 
beneficial both to the public and to the institution involved that 
the public know that they are prepared to participate. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, the issue you raise of having a 
public record of who is syndicating with the program is in 
place. This would be part of the release. Let's use the Royal 
Bank. If they were syndicating with us in one of our northern 
communities, when we released the amount of our involvement, 
the principal, and the name of the individual or the company, if 
there was a syndicating portion, that would be released as well. 
 
On the other hand, if it was a project where it wasn't 
syndicating but the individual just had a direct loan from the 
Royal Bank, that we would not release. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have absolutely no 
problem if the individual went and got a loan from the Royal 
Bank as an individual, with nothing to do with the northern 
development fund; then indeed why should the public be aware 
of it? I mean it's got nothing to do with us. 
 
But when somebody like the Royal Bank is in syndication with 
the northern development fund, then I think their name should 
be included as part of that syndication so that when they look 
down at the formula for the interest rate, they can determine for 
themselves what kind of an interest rate is involved. 



April 20, 1995 

 
1639 

And I would hope that you would confirm that that is how it 
will work, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, that's right. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will all of the 
loans that go to cabinet for approval, which is $10,000 and 
above, will they be OC'd? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, they will not be order in 
council; they'll be granted under specific regulation. The 
regulation will go to cabinet. Cabinet will approve a regulation 
and then the granting of the loans will happen under the 
regulation as opposed to individual order in councils. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the 
current system, do not all loans through the northern revolving 
fund, or through SEDCO and SOCO, go for OCs, over a certain 
level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. No, they never have gone to 
cabinet as order in council; they've always been done under 
order in council . . . or under regulation. And the difference is 
of course, that under the old program, they were a maximum of 
a million dollars and they all went through under regulation 
without appearing in cabinet. The difference now is, is that they 
will be limited and capped at 250,000 and be done under 
regulation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — What mechanism is then in place for an 
individual to come and request, who has the northern 
development fund made loans to? How does someone — the 
media perhaps — find out who has applied for and received 
loans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It would be very simple to get that, 
either by just asking the department under freedom of 
information to receive the list of who has received . . . I mean 
for Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation or for the former 
SEDCO, I mean these numbers are just available all over the 
place. All you have to do is pick up the taxpayers' report and 
they're all listed there with the outstanding principal. 
 
So there is no assumption that this is going to be the least bit 
difficult to get under this administration, because in that sense, 
we very much agree that if people are borrowing money from 
the taxpayers, they should be willing to put their name on it. 
 
Now when it comes to the detail of the loan, what they're doing 
with it, how the repayment schedules are going, I think that's 
where the line is in fact drawn, unless at some point of course 
there is a delinquent process. And then that has a way of 
becoming an issue as well. So the point of where you'll be able 
to get this information  it will not be difficult at all, as it isn't 
difficult now with Sask Opportunities Corporation or with the 
former SEDCO. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you 
give your assurance then that if an individual is to come  

forward and request a list of the loans that have been made 
through the northern development fund, that all those loans 
would be made available to whomever might be asking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. You have to remember that 
what will be made available is the name of the individual or the 
company plus the total amount of the principal, not the details 
of the loan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — That's fine, Mr. Minister. I agree that, 
you know, whether I've got a monthly repayment schedule or a 
weekly, that's immaterial. The individuals who would be 
requesting information, though, need to know indeed what the 
name . . . who borrowed the money, what the total amount was, 
and whether or not it was syndicated then, because then if it's 
syndicated, the name of the syndicating partner should also be 
included in that. 
 
Would all that information be available, without hindrance, 
without having to go through the freedom of information Act 
which can be delayed for 90 days, and there could be a charge 
placed on that access to information, a charge that could be 
applied against every loan made . . . or information supplied for 
each loan, rather than just a simply blanket coverage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we've had a policy for some 
number of years now of making that information available upon 
request. Obviously it would take some days to compile the 
information; it wouldn't be that you'd walk in, and somebody 
would rush to the file and get it out for you. But under the 
normal office procedures, as requests came in, they would be 
appropriately dealt with. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are there any 
other areas within your department that are being affected by 
this change, other than simply the northern development fund. 
What else, within your department, might be affected by these 
changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, that's the limit of the program 
change. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What impact 
might Treasury Board have on these changes? Would these 
loans be subject to any terms and conditions that Treasury 
Board might impose? How is that going to affect the situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think if you look under the 
financial assistance section, clause (c), it says: 
 
 (c) subject to any terms and conditions that Treasury 

Board may impose, sell, rent, lease or otherwise dispose 
of property and assets acquired by the minister as a 
result of any loan provided pursuant to clause (a)". 

 
So that would basically be the explanation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1640 

Clause 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
 
The Chair: — I'll ask the Minister of Agriculture and Food to 
introduce his officials to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
me today I have Terry Scott, the assistant deputy minister of 
Agriculture; and Keith Hayward, who is the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of Crop Insurance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
officials. Mr. Minister, the Bill in question transfers the 
allocation of funds for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance from the 
Minister of Finance to the Minister of Agriculture. Would you 
please summarize the reasons for the change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Quite simply, the reasons for the 
changes that we made in this Bill are because of the change that 
we've made to Crop Insurance and the way Crop Insurance is 
administered. Crop Insurance is very much part of the 
department. We've pulled Crop Insurance into the department 
budget now and therefore it's in part of our department budget. 
It makes more administrative sense to have that money flow 
through the department rather than having it by OC each time, 
as it previously was. 
 
So this just streamlines the procedure and makes it simpler to 
transfer money. The money is still accounted for because it's 
part of our budget and is approved in budget. It's simply an 
administrative fix to the way we've changed the operation of 
Crop Insurance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
and officials. Don't these changes effectively remove 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance control over its own budget, 
which would have been in place previously? The budgetary 
process, money was supplied from the general funds of the 
province to Crop Insurance who then administered those funds. 
Under these changes, now your office will be administering 
those funds, will be making the determinations on budgets 
rather than Crop Insurance itself. 
 
I guess when you do that, my question has to be, what's the 
point of having Crop Insurance as a Crown corporation? Why 
don't you just bring it in, lumped holus-bolus into the 
Department of Agriculture, and simply do away with 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance as a Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That certainly is not an option that 
would be excluded from doing something that we looked at 
doing. But there are some advantages to having this as a Crown 
corporation. We have a board, a panel of producers, that hears 
complaints. So we've kept it a bit at arm's length and kept it a  

bit separate. 
 
But the change we're making here simply is administrative. At 
one time there was . . . Crop Insurance was under a separate 
minister from the Department of Agriculture with separate 
responsibility. It now is under the same minister. It's in the Ag 
budget, and therefore it is just administratively simpler to move 
the money in this manner. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm glad you 
mentioned the board. Since you now will control the budgetary 
process through these administrative changes, what's the point 
of having a board of directors? You're making the decisions. 
 
Now the person who owns the gold has the power and makes 
the decisions. You now have the gold when this Bill passes. 
You'll be making those decisions necessary to run the 
corporation. What is the point of having a board of directors? 
You've mentioned that they're in place for complaints. Well, 
Mr. Minister, that's part of what your job is also, is to accept 
complaints. Why do you need a board of directors there to do 
that if that's their sole purpose, is to hear complaints? 
 
You're taking away their administrative abilities, passing it on 
to yourself by taking control of the budget, so what's the point 
of having a board of directors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well this Act does not transfer any 
of the control . . . simply, as I said earlier, is administrative in 
nature in the way that the money is moved. And it's through the 
normal departmental process rather than through an OC which 
sometimes can delay money being transferred for a week or so 
or two weeks as it goes through the process. 
 
The board was eliminated some time ago when we did 
downsizing. As the member probably knows, we had 4 or 500 
boards and commissions in this province, and as part of 
downsizing in government, we eliminated a number of them. 
We always have had the goal . . . the Crop Insurance has been 
wholly Treasury Board in its nature. All of the money that goes 
into Crop Insurance comes from . . . the administration of Crop 
Insurance comes from taxpayers and comes from provincial 
government. 
 
The farmers' pool is separate, and their premiums go into a pot, 
and that's used to pay out indemnities. But the administration 
has been through a federal-provincial agreement. We always 
have had . . . all the money has had to be advanced through 
government, through Treasury Board, and through cabinet in 
order for any policy changes to occur. It was always budgeted 
this way and continues to be done in the same manner. 
 
There is again I think some good reason to have a panel of peers 
out to deal with problems that farmers have. Crop Insurance is a 
business, in that it deals with farmers, provides insurance. We 
feel that there needs to be a panel of peers out there who can 
hear complaints that farmers have and problems  



April 20, 1995 

 
1641 

that arise. That part has been very useful and very successful, so 
we would like to continue that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You 
talked that OCs at times can mean a delay of a week or two in 
the allocation of funding. I would think now with it simply 
going through your department and your office, it makes it very 
susceptible, very susceptible to changes in the funding, where 
funding can come out earlier, based on political need, or be 
held off until later, based on political need. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the fact that it's going through your 
department rather than OC really does not have a major impact 
on it whatsoever. That political manipulation is still there and 
still available. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was interested to listen when you noted that all 
of the funds for Crop Insurance come through Treasury Board, 
either federally or provincially. Because every year I seem to get 
a bill in the mail from Crop Insurance says that you owe us 
some money for something. So I have an investment in Crop 
Insurance also, as do a good number of farmers, although I 
recognize that that number is decreasing every year. 
 
So farmers also, Mr. Minister, have a financial interest in Crop 
Insurance that they felt their body of peers, as you term them, 
the board of directors, did have some input into. So, Mr. 
Minister, under these changes that you propose, exactly what 
power, what administrative abilities, will the board of directors 
have after these changes take place that they don't have . . . or 
they do have now? What will change? And will they be 
anything more than simply a complaints department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, the structure won't change. 
The board of directors, as it now exists, includes the deputy 
minister and assistant deputy minister and one or two other 
people; that still functions as a board. The appeal panel is not 
the board of directors of Crop Insurance. As I said, that decision 
was taken a number of years ago. 
 
There is no difference in any of the powers or structures of 
Crop Insurance as a result of this Bill. The only thing that this 
Bill does is that when the premiums are due for crop insurance, 
which we have to pay based on our federal-provincial 
agreement and based on our contracts with the producers, 
instead of the money being advanced through the Minister of 
Finance and through an OC, it's advanced through the 
Department of Agriculture as pursuant to the budget, as laid out 
in our budget. So this Bill has absolutely no impact on the 
structure or the powers of any of the functions of Crop 
Insurance, whether it's the appeal panel or the board of 
directors. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could outline for us and let us know exactly who the board 
of directors are. Who are my peers on the board of directors, as 
a farmer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again there are no farmers on the  

board of directors. The board of directors is made up of the 
deputy minister of Agriculture, two assistant deputy ministers 
of Agriculture, and an individual by the name Wil Olive who 
supplies the legal expertise to it. 
 
That hasn't changed with this Act. The Crop Insurance 
Corporation functions very much as part of the department. We 
have found certain administrative efficiencies by having it in 
the department. It is still a Crown corporation in name and still 
has some attributes of a Crown corporation, but it functions 
very much as a branch of the Department of Agriculture. And 
we've found that to be a rather successful way of trimming 
administration and avoiding overlap and duplicate within the 
department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, how can you talk 
about a body of peers then? Perhaps your two officials there 
feel as it's their peers that are sitting on as representatives on 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance commission, but it's certainly not 
a body of peers of the people who Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance is there to serve, and that's the farmers. 
 
You yourself have just admitted that there is not a single farmer 
on that board of directors, and I know at one time there were a 
lot of farmers on that board of directors. 
 
So how can you possibly talk about the board of directors being 
in place as a body of peers for your clients and your customers, 
because it certainly isn't when you're talking about the deputy 
minister, two assistant deputy ministers, and a lawyer. That's a 
peer for the legal society and it's a peer for your two officials 
sitting beside you, but it's certainly in no way, shape, or form 
peers as far as farmers as concerned, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again let me be clear. That board 
of directors is again part of the department as you've outlined, is 
mostly made up of civil servants. This functions mostly as part 
of the department. 
 
The peers sit on the appeal panel which is there to hear 
complaints and concerns that farmers have in individual cases. 
They rule on . . . and have the power to judge individual cases. 
 
Crop insurance is a very complicated business. There are rules, 
but there are very individual circumstances on farms. And there 
are cases that come up that fall into grey areas. The farmers 
have concerns that they're not being treated fairly or that the 
rules haven't been applied fairly or haven't given them a fair 
break under their circumstances. And the appeal panel then 
hears those issues and makes a ruling on it. That's where the 
panel of peers that I was speaking of is  the appeal panel. 
 
And other governments have also done similar things. I believe 
Alberta has crop insurance in their Department of Agriculture 
completely. So because it is . . . as the member points out, we 
have farm customers and they deal with farmers, but the money, 
as the member points out, money for the administration and for 
the programing, comes through Treasury Board in any case. 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1642 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then what 
you're saying is that currently, as the situation exists, the board 
of directors who controls the Crop Insurance Corporation is 
wholly made up of bureaucrats from within the Department of 
Agriculture, and they control the direction and the function of 
Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that is essentially correct and 
that is essentially what has happened. Even when we had a 
board of directors in place, they didn't have the authority to 
change the direction of Crop Insurance without government 
approval, nor did they have any authority to spend money at 
Crop Insurance. Any money that the board of directors at Crop 
Insurance, in the past, would have desired to spend, would have 
had to go through all the government processes that any other 
departmental expenditure would have had, and Treasury Board 
would have had to approve of it. And so in a sense, they acted 
in an advisory capacity. 
 
We have in this province a Farm Support Review Committee 
which has spent the last year of time looking at Crop Insurance 
and how it may be changed. They spent a good deal of time 
advising us on what we should do for a new safety net. One of 
the things they recommended for our safety net was that Crop 
Insurance would continue. We were able to keep Crop 
Insurance. 
 
There are some, as the member points out, some concerns about 
Crop Insurance. The agreement expires in one year with the 
federal government, so we've had the Farm Support Review 
Committee, which is 32 producers in this province, looking at 
how Crop Insurance could be changed. So that's . . . the 
advisory role is coming now from that body. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you 
mind pointing out then exactly why there needs to continue to 
have a board of directors. Why don't you simply administer it 
through the Department of Agriculture and do away with the 
bureaucracy that is in place? The same people would still be 
there. The deputy minister would still be there; the assistant 
deputy ministers would still be there. You wouldn't need a legal 
counsel on the board of directors because you have access to 
legal counsel either through the department or through the 
Department of Justice. Why don't you just simply do away with 
the board of directors then, because you've already taken over 
all the control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly that, as I pointed out 
earlier, is an option and it's something that we certainly may 
look at in the future. The legislation now requires a Crown 
corporation and a board of directors. As the member points out, 
there isn't the cost to it because it's essentially civil servants 
who are on it. 
 
There may be some advantages to having a Crown corporation. 
We did this as a step . . . As I pointed out, some provinces have 
Crown corporations; some have it in the department. We've got 
a system that's somewhat halfway. I guess it gives us the option 
of going back to a full-blown Crown if we were to see that that  

had advantages; or moving it completely into the department, 
which we may do at some time in the future. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could perhaps go back to this peer group that you were talking 
about earlier — the appeals panel. Who sits on that appeals 
group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We don't have the list of names 
right handy. There are, I believe, five producers who sit on that 
panel. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — How are they chosen, Mr. Minister, and 
how do you determine what their qualifications are to sit on an 
appeals panel? Are they simply five farmers scattered from 
around the province, or what's the mechanism in place here that 
they should be qualified or classified as a peer group for the rest 
of the farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We selected five producers for the 
board, much as the old board of directors would have been 
selected — people who have experience with farming in the 
province, who are respected in their communities. And that's 
essentially the criteria that we use to select a board. 
 
I think the appeal panel has done an excellent job. It certainly 
gives farmers the comfort that there are some actual producers 
who sit on appeals, who can relate to their problems, rather than 
government officials. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could please give us the names of the individuals who sit on the 
appeals panel and what their qualifications are to hold those 
positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I have a list of the names of the 
appeal panel. Brian Kramer is a member of the appeal panel; 
he's a farmer. Lorraine Hanson is a member; she's a farmer. Jim 
"Duke" Bulych is a member; he's a farmer. And Donald Purich 
is a member; he is a lawyer, so he has some legal background as 
well. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, unless my math is wrong, 
I believe you named four individuals. And you had indicated 
there were five on there. 
 
I wonder if you could also indicate where these people are from 
and what kind of farming operations. Are they grain farmers, 
cattle farmers, hog producers? What kind of farming do they 
actually carry out? And the individual who's the lawyer on 
there, is he also a farmer or is his enterprise strictly that as a 
lawyer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Brian Kramer is from Southey; 
Lorraine Hanson is from Broadview; Jim Bulych is from Foam 
Lake; and Donald Purich is from Saskatoon. All of these people 
obviously are grain farmers in that they have contracts with  



April 20, 1995 

 
1643 

Crop Insurance or have some experience at least in the grain 
industry, which is where Crop Insurance does business. 
 
And I don't know exactly what sort of farming operations any of 
them have. I'm not aware of whether or not Donald Purich has a 
farming operation or not. He is from Saskatoon and he is a 
lawyer. And he was on the Crop Insurance board of directors 
before this, so he had a good working knowledge of Crop 
Insurance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, what powers does 
the appeal board have to make changes to a farmer's situation, 
to any complaints he might have in dealing with Crop 
Insurance? Obviously the problems that are going to arise are 
going to be the rates charged for a particular crop. A farmer 
may feel that his coverage has not been properly evaluated, that 
perhaps his soil type is wrong or his individual yields are wrong 
or something along that line. Or at the other end, that an 
adjustment has not been made properly in either the volume or 
the quality of his crop that he may be making a claim for. 
 
So what powers does the appeal body have to be able to make 
adjustments for that particular individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The board will hear, the panel, 
pardon me, would hear cases, and all of those situations that the 
member raised would be appropriate things to take to the board. 
And they would look at the circumstances, often have the 
individual appear before them and make his case, and that's the 
. . . so all of those areas would fall within the purview of the 
panel. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — What power though would the appeal 
process board have to make adjustments either for or against the 
individual claim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The panel then makes 
recommendation to Crop Insurance. They don't have the 
authority to change policy or to make definitive rulings. They 
would make recommendations to Crop Insurance. In the vast 
majority of cases, if they make a recommendation to Crop 
Insurance, they would be followed out. 
 
Most of the cases that come before the board are from 
producers who feel that the measurement hasn't been right or 
that they've been assessed unfairly or that there's something . . . 
and normally they're not asking to give money back. They're 
asking to have money or bills lowered or whatever. And if the 
panel rules that indeed the rules haven't been followed . . . or 
even if the rules have been followed, if — in this particular 
circumstance — it hasn't treated that particular producer fairly, 
then they can recommend in favour of the producer. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, so now let's say the panel 
has made a recommendation of some sort of an adjustment. 
That recommendation previously would have gone to the board 
of directors who, at one point in time, were farmers from across 
the province. Now it will go to either the board of directors or 
to your office, Mr. Minister, to be dealt with by the deputy  

minister and the associate deputy ministers. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, has the situation now changed into a position 
where the acceptance of the recommendations of the appeal 
panel can now be classified as a political decision, being made 
by your office, as opposed to a decision being made by an 
independent board of directors that would have been made up 
of peers of the people who were paying in part for this program: 
the farmers and the taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well there isn't a lot there's 
changed. With the old board of directors, which was made up 
of farmers, then the appeals went directly to that board of 
directors and they would make a decision. Now because that 
board of directors essentially no longer exists and this is a board 
of civil servants, we now have a panel of producers who hear 
the complaints very much the same as the old board used to, 
and they make the decision on it rather than having it go 
directly to a board of directors. 
 
So that was one of the functions of the old board of directors 
which was very useful and very helpful, and that's why we 
maintain that function by striking a panel that could do that 
specific job. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We've 
gone from an appeal process going to a board of directors made 
up of farmers who were in place for a fixed period of time 
based on their OCs, their contract with the government, that 
they were there from point A to point B and that was the term 
of their involvement in the Crop Insurance board, to a board 
made up of civil servants who are directly responsible to you, a 
political minister. They're not responsible to the farmers, they're 
not responsible to the taxpayer, they're not responsible to the 
man or woman out on the farm. They're responsible to you now, 
Mr. Minister, not to anybody else. And they're going to be 
making that decision now. 
 
The previous board of directors, as farmers sitting on the board, 
were not responsible to the minister for their daily bread and 
butter. They were responsible to the people they represented as 
a whole — the farmers. You, Mr. Minister, are responsible to 
the other members sitting in the seat across from here. That's 
where the responsibility lies. It's now a political area of 
responsibility rather than an administrative area of 
responsibility. And I believe that change, Mr. Minister, is 
entirely wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again that's the reason for the 
appeal panel of producers being struck, because that gives us a 
buffer between the producers . . . that they can actually go to 
actual producers to make their case. And we think that's useful, 
and therefore we kept that structure in place. 
 
There really isn't a whole lot of difference between a panel 
that's appointed by the minister or a board of directors. It's 
appointed by a minister with peers. They were all good people, 
they were all producers in the past, and so that that hasn't 
changed a lot. That function of the board we kept. 



April 20, 1995 

 
1644 

The advisory function of the board on policy, we are able to get 
from our Farm Support Review Committee and this was part of 
downsizing of government. The members opposite always say 
government's too big and we should have smaller government 
and we should downsize and we should save dollars. But when 
there's examples of it occurring, they say, well no, we should 
have 12 or 13 producers who meet monthly and hear complaints 
instead of a panel of 4 or 5, which does the job as adequately, 
in our opinion. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't have a 
complaint with the appeals panel. I may not agree with certain 
individuals on that panel, but I don't know whether I do or not 
because I don't know the individuals. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it's not the appeal panel that is the problem; 
it's where the recommendations from the appeal panel goes to. 
It goes to the board of directors that are made up of the deputy 
minister of Agriculture and two assistant deputy ministers of 
Agriculture and a lawyer — all hired and paid for by the 
Department of Agriculture and responsible to you as the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
The board of directors that was in place previously, while being 
responsible to the minister, were also there for a fixed term. 
They knew that they were there from point A to point B and 
they could be reappointed after that point. But they had a fixed 
appointment period of time. 
 
The deputy minister and the assistant deputy ministers are there 
at your pleasure. If they . . . a recommendation comes from the 
appeal panel to do this and that doesn't serve your purpose, Mr. 
Minister, then the board of directors, who is responsible to you, 
will be taking into account your concerns rather than 
necessarily the concerns of the appeal body, who are the peers 
of the farmers out there, other than the lawyer that's on there. 
 
And that's where the concern comes in. Why not move that 
appeal body then — since you're paying them already — move 
that appeal body in as the board of directors and allow them to 
continue to hear appeals, as the board of directors, making the 
decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the member can put in as 
many layers of bureaucracy as you want. At the end, the buck 
stops at the people with the money, which in this case is the 
taxpayers, and me who will have to go to the polls and get the 
support of farmers every four years. 
 
The members on the board of directors also sat at the pleasure 
of the minister. That hasn't changed. You can put in as many 
boards as you want; they're all appointed by the minister. The 
government, the Treasury Board of the province, has control of 
the money that goes out to do the administration of Crop 
Insurance that the Government of Saskatchewan signs, the 
federal-provincial agreement with the federal government to 
design the program. And that's where the buck stops and it 
always has. 
 

We certainly see the value of having a panel of peers look at 
individual cases and that still exists as it did before. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my 
colleague has raised some very good points here, so I'm going 
to directly ask you what role you're going to take in managing 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance as consequence of expansion of 
your powers over it. Obviously you've thought this out or you 
wouldn't agree to the legislation. What role will the minister 
now perform in regards to the changes to the corporation that 
the minister did not perform before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well absolutely none. The only 
difference in my role will be when premiums are due and they 
are they being paid out as per the federal-provincial agreement, 
or money is moved into the reinsurance fund as per the 
federal-provincial agreement  that will be done under an 
order signed by the Minister of Agriculture instead of the 
Minister of Finance. And that is the only difference that this Act 
makes to my powers. There will be no difference in the way 
Crop Insurance operates. 
 
The restructuring of the Crop Insurance was done a couple of 
years ago when we moved it essentially under the Department 
of Agriculture. This Bill doesn't change it, it just makes the 
present administration of Crop Insurance work more smoothly. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, will this Bill expand your 
ability to control the pay-out policies in the corporation beyond 
what you have just mentioned? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No it won't. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well it's a tough argument, Mr. Minister, for 
you to make here and for us to believe because there's no doubt 
that this Bill makes SCIC (Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation) less responsible for its funds. I mean that the 
controls on the corporation's spending that will now be in place, 
that will be a direct pipeline from the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
And I have had a little experience with that particular 
corporation, having had responsibility for it for a year and a half 
as a Legislative Secretary, so the board room in Crop Insurance 
is not unfamiliar to me, and how it controlled its funds and its 
expenditures. And that now will be directed from a different 
direction, Mr. Minister, so it's hard for us to not believe that you 
will have more say in the direction of how those funds are 
spent. 
 
For instance, will the Department of Agriculture budget be 
increased to create a contingency fund to meet the requirements 
of this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. Again, I don't know how the 
member opposite and how their government operated under 
Crop Insurance, but this much is, if I wanted to spend more  



April 20, 1995 

 
1645 

money in another branch of the department, there's a budget. I 
go to Treasury Board; I go through processes; it's approved by 
cabinet and by caucus; it becomes policy; it becomes in budget. 
 
If in situations that arise where money outside of budget needs 
to be spent, if there's something that happens in Crop Insurance 
that I think more money should be spent at, I do not have the 
authority to spend it without going back to Treasury Board, 
cabinet, caucus, and the whole process for government funding. 
 
So there is no difference except that the formality of how 
money that's moved out, which is in budget, which is the 
premiums and reinsurance fund monies that need to be paid out 
at given times as per our federal-provincial agreement, which 
really governs what monies go into Crop Insurance, we have to 
abide by our federal-provincial agreement. 
 
Those are done under my signature rather than under the 
Minister of Finance's signature. That doesn't change my 
authority to spend money. I'm sure the Minister of Finance 
wouldn't approve of this Bill if it were giving me free access to 
the provincial treasury to spend on Crop Insurance as I saw fit. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, you come here for 70 days a 
year and appear in the Assembly, and during that time, we can 
ask you questions about what you're doing. But other than that, 
for the whole rest of the year, you're not in here. You're not in 
here, and you're doing what you do. 
 
Now when you had to go through the Minister of Finance, you 
had to get OCs, which were available to the public after seven 
days. So if Crop Insurance was expending money on particular 
projects or because of circumstances and they had to go and get 
that money, that became a public document. 
 
So yes, we get to ask you questions. But for the most part of the 
year we're not here to ask those questions, you know. So you're 
busy doing things and we don't have access to you and you're 
spending money, and there's no way of tracking it because the 
House isn't open. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when you talk about accountability, I'm not 
sure that that's a step forward. Where you now, through the 
Department of Agriculture with a very large global budget . . . 
you're responsible for one of the largest budgets in the province 
of Saskatchewan; hundreds of millions of dollars -- not tens of 
million, hundreds of millions — and you can now spend that 
without coming back to this Assembly. 
 
And the board of Crop Insurance now is absolutely meaningless 
to the spending of that money. The appeals board can hear an 
appeal, but they have no power to override you, sir, and your 
department and your political staff. And you simply aren't here 
to answer the question 365 days of the year. 
 
At least I could follow the expenditures that you had decided 
upon on a weekly basis because I could follow the OCs coming 
out of the Minister of Finance. I can't do that now. 
 

So you have to convince this House that all of the rest of the 
time that you're not here, that the safeguards are in place for you 
to move that money around. And you can move it within your 
department without saying anything. You don't have to justify it 
to anyone. You can move it around in there. And it's done every 
day inside departments. And you can now transfer monies to 
Crop Insurance without having to answer to anyone, except the 
people in the bureaucracy within your department. You don't 
answer to a board any more. There's no independence there any 
more. 
 
So you have to tell me, Mr. Minister, why it's a better system 
when you can move within hundreds of millions of a budget 
that I can't track as an opposition politician, which is better than 
me being able to see the Minister of Finance have to forward 
funds when it's public knowledge after seven days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again, Mr. Chairman, the money 
that's spent in Crop Insurance is governed by the 
federal-provincial agreement; it's governed by regulation. Any 
change in those would be by OC, and the member would be 
able to see those changes by OC. 
 
This is not any different than the Department of Environment 
and forest fires. If there's a forest fire during the summer when 
the session's not on and there's more money spent on it, on 
forest fires, at some point there will be special warrants if it 
goes above budget. If there's money moved around within a 
department, that would be a decision of Treasury Board and 
cabinet. Those same safeguards and accounting practices would 
be available as another branch of the department. 
 
And so I think . . . particularly given the fact that there's a 
federal-provincial agreement, that money is in budget. The only 
overexpenditures that would occur is when the pay-outs are 
greater than the premiums, and money has to be forwarded from 
the reinsurance fund to cover those. Otherwise there aren't any 
unusual expenditures within Crop Insurance. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well it seems strange, Minister, there's a lot 
of other Crowns out there, Treasury Board Crowns, that I mean 
if this argument's made in this case, I guess it would work just 
as well . . . you're talking about streamlining services to 
customers. I mean the other Crowns have customers. 
 
Other Crowns have cost overruns and they function perfectly 
well with order in council grants. They do; they do it all the 
time. What makes SCIC so much different than those other 
Crowns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again, SCIC runs very differently 
from some of those other Crowns. Commercial Crowns such as 
SaskPower raise rates and work as a business within. Within 
Crop Insurance in the past, all the money that's Crop Insurance 
expenditures are under a federal-provincial agreement. They're 
governed by that. That's what sets out the expenditures of Crop 
Insurance — they're done through government budgeting. 
 
Any approval of money was not done by the board of directors.  



April 20, 1995 

 
1646 

The board of directors didn't decide whether or not we should 
pay the premiums that we were committed to, or the agreement 
it called for us to do. That was done as government decisions. 
 
And that's why we think that this system . . . and I mean the 
member's arguing about the changes that we made to Crop 
Insurance two years and not what this Bill does, because this 
Bill makes no change in the structure of Crop Insurance. 
 
But this is a structure that saves some money, that streamlines 
the decision-making process, and that because it allows some 
savings within the Department of Agriculture and that we are 
able to avoid some duplication with Crop Insurance and make 
better use of personnel and so on. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, was an opinion sought from the 
Provincial Auditor before this measure was taken? As I read, 
most of the recommendations in the last year, what you're doing 
would run counter to some of those recommendations. Did you 
specifically go and seek an opinion from the Provincial Auditor 
before making this move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, we had of course approval 
from the Department of Finance and they may have spoken to 
the auditor. I think this is the . . . the structure of Crop 
Insurance is what the auditor has been saying that we shouldn't 
have a whole bunch of separate funds, that as much as possible 
everything should be in sort of one big kitty where everybody 
can see where it is and where the expenditures are. So we 
certainly haven't had any concern expressed by the auditor in 
the restructuring of Crop Insurance that we did. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Don't you think, Minister, that given the size 
of this operation, the amount of public money expended, that 
you probably could have negated maybe an hour of questions 
by simply coming in and say, I have the seal of approval of the 
Provincial Auditor for what I'm doing because it meets the new 
standards that he set for government accountability, that this is 
a better system for accountability than what the public had 
before, that the public will be able to garner or understand how 
funds move around better because I, as the minister, now have 
direct control of it rather than the board of directors of Crop 
Insurance? 
 
I would have thought, given the climate out there today with 
taxpayers and farmers in particular, who you have not treated 
well when it comes to living up to contracts and a few other 
things, that you would have wanted the Provincial Auditor's 
stamp of approval on it so that there isn't a farmer out there can 
question either political interference or anything else because of 
the changes that you've made in crop insurance. 
 
And that would have seemed logical to me that's the first place 
you would have gone to make sure that this was on the up and 
up. And you say you didn't even bother to think about that. And 
I find that strange that your officials would not have wanted 
that stamp of approval before you moved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly we did not view this  

Bill as any major change other than housekeeping, and it 
basically falls into line with the way the corporation has been 
functioning for a couple of years and we haven't had any 
concern expressed by the auditor. 
 
My experience with farmers is that they're concerned about crop 
insurance and the program and how it works and what the rates 
are. They're not concerned about whether or not the money that 
we pay in premiums comes from a cheque signed by the 
Minister of Finance or a cheque signed by the Minister of 
Agriculture. But that, in hindsight, if we had known your grave 
concern about what this Bill might do, we certainly might have 
talked to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, they're all taxpayers, or at 
least we hope they are. After you've got done with them lately 
we're not sure that they're all going to have taxes to pay because 
they've got a lot less money in their pocket. 
 
But I'd like your commitment that your officials will take the 
opportunity to run this by the Provincial Auditor, and you'll 
have ample opportunity in other estimates before we're done 
around here to tell us what that opinion would be. If he says it's 
great, then I tend to agree with him. And I think that would be a 
simple enough task for you to perform. I'm not going to block 
the passage of the Bill because of it, but I think it's important 
we understand that that auditing process is one that he approves 
of and that we all as taxpayers, whether we're farmers or not, 
are comfortable with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly I would commit to do 
that. If the auditor has concerns, obviously that would be a 
concern to me as well. And I'm sure he won't, but if the member 
opposite would like us to get an opinion from him, we certainly 
can do that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I'd like to thank my officials, Mr. 
Chair, thank them for the excellent support; thank the 
opposition for the questions. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to 
thank the minister and his officials for the answers today and 
hope that everything goes well. 
 
(1630) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to repeal The Economic Development 
and Tourism Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1647 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Economic Development Act, 1993 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — I'll ask the minister to introduce his officials if 
there are any here who have not already been introduced as this 
committee has been before the . . . as this department's been 
before the committee before.  
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm not sure 
who was here last time so I'll have to do the introductions. We 
have Hartley Furtan, the deputy minister; and Dale Sigurdson 
and Terry Scott, the assistant deputy ministers; Jack Zepp, Ross 
Johnson, Lorne Warnes and Laurie Hamers. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and your 
officials, I have a question I'd like to begin with and this goes 
back to last year. We had a number of discussions in here 
pertaining to an individual who you terminated at Crop 
Insurance and that was the last individual I believe. And I was 
really saddened to hear that . . . yesterday I was informed that 
this individual has still not been settled with. 
 
And you told the Assembly last year on a number of occasions 
that you were going to make sure that this problem was looked 
after and I can't believe that you have continued to spend 
taxpayers' money on legal counsel — And I won't get into the 
legal counsel, but I believe it's the same one that you had before 
which has done millions of dollars of taxpayers' . . . or spent 
millions of dollars of taxpayers' money — and that Mr. 
Matwijeczko is still hanging out there in limbo land one year 
later. 
 
And I'd like you to give an explanation to the House why, after 
a whole year's time, after what you said last year, this issue  

hasn't been settled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The member is right that the issue 
is not settled and of course that's a concern and we certainly 
would have liked to have had it settled. I've certainly given my 
officials instructions that we wanted to settle this as quickly as 
possible. 
 
What's happened is this is going to the courts. It's my 
understanding that we are attempting to get pre-trial 
conferences and we haven't had response from Mr. Seiferling at 
this point. But in any case, it is going to be heard by courts.  
 
No settlement seemed to be possible. No mutual settlement was 
agreed upon and it's wending its way through the court system 
and it certainly would be our desire to continue to get it settled 
as quickly as possible. But without going into a lot of details on 
dates and processes, it just is one of those things that's taking 
some time to get through the court system. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well can you tell me then how much money 
you have expended in legal fees in the last year, since you told 
the Assembly that this thing was going to come to an end soon, 
I believe was your words, that you thought that the process . . . I 
mean I heard this same junk about pre-trial hearings and stuff 
last year from you. You went on about all of the processes and 
thought it was ridiculous that it had gone on that long, couldn't 
understand, you were going to tell people to do something 
about it. One year later, we're back here in the same boat and 
you've still been spending lots of taxpayers' money on 
high-priced legal help, and nothing's done about it. 
 
I don't see how that's in the least bit fair to either the taxpayer of 
this province or the individual. I mean it's one thing to terminate 
somebody because you don't like him or the wrong politics or 
something, but then to turn around and drag this thing on for 
years and years and years is just absolutely ridiculous. How 
much money we've spent in the last year probably could've 
settled the fool thing. 
 
So, Minister, what I'd like from you is a commitment that when 
you come back to estimates next time you're going to bring back 
the amount of money that you have spent on legal fees in the 
last year for something you said would be settled last year, and 
report back to the House exactly what the process is going to be 
to finally get this cleaned up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we can certainly look for the 
numbers that the member asks for. It's again not our desire to 
hold this up. We do have processes to follow, and it certainly 
takes two to arrive at settlements, and so that being a fact, 
there's obviously some problems on both sides in this particular 
case. But I can find the numbers that the member asks for. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I see 
that we don't have a lot of time left today in estimates, Mr. 
Minister, so we'll just maybe stay with one area today and that 
would be in Crop Insurance. 
 



April 20, 1995 

 
1648 

I was just reading on page 37 of the Estimates that Crop 
Insurance this year is going to take another $8 million drop, and 
I guess the only thing I could . . . that would come to mind is 
that you're expecting to have a lot less acres, or participants 
dropping out of the program again in this year. Otherwise your 
share of the premiums wouldn't be dropping to such a 
significant amount. 
 
And I was wondering if you could then give us the total acres 
that were covered by Crop Insurance for the past year, I guess 
maybe for the past couple of years, and what the acreage is that 
you're expecting to have covered in this upcoming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Essentially what happened in Crop 
Insurance was that we overbudgeted last year. We were actually 
$10 million under budget in Crop Insurance last year and so we 
think now that the 91 million is a more realistic guess, so we're 
not anticipating a further drop from last year. The drop actually 
occurred last year. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I think I heard you say 10 
million under budget. Did you mean under or over, just so I 
know where to start? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I'm not sure what I said. I meant 
over budget or . . . we budgeted more money than we actually 
spent last year. The 98 million that's here . . . and I don't know 
what portion of that was the premiums, but we expected to pay 
more premiums than we did and that was, as the member 
knows, partially because we lost some acres last year. 
 
We think this year that we won't have a drop, but the premiums 
that we projected this year, we think, will be closer to accurate 
than they were last year. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, given the fact that you 
were over budget, would make me ask if all the accounts that 
you had, that the participants had, have been dealt with or are 
there some outstanding accounts, and if so, how much would 
that amount to? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Within Crop Insurance we always 
budget for some accounts to be overdue and flow into the 
following year. And that amount remains relatively constant, 
the amount of money that we budget for accounts that are 
receivable and they're collected in the following year. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. Mr. Minister, I've been noticing 
on TV and in the newspaper in the last month or couple of 
months that Crop Insurance is doing a great deal of advertising. 
I can only assume that they're doing as much advertising as they 
are because at least some of this $8 million has got to be a 
reflection and a loss of participants. And if so, I would have to 
ask how many participants do you expect you will have less? Or 
in fact do you see there is a problem in Crop Insurance at all 
with the amount of participants that are or aren't in the 
program? 

I think if I recall the last time we had a discussion in here in 
regards to Crop Insurance, I believe it was your figures that 
were 75 per cent of the farm land in the province is not insured. 
Now maybe you could correct that or give me the actual figures 
of where we're at today, and the number of participants — like 
I'd asked you before — for the last three years, and what you're 
projecting for both acres and participants for this upcoming 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There are 55 per cent of the acres 
in Saskatchewan . . . were insured last year. That of course is, as 
the member points out, is a concern to us. We've had some 
drop-off in acres insured. And indeed that's what the advertising 
is designed to do. We still believe that crop insurance is an 
integral part of a safety net in Saskatchewan. I think it's more 
crucial given changes to some of the other programs that we 
have. From our initial reports from agents which I got in the last 
few days, we're anticipating that we will at least maintain our 
acreage and hopefully have some increase in acreage this year. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, can you give me a run-down 
of everything that Crop Insurance is doing or that your 
department is doing to get more participants in the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well last year we made several 
changes. We brought in spot loss hail back into the program. 
We brought in a multiple crop option and a diversification 
option. So we've done that. We're trying to tidy up our 
administration. And the one thing we're doing this year is the 
advertising, and we're hoping that that will help. 
 
I think there are a couple of ways you bring farmers in. One, 
that you convince them it is a good program. And certainly it is 
overall going to be beneficial to Saskatchewan farmers. For 
every dollar that farmers put into crop insurance, they receive 
two dollars back in a general, not on an individual farm basis, 
but that's how the program works. Farmers put a dollar into the 
crop insurance as a premium, and between the two levels of 
government that dollar is matched. There's then two dollars in 
the pot which is available to pay out indemnities. 
Administration is picked up by taxpayers in general. 
 
So obviously overall for every dollar that's gone in, two dollars 
have gone back to the farmers somewhere in the province. And 
in fact the program ran a significant deficit which, by the way, 
has been reduced a bit, and we're hoping that that's taking care 
of itself. But not only have they got back two dollars for every 
dollar they've put in, but they've also run the program $500 
million or so into deficit. 
 
So given that fact and given the fact that weather in 
Saskatchewan is very variable and there is a need for some 
stability on farms, we still think this is a good, needed program 
and has a use. We have to convince farmers of that because if 
the enrolment drops to some point, obviously the program will 
collapse and won't be available. And that's not, in our view, 
good for Saskatchewan farmers, nor is it good for the province 
where our economy counts very much on the agricultural 
industry  and the grains and oilseeds sector in particular. And  



April 20, 1995 

 
1649 

if farmers are not covered by insurance and they have a disaster, 
that reflects on a disaster on our provincial economy, so we're 
concerned. 
 
We're doing, as I said, made a number of changes to 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance last year to try to make it more 
responsive and respond to farmers. We're looking now, as I 
mentioned earlier in the Bill we were debating, we have a Farm 
Support Review Committee of 32 farmers in the province who 
helped with advice on negotiating a new safety net with the 
federal government. 
 
One of their recommendations, strong recommendations, was 
that crop insurance would remain as a basic building block of a 
safety net. They also have concerns about crop insurance, and 
they've spent a number of days this winter going through crop 
insurance and looking at changes that we might be able to effect 
that will make it more attractive to farmers. 
 
And the federal-provincial agreement has expired. It's a 
five-year agreement. It expired. We got a one-year extension on 
it, so sometime in the next year we're going to have to 
renegotiate that with the federal government. 
 
So we're looking at any other changes that we can do to crop 
insurance to make it more attractive to farmers. So we think that 
it is a good program and that it may need some fine tuning or 
some changes if farmers desire it, but basically the crop 
insurance program is an essential building block for 
Saskatchewan farmers and for our whole economy in this 
province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, of all the things that you 
have just mentioned, are all of those things being done in-house 
by just the Crop Insurance Corporation, or have you hired 
outside consultants? If so, who would they be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — On the programing side, as I 
mentioned earlier, we have the Farm Support Review 
Committee, and we're talking to farmers and farm groups all the 
time. And we may at some point in the summer carry on public 
meetings even or more consultations, but essentially the Farm 
Support Review Committee has been advising us and are 
working on a report on crop insurance and some 
recommendations for it. 
 
On the delivery side we have hired Ernst & Young to look at 
our delivery system. Ernst & Young have been hired to look at 
our delivery system. We have eliminated the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) program, and that's allowed us to 
downsize some positions at Crop Insurance. It makes some 
difference to our delivery system, and that's a concern to look at 
our overall delivery system as to whether or not we're doing the 
most efficient possible job from a cost point of view and also 
from service to farmers because that's another critical point in 
keeping farmers in the program . . . is delivery good service to 
them. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, can you give us a  

breakdown of what all Ernst & Young was to be looking at? 
Just to say delivery system, I mean there could be a lot of things 
involved in this. Are they looking at perhaps doing away with 
the agents or moving Crop Insurance offices out into the SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) offices or what have 
you? Or are they fairly limited in what they're to be looking at? 
 
And also can you give me a breakdown of the cost, what Ernst 
& Young are going to be getting to do this? And in fact is it 
showing up in this year's budget? And if so, can you tell me 
where I would find that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Ernst & Young has a very broad 
mandate to look at the overall delivery system. We're looking at 
how we deal with farmers primarily. So they will be looking at 
the agent system and the CSO (customer service office) system 
to see whether that could be streamlined or changed. They're 
looking at the paperwork and the paper flow and the forms and 
generally looking at the whole delivery system of the 
corporation. The cost is $85,000. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 
 
 


