






















































May 16, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 16, 1995 

 

 
2297 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair: — I would ask that the Minister of Labour 
reacquaint us with the officials who have joined us here this 
evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. I have two 
officials with me this evening. To my left I have the assistant 
deputy minister, Janis Rathwell, and one of the directors in the 
department, Jeff Parr. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening, 
Minister. I have tonight brought with me some notes for a 
couple of questions that I want to ask you, or a few more 
maybe, and so I hope that you haven't booked a plane for 
anywhere. 
 
To begin with, we have talked about this particular portfolio 
before in the session as you will recall, and we had asked you 
for some global questions that we ask of every department and 
we finally did receive a package of material. And so we want to 
just work on that a little bit for clarification to make sure that 
we understand exactly what's been going on in your department. 
And we would like to do that for the benefit of the taxpayers of 
this province so that they'll know that their money was spent for 
some good purpose. 
 
The first item on our list this evening, Minister, is minister's 
travel. And we would like to know a few of the details about 
the travel, as what we have are some very general figures on the 
answers that you have sent over to us. 
 
Now what we have here is comparative listing from last year 
and this year, and I'll just go right down to the total and then we 
can kind of work back where we have to. But it looks like in the 
travel expense area for '93-94 we had $386,000 that was spent 
by your department, and this year it appears that we went up to 
475,777. 
 
So there's a fairly sizeable increase in the cost of travel and I 
would like you to explain to the people of Saskatchewan where 
did this money all get spent and how did you manage to achieve 
such a large increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The hon. member is correct on the 
figure for the budget for the '94-95 fiscal year which was 
$475,777. I don't have the figure with me readily available that 
you quote, I believe it was the '93-94 fiscal year, which was 
$386,000 approximately, give or take a few cents. 
 

The reason for the increase in travel certainly is not to do with 
my commencement with the Department of Labour. I'd have to 
get that answer for you. The travel I had within Energy and 
Mines may have justified the amount it had gone up but my 
officials tell me that that is not the case. There is an increase of 
some almost 90,000 . . . $89,000-plus in travel and I don't have 
a readily available explanation for that. But I will send that over 
to you shortly. So you want to go on with your questioning, I'll 
get that answer for you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We will await that with 
anticipation so that we can get right back to it as soon as it 
arrives. 
 
Under the item of out-of-province travel, could you give us 
some explanation of the dates, the destinations, and the 
purposes of these trips, and could you tell us what each of these 
trips accomplished. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The minister's out-of-province travel 
would be about $3,517. I don't have at the current time the lists 
. . . sorry, I do have. This was one trip by the previous minister 
and his ministerial assistant, Bill Davies, and it was to 
Vancouver, British Columbia, to attend a labour market 
productivity conference. I can send that over to you. 
 
As well, the travel for deputy minister and department officials: 
total for the deputy minister, $4,109; for department officials, 
$41,947. And I don't know whether the member wants me to go 
through the reasons for the out-of-province travel for the 
departmental officials, but I could send those over to you if you 
wish. Would that be satisfactory? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Now, Minister, this seems a strange high 
amount of money for a Department of Labour to be spending 
outside of the province when the minister appears not to have 
made a lot of these trips in conjunction with what was going on. 
So we're going to study this list and try to put together some 
sense of why there would be a need to do this kind of 
expenditure. 
 
In the meantime, do things like hotel bills and meals and other 
expenses come out of this travel account, or would they be 
charged some place else in the process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — All expenses for out-of-province travel 
would be included in the list that I've sent to you. It would be 
travel, hotel rooms, sustenance. Anything that would be an 
expenditure that is tagged to the employee who would leave the 
province for another destination would be included in those 
amounts. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — So when you're trying to decide how you're 
going to facilitate a trip like this, would you have one of your 
officials in the department sort of phone ahead and book some 
hotels and arrange for an airplane flight, or would you use a 
travel agency? And if you did, what would the travel agency's 
name be if there was one used, or several, or whatever they are?  



May 16, 1995 

 
2298 

How would this all be accomplished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — If an employee is anticipating 
out-of-province travel, I believe they would require a request 
for travel approval by the deputy minister. And once the 
approval has been received from the deputy minister, the 
permanent head of the department, then someone at a clerical 
level likely, would phone a travel agency and book the trip, the 
rooms, and any other necessary bookings that would be 
required during the stay outside of the province. 
 
The travel agency is co-op travel, I believe out of Regina here. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well the word co-op usually indicates a 
non-profit organization that has been registered under the 
government's legislation. Is that the case in this situation, or is 
this just a privately owned company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We have had an arrangement for about 
a year, a year and a half, maybe close to two years, with that 
particular company. In terms of the ownership structure, I don't 
know that. I don't have that readily available. But if the member 
requires that, I would undertake to provide that to him. 
 
I would think that because the name is co-op travel, it is a 
cooperative that is broadly held by the members of the co-op. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Would the provincial government be a 
member of that co-op and would you be paid dividends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — My officials inform that we are not a 
member of that cooperative. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, why not? Co-ops in my town 
operate with the purpose of making a small profit and bringing 
goods and services to the community, and the profits are shared 
through dividends. So why wouldn't you be a member of a 
cooperative that operates in the city and get that saving for the 
taxpayer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I would think that the department 
has chosen not to be a member of any organization so that they 
can fulfil a professional mandate and feel free to represent, as 
professionals, any group, whether it be a cooperative, whether it 
be a labour-management issue. I think it would be inappropriate 
for the department to join any type of cooperative or other 
group. They need the independence and the impartiality to work 
as professionals. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. That makes some sense, 
all right. It might be a conflict of interest anyway. 
 
Now we were just checking on the out-of-province travel sheet 
that you sent over and we've got some abbreviations in there 
that kind of make us wonder what's been happening. For 
example, apparently there was a trip to a meeting that's called a 
CCOHS (Canadian Centre for Occupational Health & Safety). 
What would that kind of a meeting be about and why would 
you have your officials there? 

(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Those initials stand for the Canadian 
occupational health and safety group, and it's important to know 
what's happening in other jurisdictions across Canada. All 
jurisdictions would participate in such an organization. It's a 
sharing of information and learning from each other as to what 
works well, what doesn't work, new ideas in the area of 
occupational health and safety. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. Minister, we have 
another one here that's under the purpose. It's . . . the destination 
was Fredericton and Ontario and . . . I think that goes together 
anyway. And it's: attended the national meeting of Premier's 
advisory council. What is a national Premier’s advisory 
council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's the Premier’s advisory council for 
persons with disabilities, and there's a national organization 
which they would have attended, and that's the particular 
conference that you refer to. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, what benefit would it be to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers for somebody to be at that particular 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well again, most of the travel out of 
province is for knowledge as to what's happening in other 
jurisdictions of Canada so that, in this case, a disabled person 
— whether they live in Moncton, New Brunswick; or Penticton, 
British Columbia; or Maple Creek, Saskatchewan — they could 
expect at some point to have standardized regulations, 
standardized laws, standardized facilities, and services that a 
disabled person could expect. There's a sharing of information 
from each of the respective jurisdictions and hopefully down 
the road that the Canadian government will observe that an 
organization such as this provides a good focal point for 
consultation to produce standards on a national scale. And this 
is usually the reason for attending a conference of this nature. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — On June 4, for one week, Bill Davies 
attended Vancouver, British Columbia, a meeting called the 
labour market productivities conference. Now what would be 
the purpose of that type of a conference and what would have 
been gained for the Saskatchewan taxpayers out of going to that 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The labour market productivity group, 
I'm informed, is a group which looks at the standards across the 
country. The importance of a conference such as this is that it's 
a bilateral industry-labour conference, so you have industry 
representatives as well labour representatives at that type of 
forum. And it's likely the way of the future in that the 
in-your-face or confrontational types of operations very seldom 
turn out to be productive, either for the employer or the 
employee. 
 
And this type of conference, I think, helps people to understand 
how to cooperate together, how to arrive at sometimes  



May 16, 1995 

 
2299 

compromise positions so that it's for the very best for the 
employer and the very best for the employees. And this is the 
type of conference we'd be very excited about sending 
employees to, to make sure that we have consistency with the 
rest of Canada. And if it's unanimous at the national level then 
we can expect our federal government to standardize some of 
those issues which are contentious between employers and 
employees throughout the country. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I'm intrigued by this 
conference. Was this a one-week conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I don't know the exact duration of the 
conference. I would in fact ask the employees to look at the 
dates that the conference was actually held and provide that to 
you in a written form. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We'll await that 
information. Just to carry that a bit further, we do note that the 
minister in charge at that time was not, apparently, yourself — 
it was the previous minister — and it appears that he stayed for 
two weeks. And we were kind of wondering if the conference 
lasted for a week or two weeks or three weeks, or if the 
Commonwealth Games were on at the same time, or just what 
was going on over there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I don't know what events 
coincided out in British Columbia with the time of the trip that 
you're calling into question. I'm sure that the employee who 
travelled to the west coast had good reason for being there. 
 
It's not unusual for people who are employees of the province 
of Saskatchewan to take the opportunity, when they have to 
travel to another jurisdiction, to in fact try and garner more 
knowledge and understanding of what happens within that 
particular area of influence that they would have to deal with 
back here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I don't know the exact answer to that, but as I said, we will 
undertake to provide the member with the information as to the 
exact dates of the conference, how long the trip was, and what 
this particular individual did in addition to attending the 
conference out in British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. I wasn't 
questioning the rationale for sending Bill Davies to a 
conference like this. I think we do have to participate in the 
world around us obviously. And I'm quite sure that he had a 
legitimate reason to be there. 
 
But we did notice that the member from Churchill Downs had 
been gone exactly the same period of time, and for even a week 
longer; went to the same place. It appears that he attended the 
conference, and that's what it says. It's got an abbreviation there, 
but I'm sure it's the same conference at the same time at least in 
chronological time. So we were kind of wondering why he 
stayed a week longer and what he accomplished for the 
taxpayers in that extra week? 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I would take that as a 
supplementary to the question you asked earlier and undertake 
to provide you with that information. I would want to point out 
to the hon. member that it's not unusual for a cabinet minister to 
be accompanied by a ministerial assistant and do a number of 
additional things while you are on one specific focus for the 
trip. And to abbreviate it, it is likely been written down that he 
attended this particular conference. 
 
I could give you an example of myself and my former portfolio. 
If I had travelled to Calgary to attend an event at the Petroleum 
Club, I would quite often take opportunity of that same trip to 
share expenses and save dollars for the taxpayers to visit with a 
number of oil and gas companies in Calgary while I was there. 
And it could quite well take longer over a period of days than 
the actual event that would be marked down for my attendance. 
 
But I'm sure that the member who was the minister of Labour at 
that time can well document the reasons he was there and his 
itinerary for you. And again I will undertake to provide that 
because I view it as a supplementary question to the one you've 
asked earlier. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister; we would appreciate 
having that information because obviously the member from 
Churchill Downs stayed an extra five days after his official 
came home and there must be some explanation as to what he 
was up to. And obviously if he was representing the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan and the government of this province, there 
must be some documentation as to what he was doing. And I'm 
sure he will probably cooperate with you to track that down. So 
we will anxiously await the answer to that question. 
 
Just going back to the way that travel agents are selected and 
the people that you deal with, and you've already explained that 
this was a co-op group, would work like that be tendered or 
would you just naturally assume that you could determine 
whether or not you were getting the best deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The situation with the co-op travel as 
being the travel agency of record for the Department of Labour 
was a tendered situation and they were the successful bidder. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Now in the in-province 
travel we've got something like $426,781 were spent. Would 
those kinds of travelling be similar to the ones that were out of 
province or are there different responsibilities that are attached 
to the in-province travel expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — That travel would be quite different. 
The travel usually done within province is task oriented where 
an employee may have to attend a situation of conciliation; they 
may have to meet with a business group; they may have to meet 
with a trade union; they may have to investigate an occupational 
health and safety complaint; they may have to investigate a 
labour standards complaint. There would be a wide range. But 
usually it's task oriented where the employee would go out with 
a specific reason in mind for being there to try and resolve a 
situation and then return back to the place  



May 16, 1995 

 
2300 

where they're assigned for their employment. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Just to give people an idea in a little more 
detail, could you give us some kind of an example, maybe even 
a hypothetical one so that we don't use somebody's particular 
name or anything like that, of the type of conciliation work that 
someone might be doing in this department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well for example, there's one going on 
now with Parkridge nursing home in Saskatoon where the 
parties were not progressing as any reasonable person would 
expect. Both sides recognized that; they asked for our 
intervention, I believe they asked for our intervention, and we 
appointed a conciliator in that situation to see if we could have 
the individual who's doing the conciliation get a resolve 
between the two parties. 
 
That's maybe not the best example of travel and the expenses 
you're asking about. Another situation would be that someone 
in Green Lake, Saskatchewan, has a complaint in the nature of 
occupational health and safety or a labour standards or a Trade 
Union Act complaint. The closest employee to that, depending 
on the nature of the complaint, may be North Battleford, and 
the employee would at some point likely have to travel from 
North Battleford to Green Lake, look into the situation, hear all 
sides of the story, gather the information they need to gather to 
determine what the facts are, and at some point travel back to 
the office in North Battleford. 
 
That's an example of the travel that you refer to in the amounts 
that you refer to, that would be taken internally within the 
province. And I think that makes up the vast majority of the 
travel internally within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. In the event that you 
did travel, as you say now to North Battleford, and an official 
made that trip and they were investigating something in the area 
of the occupational health and safety area, perhaps on a 
complaint and there was an inspection required, would you 
charge someone there a fee or some kind of charges for that 
individual having gone there to do that trip? Or is this all cost 
that is directly related back to your department? Or is there any 
recovery under any circumstances where you pass the costs on 
to the people who have caused the problems that require people 
to travel out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — No, not currently. Certainly in 
occupational health and safety, and I believe labour standards as 
well, it's a cost of doing business for the department. And the 
employee would go out there and try and determine the relevant 
facts of the situation and try and assist in getting a resolve with 
the employer and the employee, or in some cases, employees. 
 
But the travel in that case, the expenses associated with it, have 
always been absorbed by the department. I think that that is 
rightly so. And that's been the case for as long as I think the 
department has existed. There's no attempt at cost recovery for 
travel expenses within province. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Maybe we should have 
fees and charges. The thought just crossed my mind that maybe 
if there are some folks in society who consistently cause you to 
have to have officials come out and straighten out problems, if 
it were once or twice, I suppose that would be the cost of 
business. But if it got to be a chronic situation, maybe there 
would be a need to start to charge people and make them more 
responsible. 
 
I'll let you comment to that. And then I guess earlier today the 
Liberals had indicated that they wanted to make some 
comments and ask you some questions, so I'll let them have 
their turn now if they'd like to get involved with the Department 
of Labour — after you make your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I guess we wouldn't want, either 
from the employer side or the employee side, to cause undue 
hardship because of the expense of someone coming out to 
investigate a particular complaint. 
 
Actually the new Labour Standards Act may allow for a small 
fee for the collection of wages, and it can be up to as much as 
10 per cent. I'm not sure that that's a practice that will either 
deter or encourage people to make complaints if the law or 
regulations have been broken. Certainly if there's cases of 
vexatious complaints, we would want to make sure that if those 
were reoccurring in the same area, that in fact the department 
would be a little reluctant to respond. 
 
So I think that what you're saying may have some merit to it, 
but we certainly wouldn't want to impose any hardship on 
people utilizing the facilities of the Department of Labour. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the 
Liberals really didn't want to be bothered with the Department 
of Labour, so I'll just carry on and ask the questions for them. I 
suppose somebody has to do it for them. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the area of legal actions, could you talk to us a 
little bit about the kinds of legal actions that might be going on 
in the department. I guess, just give us an overview to begin 
with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Usually we will consult with the 
Department of Justice. Sometimes we can receive legal 
assistance from the department itself, meaning the Department 
of Justice. 
 
In terms of the Labour Relations Board, we've retained four 
different law firms in the period April 1, '94 to March 31, '95. 
And those firms worked as legal counsel to the Labour 
Relations Board. The total payment to them was $27,750. 
 
We also, during the year that I mentioned previously, had two 
law firms give us legal opinions on certain aspects of The Trade 
Union Act. These fees amounted to $7,300. We had some 
consultations with private legal firms over the labour standards  



May 16, 1995 

 
2301 

hearings. That amounted to some $3,440. And there was 930 
miscellaneous dollars of legal fees. In total, with private law 
firms, the department spent in the fiscal year '94-'95, $39,420. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Would any of these actions have been as a 
result of regulations that were not implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — My recollection is that there was that 
situation with the labour standards regulations, as to whether or 
not they actually reflected what the intent of the government 
was, and there was a small amount. I'm not sure what the total 
was, but the total for the year, and even if that was the total for 
that consultation on the regulations, was some $3,440 as a cost 
to the department. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — What law firms would have been connected 
in receiving those funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — There were two firms that gave 
opinions on the labour standards regulations. They were 
MacPherson, Leslie, Tyerman; and Woloshyn Mattison. Both 
those firms gave opinions on labour standards regulations. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, it sounds to me like most of 
this legal cost was in terms of consultation fees. Were there any 
actions that your departments were involved in where there 
were plaintiffs? Or were there any actions where you filed 
against somebody else in any kind of a court action or suit or 
anything like that? And if so, what would those costs have been 
and who would have been involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — In the type of situation that you refer to, 
we would not have retained any private sector law firms. Any 
actions either for or against the department would have been 
handled by the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — So in order to find out what actions there 
might have been, would it be then appropriate for us to ask the 
Department of Justice when they're here or do we seek those 
things from you? Could you elaborate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The department officials and myself are 
unaware of any actions that actually happened. There have been 
consultations on legal matters, regulatory items, statute items, 
but no retention or, pardon me, no usage of Department of 
Justice for actions actually by the department or against the 
department. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — So the consultations, Minister, that the 
Department of Justice might have handled for you, how would 
we find out about those? Would we find those things out from 
you now or do we have to wait and ask the Minister of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The Department of Justice would have a 
breakdown for you as to the amount of service that they would 
perform for each of the provincial government departments 
and/or agencies. In terms of actual opinions, I guess it would be 
more appropriate that it would come from us. But if you want 
the breakdown of time that Justice would spend, their time with  

various government departments or agencies, it would be 
appropriately asked of the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well could we get an undertaking from you 
to give us what your interpretation is of those things that the 
Department of Justice has done for your department and then 
we'll also ask them, of course, later on. And that way maybe 
we'll get everything. I note the minister is nodding yes, so we'll 
take him at his word and wait for that information. 
 
In the area of contracts, we note that there are two contract 
employees that you had this year. Could you give us their 
names, their terms of job description, benefits, offices’ 
locations, principal residence and locations, and those kinds of 
things that relate to the contracted employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — During the period April 1, 1994 to 
March 31, 1995, the '94-95 fiscal year, there were two 
contractual services provided by individuals to the Department 
of Labour. They were John Alderman in the amount of $19,020. 
There was Ernest Becker. His contract was in the amount of 
$19,780. 
 
In terms of their services, Mr. Alderman reviewed and advised 
on the development of the occupational health and safety 
regulations and the mine regulations. He provided support for 
the occupational health and safety council. He reviewed and 
advised on divisional policy with regard to uranium mining in 
Saskatchewan. He reviewed environmental impact statements 
and developed the divisional policy in regard to the 
federal-provincial review panel. And in terms of the period, that 
took place from January 3, 1995 and the contract runs until 
June 30, 1995, which is a month or so into the future. 
 
In terms of the personal residence, I think it's inappropriate to 
provide that information for employees. I don't want to, in a 
public forum, provide personal residences so that anyone can 
determine where Mr. Alderman actually lives. 
 
The second individual, Mr. Ernest Becker, he developed policy 
for regulations on the long-lived dust in Saskatchewan uranium 
mines. He established a mechanism for conducting an 
epidemiologic study of the health of current and former 
uranium workers. He completed uranium mine radiation safety 
training programs. And again, I feel it's inappropriate to provide 
the residential . . . or personal resident's address of the 
individual, and I hope that serves your needs in terms of the two 
contract employees. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, that's a great help to us. 
I guess we should have more specifically said could you give us 
a description of a community where these people might have 
been located in rather than the more specific kind of question 
that I did ask. And I understand the logic behind your thinking 
of not giving out the details, and I appreciate the fact that you 
didn't do that. But could you tell us which part of the province, 
maybe a little closer to what city or some community kind of a 
description? 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2302 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Alderman has a permanent address 
in the Outlook area. The other individual — Mr. Becker — his 
address would be Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Now under the heading 
of personnel reports — and you gave us considerable 
information there on personnel circumstances — it appears that 
you hired four fewer in-scope permanent employees this year. 
And yet you have still managed to spend $280,790 more on the 
salaries for this class of employee. How did this happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — That depends entirely on the mix of 
classifications. For example, if there were fewer clerical 
employees within the department but more occupational health 
and safety officers or labour standards officers, then you could 
quite well have fewer positions but more money paid to the 
positions. 
 
I don't know whether or not temporary positions are included in 
that, but I suspect the temporary positions are included in that 
as well. So it really depends. You'd have to do an analysis of 
the mixture of employees — clerical versus inspectors versus 
regulators versus executive administration — within the 
department. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, that was sort of what we were 
hoping you might do for us because it doesn't say anything 
about part time. It says in-scope permanent employees . . . is the 
term that's used. Now permanent seems to imply permanent, not 
part time. Or maybe I'm confused about this, but then the reality 
goes on that we did spend the $280,000 more for salaries in that 
class of employee and yet we have statistical data given to us by 
you that shows four fewer in-scope people were in that 
department collecting the wages. So how did it happen that this 
extra amount of money got spent? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'd like to correct the record just a bit if 
I could for the member. I hope I haven't misled you, but the 
information I have is that you're correct that temporary 
employees are not necessarily included in that amount. 
 
The four fewer in-scope people but the greater amount paid 
overall, would have been part of the collective agreement 
arrived at with the Saskatchewan Government Employees' 
Union. You'll recall that the standard fare at that time was zero 
per cent, zero per cent, and 2.5. This would have been the year 
that the 2.5 per cent had kicked in and that reflects the four 
hundred and eighty-some thousand dollars that you refer to; that 
would be the 2.5 per cent spread over the amount of the 
in-scope employees. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Would any of the employees involved in this 
negotiated settlement — and I believe it was a 2.5 increase — 
would any of those employees have earned less than $12 per 
hour, and if the ones that are above that . . . would they have 
been bumped up or anything like that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I can't give you a precise answer on the 
people earning less than $12 per hour. I would suspect that 
there would be very few, if any, but we would have to do a 
computation because their wages are based monthly or annually 
and we would have to break down the actual numbers of work 
for a specific employee, divide it into the monthly wage, and 
determine the hourly rate for you. I don't have that information 
readily available and I believe that we could give you our 
undertaking to provide that to the member. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — We'd appreciate that, Minister. I would just . . 
. in consultation with my colleague who said that in SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), this same 
application was used in the negotiated settlement. And all those 
employees that were working at that time who were under $12 
per hour were automatically bumped up to a level of $12 or 
more, so it became their minimum sort of a wage. And then 
new people were hired later at lower wages, but everybody sort 
of got bumped up to that area and in fact then that some people 
may have gotten only one and a half per cent or even perhaps 
less of an increase, while those below the $12 level had gotten 
maybe three or five or whatever it took in order to get them to 
the $12 level. 
 
So that it wasn't really a 2.5 per cent increase for everybody. It 
turned out to be an average. And is that the same circumstance 
that occurred in your departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'm informed by the officials that there 
were no special adjustments within the Department of Labour, 
so it would be safe to say that the in-scope employees, 
everyone, got 2.5 per cent increase in that particular year, after 
having been negotiated zero the year before and zero the year 
before that. So you can't use this as an average. It is in fact the 
amount. There was no special adjustments within the 
Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Now you spent about 
30,000 more dollars on the out-of-scope temporary employees. 
Now could you explain what these positions were and why you 
spent more money on this term this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — To arrive at what the member would 
like, I believe we'd have to do a breakdown of everyone who is 
out of scope. The out-of-scope employees receive not 2.5 but a 
2 per cent across the board increase. There may well have been 
some people that moved from one position out of scope into 
another position out of scope, and that could also have an effect 
on the $30,000 that you refer to. 
 
But I can't give you a definitive answer to a fairly general 
question that you've placed to me. If the breakdown is important 
to you, if you let us know more specifically what you're 
interested in, we'd try and provide that breakdown for the 
member. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — No, Minister, I think on a $30,000 item we 
wouldn't want to put you to a whole big test. I think perhaps 
though you might take note of this for next year, and if we're  



May 16, 1995 

 
2303 

both still around maybe I'll ask you where this kind of money 
went and you might want to give us a little more detail. Quite 
sure that it's possible if you have folks watching for it as they're 
doing their job of compiling the information for you. 
 
Now you spent $183,981 on other employees, which is $81,000 
more than last year. Could you explain what these other 
employees are and why spending in this area increased so 
dramatically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Other would include the costs paid to 
members of the Labour Relations Board, the joint commission 
on part-time work, and the joint labour-management sectoral 
working committees. There'd be overtime included in that, 
temporary performance of higher duties, those types of things 
would be included in the amount that you have referred to. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. In the overall spending 
of the department, under the departmental travel once again — I 
just want to divert back to that again — we have got a little 
calculation here. It shows, if we got this right, that 23 per cent 
increase at the $475,777, and that seems like a fairly significant 
increase. 
 
Why has it gone up this much in this period of time? Will this 
be an ongoing percentage increase that you can expect for next 
year? Do you have any plans, or was this something that just 
cropped up one particular year because of the changes to the 
Acts? Could you outline these additional travel involvements? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, I believe that relates to the first question 
you asked me here this evening. The amounts where the 
increase occurred were with in- province travel. They can be 
broken down basically into three areas. There's the increased 
amount of expenses for safety and labour standards activities; 
there were the 14 labour standards sectoral committees for 
consultations; and thirdly, there were the 20 occupational health 
and safety committee sectoral committees, to have consultations 
with them. 
 
We do not expect this to reoccur in the year under review. And 
this is a one-time expense because of the broad consultation 
that took place in regard to the Acts and the regulations, which 
the member would be well aware about. Do we expect these to 
occur again next year? No, we do not expect those same 
expenses to occur again next year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I noticed that with the change-over from the previous minister 
to yourself that there has been a change in the ministerial staff 
within your office. I wonder if you could give us some 
information about the staff that was there previously that are no 
longer there? Are any of them currently employed either within 
another department or within a Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's usually the case that when a minister 
changes portfolios that the staff that the minister had would 
move with him into the new portfolio. I can tell you that the 
people I currently have employed in my office are Janet Abels,  

Shayne Cristo, Scott Goddard, Judy Haukeness, Ingrid Read, 
and Linda Plese. Those are the current employees. 
 
I do not know the disposition of the staff that worked for the 
previous minister. But I would undertake to get that for you. It's 
just not readily available this evening. 
 
I assume that some of those staff may be in different jobs 
somewhere within government, some may still be with the 
minister, some may have gone to other opportunities. I just 
don't have that available here this evening. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. On your 
global that you've sent over  information  it talks about 
permanent employees and a number of names listed under 
terminations. How can those employees be permanent if they're 
terminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Possibly the term, termination, is a bit 
of a misnomer because even if someone resigns, it's recorded as 
a termination. So there can be many different categories of a 
person departing the employ of an office; it would be classified 
as a termination. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think I have more 
contention with the word permanent than with termination. If 
the employee can be moved away, they're not a permanent 
employee. And as one boss that I had told me that there are no 
permanent employees in this organization, they are regular 
employees and temporary employees. And this was about six 
months before he got fired. 
 
So I think it goes to prove the point that there are no permanent 
employees and perhaps it would be worth the minister's while to 
change the names of the classifications away from permanent. 
 
I have some questions also dealing with advertising and 
communications. You have a number of newspaper ads and 
training ads that were put out. They're all by one company. And 
I was wondering if all of these were tendered. Who else 
submitted tenders and were there any special conditions 
attached to those tenders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The agency for the department would 
have been originally tendered. The successful bidder was 
Warwick associates and they are the agency of record. That will 
likely at some point in the future be tendered again, to remain 
competitive in terms of the firm that we have to perform the 
service for the department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — This tendering would be then not for a 
job basis but rather for a one-year or two-year term or whatever 
it may be. What kind of a term are we dealing with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I don't have the term of the Warwick 
and associate contract readily available here this evening. I 
would give the member my undertaking that we would provide 
that with the other issues that we are going to provide you with  



May 16, 1995 

 
2304 

written information on at a later date, if that's acceptable to you. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would think that 
you should know whether or not tenders were at least provided 
on a one-term basis, per job, or if it's a one-year term to provide 
all the printing necessary for the department. Can you answer 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's not per job. It would be for a set 
term so that one agency would do all of the work that the 
department would require. We don't go to the competitive 
market for every individual situation where we wish to receive 
this type of service. So I can tell the member that we don't 
tender for each individual service we require. We would have a 
contract with Warwick associates, and it's for a set term of time. 
I just don't have that set term here this evening. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you have a 
contract with Warwick associates for a period of time, would 
they also receive a retainer if there was no duties performed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — No. Payment to the firm would only be 
on services performed for the department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You also have, 
under advertising and communications, a number of newsletters 
and periodicals. It doesn't list here who printed them. The costs 
are listed, but no one listed for who printed them. I wonder if 
you could provide that. Were those done in-house, or were they 
done through Warwick associates, or who did that printing for 
you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — In the case of printing of pamphlets and 
that type of material that would be dispersed from the 
department. We have a printer that is for a set term just like the 
agency of record, and we would provide all of the print work to 
that particular print company. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Two questions then. Warwick and 
associates  where's their head office, or where are they based 
out of? And the other periodicals, the newsletters and 
periodicals, who would be the company that is doing the 
printing for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Warwick associates is out of Saskatoon. 
The officials do not have the name of our printer of record that 
we go to here this evening. I apologize for that. I don't know 
who is doing our printing currently. But I'll give you my 
assurance that that will be provided with you as expeditiously 
as possible. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under 
Warwick associates, you have approximately, I believe, 23,000, 
$25,000 worth of printing. Under newsletters and periodicals 
it's about $50,000 worth of printing. And yet I'm surprised that 
you wouldn't have the name of who would have done that. If 
you had the name for the 25,000 roughly, why wouldn't you  

have the name for the $50,000? I just find that somewhat of an 
omission that they wouldn't even be on the list. As one of your 
colleagues says, it makes us suspicious as to what may be 
transpiring. So if you can provide that for us, please, if you 
would. 
 
I have some questions now dealing with the computers that 
were purchased for your department. You have a purchase here 
of a NEC 3V MultiSync colour monitor for $9,800. I wonder if 
you can explain that. Hopefully it's more than one monitor, 
although there no "s" at the end of monitor, so I have to 
wonder. That's an awful high-priced monitor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I could come over and add the "s" 
on for you if you want. It's not for one monitor, it's for five 
separate monitors. So if you divided five into the $9,800 that 
would be the cost per monitor. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, NEC are very good 
monitors. I'm just not exactly sure that that's what you really 
need in the department. What would they be used for, and what 
size of monitors are these? Do you have any idea? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — These would be 14-inch monitors, the 
standard size monitors, I'm informed by the department officials 
that are here this evening. They would be at various locations, 
likely either in Regina or Saskatoon, but not necessarily. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, five monitors for 
9,800 bucks, 14-inch monitors. You can go down to Future 
Shop here, for 250, $300 you can buy a MultiSync colour 
monitor, 14-inch. So for 1,500 bucks you could have got, 
perhaps not as good a quality, but certainly sufficient, if you're 
simply using them for word processing, to do the job. So 
looking at that, you overpaid by $7,500. That's a significant 
amount of money on a purchase of five computer monitors, Mr. 
Minister. I think you better come up with a better explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I do have a better explanation. We 
acquired those through SPMC. Maybe SPMC marked them up 
so when they get before estimates, you can maybe ask SPMC 
what they paid for them versus what they charged us for them. 
 
We're always looking for a better deal in the Department of 
Labour, and if our officials can get a better deal, we want a 
better deal. I appreciate your suggestion as cheaper monitors. I 
don't know what the actual cost was to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, but I know that the $9,800 
was the cost to us. It was for five monitors. We paid the bill. 
We hope that SPMC is doing as good a job as what the officials 
in the Department of Labour do. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well according to the minister of 
SPMC, they do an excellent job, and they get the cheapest 
prices possible. I'd like to have your contracts for purchasing 
computers because I think I could be fairly rich at the end of the 
day, especially if you're prepared to pay 2,000 bucks apiece for 
a 14 inch monitor. If you're buying 21-inch monitors you're 
looking at $2,000, but not 14-inch ones. So, Mr. Minister, I  



May 16, 1995 

 
2305 

would strongly suggest that you go back to SPMC and inquire 
as to what is going on in this particular case because you paid 
way too much. 
 
So since you paid way too much for your monitors, maybe we 
should check the rest of your computer stuff. You purchased 
some compact LTE lite laptops for $9,000 with the docking 
stations. How many computers are we talking about here and 
what types of computers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The Compaq LTE lite laptops, there 
were two laptops that were purchased. The total cost to us that 
we paid the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, I 
believe, would have been $7,000. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, again I have to almost 
think that they saw you coming. Can you give me a little more 
information on these laptops. What speeds are they — are they 
486s? — and what megahertz? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I don't know that, but I'd sure give you 
my undertaking that as soon as possible I would go over to the 
department and check out where these two laptops are, and I'll 
get the number of RAMs (random-access memory) and all the 
things that you require. If you give me a detailed list of what 
you want to know about these two Compaq LTE lite laptops, I'll 
get it for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you had 
better start looking at your computer purchases for $4,500 for 
these two computers. Again, you're pushing the very upper 
limits of purchase prices for that type of equipment, depending 
on what it is. Now if it's a fairly fast machine it's certainly 
within the ballpark, but more than likely it's not. 
 
Other purchases  you purchased a number of NEC 48 . . . 
well I'm assuming it's 486 here; it's says 466, but 486 DX2s and 
some with hard drives for 67,500. How many computers did 
you purchase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It's my understanding that 22 personal 
computers were purchased for the $67,500. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — You're getting into the ballpark now, 
Mr. Minister, on prices. Maybe a little high but still not bad. 
 
The NEC Versa laptops for 24,800, how many of those did you 
purchase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'd want to tell the hon. member the 
computers that you refer to I'm not sure how many. I'm not sure 
how many laptop computers there were, but there were three 
work orders so there's at least three laptops for that amount. I 
don't know how many on each work order. I could provide that 
at a later date in writing to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Please do 
so. 
 

On the next page on your globals, for $2,300 you bought some 
additional 2 megs and 4 megs simm memory. How much of that 
did you purchase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well obviously, I'm going to have to get 
on top of the computer situation within the Department of 
Labour because I can't answer that question for you. But I 
would assure the hon. member that if you give me the list of 
everything you want to know about the computers and the 
software and the monitors and the floppies and the hard drives 
and anything you want to know, if you provide me the list I'll 
get that information for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well I realize the minister is not totally 
computer literate and therefore all these terminologies are 
somewhat beyond him. But, Mr. Minister, when I look at the 
prices and what you're getting for them I have to take into 
consideration that we're dealing with the Department of Labour, 
that you personally favour the use of the government Crown 
tendering policy and are used to paying 30 per cent more for 
everything than what would normally happen in the private 
sector. So I can understand why you would allow SPMC to 
perhaps inflate the prices here on your computer purchases. 
 
I think you should go back to SPMC and verify those costs and 
that you were getting the equipment capabilities that you were 
paying for. Because I would suggest to you that when you're 
buying 14-inch monitors, five of them for $9,800, you have way 
overpaid. So, Mr. Minister, even though you're used to paying 
an additional 30 per cent in labour costs, perhaps you should 
reconsider some of these purchases and ensure that you receive 
the value for your dollars that you're spending of the taxpayers' 
money before you proceed and buy more computers from 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — A number of things I want to point out. 
The member should be aware the purchases that we get through 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation are not 
within the Crown corporation tendering policy. The 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation is not a 
commercial Crown; therefore it doesn't apply. 
 
But I do really appreciate what the member points out in terms 
of getting bang for the buck, so to speak, for taxpayers' dollars. 
And I'll certainly ask the department to have some consultations 
with the Property Management Corporation to determine 
whether or not they are giving us the best service possible. I 
know the department's interested in providing good service. I 
know they're also interested in receiving good service from the 
suppliers that they deal with. 
 
(2015) 
 
I do want to make a minor correction in terms of the monitors 
that you referred to earlier. The $9,800 may have been for more 
than five monitors. I'm informed that the monitors were 
purchased on five purchase orders. There could have been more 
than one monitor on a purchase order, and I know that the very 
good assistant deputy minister who sits next to me here that  



May 16, 1995 

 
2306 

originally provided me with that information will examine each 
and every one of those purchase orders to determine how many 
monitors there are for $9,800. And I want to personally sign the 
letter to send across to the hon. member. And I thank you for 
bringing these items to our attention in terms of getting good 
value for money spent. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I didn't stand 
up to torture the back-benchers; I have a couple of more 
questions that have arisen from our researches into the 
information sent over by the minister. 
 
Amongst your new, non-permanent employees you have a Ms. 
Dawn Stanger, who was hired as an info services officer in 
January, Minister. Could you describe for us where Ms. Stanger 
works and what this position involves, what Ms. Stanger's 
qualifications are, what steps were taken to advertise this 
position, and how many other applicants there were, and how 
Ms. Stanger came to be selected over the other candidates for 
this position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Ms. Stanger that you refer to was not 
hired through a competition. She was hired as a temporary 
employee. We were under some pressures to get information 
out on The Labour Standards Act and the regulations that 
flowed from that. She actually works within the 
communications branch of the department. Currently, I believe, 
her position is soon to be advertised . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . or, my official tells me, has been advertised. She would 
have to apply for that position and go into competition with 
other people within government, outside of government, anyone 
who responds to the ad. 
 
So that's going to competition in the very near future. The 
advertising process, to make people aware, has already 
commenced. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, could you elaborate on the activities 
of the Jurisdictional Assignment Plan Development 
Committee? I noticed that it involves The Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Act and has Mr. Ed Cowley as the Chair. 
Would this have anything to do with the recently announced 
Crown tendering policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — No, it doesn't really. It's a committee 
that looks at jurisdictional issues between the trade union 
movement and the employers that they work for within 
Saskatchewan. He chairs that particular — is it an advisory 
committee? — he chairs that particular committee to have 
consultations amongst the trade union movement, in particular 
the building trades of Saskatchewan. And he would provide 
advice in regard to jurisdictional issues of unions and 
workplaces as opposed to anything to do with any policies of 
government. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, having gone through the 
global answers that you supplied to us and having studied and 
researched the department over the past few months, it seems to 
me fairly obvious that we can come to a couple of conclusions. 

And the first conclusion I would come to, having observed the 
department and worked through the figures, is that you have an 
awful lot of luxury items that you're purchasing for your 
employees. I'm sure they're quite happy employees. They should 
be — they have overpriced equipment that is not totally 
necessary. This appears to me to be a wasteful expenditure of 
taxpayers' money. 
 
We think that the second observation we can make, having 
worked on the analysis of your department, is that you have an 
awful lot of fat in your department created by unnecessary 
legislation that is definitely a hindrance to the development of 
our province, definitely has discouraged business from coming 
into our province, new businesses. It has stifled our economy, 
and it is definitely largely responsible for the state of inactivity 
that we find our province in when we compare it to the 
province of Alberta and other jurisdictions. 
 
We feel that your department and the work that your department 
has done is far too overpriced for the taxpayer and we want the 
taxpayers of this province to know that this our analysis of the 
situation in the Department of Labour. 
 
And having said that, I am looking forward to some day getting 
on to the point of the election that everybody keeps promising 
us, so that we can offer to the people of Saskatchewan an 
alternative, and if we are provided with the alternative . . . the 
opportunity to be that alternative, I can show you where we're 
going to cut a whole bunch of fat out of your department and 
it'll probably start at the top. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I thank the hon. member for his 
advice. I assume you're referring to at the top as myself and 
certainly as elections change, I wouldn't begrudge you that if 
the government is defeated and someone else is there. I'd expect 
to, well, be cut. I don't think I should be; you think I should be. 
That will bear out in the future. 
 
I do, however, appreciate the advice you give in terms of luxury 
items. If the employees had luxury items, then we need to do a 
review of that. The legislation that you referred to in terms of 
the creation of too much expenditure because of too much 
legislation, I would want to say to you that in the future 
certainly employers and their employees have to work more 
closely together because the old days of confrontational 
situations are rapidly moving behind us. And those who are on 
the leading edge of management-labour relations certainly 
develop cooperative atmospheres in which they can 
complement both the employees of the company as well as the 
company itself. 
 
And so your comments tonight are much appreciated. I 
appreciate you taking the time to have done all the research 
you've done and ask the very good questions that you've asked 
to hold us accountable and to keep us on our toes whether we 
are politicians or whether we are the permanent employees of 
the department. So I thank you for those questions. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 



May 16, 1995 

 
2307 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I would like to thank the members 
opposite for their questions this evening. I'm glad that the 
member was also able to provide the questions that the Liberals 
would have asked, but were asked by the member opposite. I'd 
like to thank the officials for the very good job they've done in 
providing information. 
 
I do want to assure the member from Maple Creek and the 
member from Souris-Cannington who asked the questions this 
evening that the department officials will expeditiously follow 
up on those items which we did not have answers for this 
evening, although they were very valuable questions, and will 
have those to you just as soon as possible. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman, for your time as well. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would join with 
the minister in thanking the officials for their contribution to the 
work that had to be done in reviewing the Department of 
Labour, and we very much appreciate the forthright manner in 
which the answers were given, and we anticipate the ones that 
are still coming. So thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — I would ask that the minister please introduce 
the officials who have joined us here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I want to say to the members of the opposition, I 
look forward to their questioning tonight, and as always I'm 
sure we will have a very good discussion and debate. 
 
With us tonight for the committee work, Mr. Chairman, is my 
deputy minister, Pat Youzwa, seated to my direct right; directly 
behind me — I think directly behind me — is Peter Phillips, 
who is the assistant deputy minister; Bob Perrin behind me and 
to my right is the acting assistant deputy minister of northern 
affairs and programing; and to my left is president of Sask 
Opportunities Corporation, Zach Douglas. 
 
(2030) 
 
Item 1 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials. It looks like, as usual, the official 
opposition will have to handle all the questioning tonight. I 
sometimes think, Mr. Chairman, that I should get paid double, 
having to fill in for the Liberals all the time. But be as it may, 
we'll have an interesting discussion tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, one quick question because I've been curious for 
some time on your reluctance to get involved in the pasta 
business. I understand the federal government have a $35,000 
study out in western Canada and your government has reacted 
very coolly to any of the proposals that have come forward. 
And we are the premier durum growing area, certainly in 
western Canada and if not in all of North America. And it 
would seem to me a fairly natural thing for you to do when 
you're busy handing out money these days that maybe pasta 
production might be something that would seem reasonable. 
 
Can you tell me where your department is at with this federal 
study and if you have been dealing with anyone in the pasta 
business over the last 12 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 
right in the fact that there have been ongoing discussions and 
debate over the production of pasta in Saskatchewan. This is 
not a new concept, of course. Their government was involved in 
negotiations on the proposed pasta plant for the Swift Current 
area. And during the 1970s, during the Blakeney 
administration, there was a great deal of talk about the possible 
establishment of the pasta industry here in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the problems that one has when you go to the process of 
producing pasta is not the fact of being able to do the technical 
work of producing pasta, but fitting it into the distribution 
chain. Because pasta, like many products, is very tightly 
controlled by a few companies in terms of distribution, and you 
almost have to start at that end of the chain and that is, find 
someone who will accept and distribute and sell for you, the 
pasta that you produce. 
 
Of course we could produce pasta here, but the key to 
production is having the market. And what the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool and others are now doing is trying to find that 
crucial partner who will take the product once it's produced here 
and put it on the shelves in the supermarket. And this was a 
dilemma for your government, a dilemma for the previous 
administrations, and obviously is the reason why pasta 
production is very difficult in Canada. 
 
The other outstanding problem that mitigates against the 
production of pasta in Canada, in fact new plants in North 
America, is the fact that the export enhancement program that 
the United States has been involved in as it would affect durum 
wheat pays a large subsidy on durum moving into the export 
markets, which makes it very much cheaper in many ways to 
produce, to ship durum out of the United States or the 
continental area of North America and produce it in other 
countries around the world. 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2308 

And so when we've been dealing on the trade issue with the 
United States, we have argued quite strongly that if they were to 
end the export enhancement program it would actually be easier 
for North American companies to do value added on things like 
durum wheat, but also many other grain products. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Wouldn't you agree, Minister, with the 
demise of the Crow subsidy, that the time is now ripe for 
western Canada in particular, to go looking for opportunities? 
 
I'm wondering where . . . the federal money that's being spent, 
is any of it being directed at sites in Saskatchewan or at 
Saskatchewan, or is it a general thing that you have no ability to 
influence? 
 
Where is that federal study aiming at, if you will? Is it like 
Cargill coming in with a site-specific plant for the crushing 
industry? Is there work being done in that regard by the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, the work that's being done at 
this point in time is not site specific. In fact there is no 
proponent on the distribution end of the formula at this point in 
time. And so those companies that are looking at possibly 
producing pasta, the one most obvious as being the Sask Wheat 
Pool, have indicated very clearly they're interested in building a 
plant. 
 
But what everyone is looking at is the possibility of finding a 
partner on the distribution end. And that's where a lot of the 
discussion and the debate and consultation is going on. And to 
this point, it's my understanding that that client or that group 
who might handle the distribution of the product has not been at 
this point identified. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, you have recently made a lot of 
announcements with sums of money attached to them for 
various endeavours in our province. And they are very wide 
ranging. It's been the meat business. It's been various types of 
manufacturing facilities. Some of it is old loans, as I 
understand, that have been rejigged. 
 
How much of this — and I'd like you to break it down for me 
— how much of this is coming out of your department? How 
much of it is tied to Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation? 
And how much are you making announcements on behalf of 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan)? And I 
would think of the announcements that you've made over the 
last month. Can you break that down for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I want to get for the member 
. . . You may want to go on to another question. I'll just have my 
staff work on the list. There have been a number of them. Some 
we have put money into, some we haven't. For example, 
Thomson Meats where we went to that expansion, we were 
there as an invited guest. Northwest Airlines, Athabaska 
Airways — so a number of them we have put no money into 
and are just there as facilitators. But what I want to do for you 
is get you the complete list and then we'll take an opportunity to  

run through them all, and you can follow up questions. But if 
you have something that you want to ask in the meantime, it'll 
just take a few minutes to put this list together. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That's very good, Minister. That'll give us an 
opportunity to get into some other things here. And they do tie 
together. 
 
I noticed in reading the 1994 annual report of SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), your 
comments were that you had achieved this winding-down with, 
and I quote: no bargain deals or forgiven loans. That was your 
statement in the thing. 
 
So I'd like you to support this claim for me. And I wonder if 
you could give me the total outstanding indebtedness, with 
interest to SEDCO, of your outstanding portfolio as of end of 
'94 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, SEDCO — and the 
amounts received or repaid for loans that were paid out or 
retired? Because I understand that you had a nonproductive 
loan portfolio worth about $40 million which was cleaned out 
in about two to three months. And I'm wondering how this was 
achieved. 
 
And I think the only way I can understand that is if I . . . given 
that you said in the annual report that there would be no bargain 
deals or forgiven loans, so I'm wondering if you could provide 
for me the total outstanding indebtedness with interest to 
SEDCO. And then if we know how those loans were repaid or 
retired, then we'll be able to understand more clearly how that 
was achieved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will be interested in 
this information. Now this is Sask Opportunities Corporation 
and it goes back to your previous question about what 
announcements we've made in the last short while. 
 
This isn't exactly the last month, but probably in the last couple 
of months there have been two announcements made out of 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation). One dealing 
with the Temple Gardens Spa in Moose Jaw where SOCO 
invested $700,000 in shares and purchased $700,000 worth of 
the share offering; and in the IMAX announcement on T-Rex, 
which will be filmed mainly in the Eastend area of 
Saskatchewan, we have $550,000 loan — a $555,000 loan, so 
that would be the extent of Sask Opportunity's involvement in 
recent announcements. 
 
As it would relate to SEDCO, what I'm going to do for you is 
prepare a list of all of the loans and status of those loans. I don't 
have them with me here tonight. As the chairman will know, 
those are amounts and questions normally asked in Crown 
Corporations Committee, but I will provide for you because 
they are public — the status. 
 
Now understand, and I'm sure you do understand, that I will not 
give you detail of the loans in terms of interest rates or schedule 
of payments, but what I can get for you is the names of the 
companies and the amount of the principal outstanding on the  



May 16, 1995 

 
2309 

loan. That information is available and I would undertake to get 
that for you. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I appreciate that, Minister, and if there are 
individuals' names in there, I don't need those. You can, as 
necessary, leave those out. Clearly though, I would like the 
settlements on loans amounts, conditions, and any alternative 
payment proposals that were received in there attached to those. 
Like I say, you can leave people's names out of that, because 
that's proper. 
 
Minister, I'm wondering if . . . there's a couple of questions I 
have and I believe that most of this is made public. They were 
certainly part of announcements that you took part in. Can you 
tell me if there was an offer received in regards to the Imp-Pak 
Packaging plant in Swift Current that would have allowed 100 
per cent recovery of the money owed to, at that time it would 
have been SEDCO, I believe. Was there an offer on that? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — So the member will be aware, one 
status of the SEDCO loans is there were a number over the last 
six months that have been paid out through early retirement of 
the debt. And in large part that has resulted from the fact that a 
number of these loans were written up at a relatively high level 
two, three, and four years ago. 
 
And then as interest rates dropped and many of these projects 
were on solid footing, they simply went to their regular lending 
institution and got loans from the banks or credit unions. 
Because I believe there's no penalty for early pay-out in 
SEDCO. In fact we encourage people to wind up those loans. 
We had a large number where we had actual early pay-outs. 
 
The Imp-Pak Packaging deal, I don't have the specifics but let 
me just try to put it into a general way so you understand the 
situation. In the early stages we were taking bids on the 
Imp-Pak Packaging in Swift Current and we received a number 
of bids and looked at simply taking the highest bid. 
 
The problem with it was, though, we were required to do the 
financing on the deal. And the security of course was not nearly 
appropriate for the kind of money that we were being asked to 
look at, so we would have been back into the same position as 
we were earlier where the individual was putting up very little, 
if any, cash and the people of Saskatchewan would have been 
required to lend the money to the company that was purchasing 
the assets of Imp-Pak Packaging. 
 
We then went back to ask for cash bids on the project, and at 
that point the decision was made to go with the somewhat lower 
amount; but we were out of the deal and did not have to do the 
financing. And we believe that on behalf of the taxpayers we're 
probably better served by getting the, something over I believe 
$10 million, around $10 million in cash for the assets of 
Imp-Pak Packaging, rather than taking something more than 
that but having to go back in and finance the new arrangement. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — The proposal, Minister, did it involve 
anything beyond the normal commercial lending requirements, 
the one that would have given you 100 per cent recovery of 
money over time? Were they asking for something less than the 
normal commercial structure that SEDCO would have had in 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well just two elements, and here 
again, I don't want to get into the very specific details. But the 
analysis on what we would have to finance, it was believed that 
the corporation restructured would not have been able to carry 
that debt. There was very little cash being injected into the deal, 
if any, and the amount being offered would not have covered 
off the total amount that we had sunk into the deal at that point 
in time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So you settled for 40, 50 cents on the dollar, 
somewhere in that range. Is that the way that I would 
understand this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I understand it, and I don't have 
those details here, but it would have been something in the area 
of 50, a little over 50 cents on the dollar. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And who was the successful bidder on this 
particular project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The name of the company, I 
believe, is Urban Forest Recyclers, and this is a combination of 
a number of Saskatchewan companies. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Are these companies publicly traded ones or 
are these privately held companies? Is it public knowledge who 
the principals involved in these companies are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The name of the three individuals 
that stand out, and I'll just check and reconfirm this for you if 
there were others, but the names of Jim Baker, formerly 
involved with North Canadian Oil here in Regina; a fellow by 
the name of Kevin Stangland, I believe his name was; and of 
course Paul Hill. 
 
Now these individuals were all publicly announced at the 
official opening in Swift Current. And I believe there was a 
public press release that went out with the details, and I can get 
that press release for you because the absolute details of that 
arrangement were public in the announcement when it was 
made. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Has SEDCO in its wind-down phase, 
Minister, done any write-offs of loans to viable businesses 
which are still in operation, and if so, why was there not a full 
cost-recovery mechanism? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
I'm just asking. Were there any write-offs on loans to businesses 
that are currently in operation during the last year? And if there 
were, why was not full cost recovery applied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — My understanding is, is that we 
have renegotiated a number of loans. But it's my understanding  



May 16, 1995 

 
2310 

also that if the company's still in existence and still productive, 
that there wouldn't have been loans that would have simply 
been forgiven or written off. But a number of arrangements 
where the company was simply unable to survive, given the 
load, we may have . . . or there could have been negotiations 
that went on to rearrange their repayment schedules, and that 
sort of thing. But nothing that wouldn't have been within the 
parameters and guidelines of SEDCO at that time. And this is 
not an uncommon banking arrangement where, in order to save 
some portion of the loan principal, you make some 
arrangements to get at least a portion of it back. 
 
But I can tell you quite honestly it's my opinion, and I think the 
hon. member if he has been talking to many of the clients of 
SEDCO would realize, that we have had very, very stringent — 
some might argue almost too stringent — control mechanisms 
on our loan applications. And of course . . . not the applications 
but on the collection of debt from individuals or companies 
who have been involved with SEDCO. 
 
But I think it's important again to try to find that balance 
between being so intent on re-collecting the money that you 
actually shut companies down and cause a problem for 
companies that are employing people, and on the other hand, 
being too lenient and not collecting the proper amount back for 
the taxpayers whose money it is. 
 
And this is the struggle that I think probably the administration 
that you represented had in the 1980s. Maybe even more so 
with the high interest rates that you were involved in at that 
time, and is also part of the reason why SEDCO got such a 
black eye, or in fact had such a bad reputation. Because in its 
day SEDCO made many arrangements with many businesses 
where the loans were all repaid. In fact many business people 
. . . and I could bring letters to the House where many business 
people say they simply wouldn't be in existence today if it 
hadn't been loans that they received under the Blakeney 
administration, or in fact under the administration that the 
Conservatives had in the 1980s. 
 
So far from being an organization that made only bad deals, 
there were probably many more good deals that were made in 
the 1970s and '80s than there were bad. But the fact of the 
matter is that the corporation lost the confidence of the business 
community of Saskatchewan. And once a lending institution 
loses confidence of its clients, there really isn't much left to deal 
with. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, can you tell the Assembly, is the 
Quill water plant still in operation? Is it a going concern or has 
it been shut down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It's my understanding that that 
operation is not in production at this time. And I am not quite 
sure because SEDCO, as you understand, has now moved over 
to Crown Investments Corporation for the last five months or 
four months. I've sort of lost track of that project. 
 
But the last time I was in that area of the province, there was no  

activity, although from time to time you hear of proponents who 
have come forward. There was a canola bottling operation that 
had looked at the plant as a possible site for bottling canola oil. 
But it's my understanding at this point in time that that plant is 
still not working. 
 
But there again, there are a couple of excellent potential 
buildings or facilities in that area that could be used for some 
company who might come in, maybe to bottle water or maybe 
to do other processing. But the fact is, when you look around 
the province today you will find that almost all of those 
facilities, where they were having trouble possibly in 1990, are 
now full and actually expanding. 
 
And it has something to do with the economy of western 
Canada coming out of the recession that hit the economies very 
hard in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta. And the simple 
fact is that with the recovery of oil and gas, with recovery of 
machinery manufacturing, many of these smaller companies are 
now looking to expand. And buildings that exist — and here I 
refer to the one you mentioned — I find it hard to believe that a 
building of that quality will go unused for very long before 
somebody comes up with an imaginative way of finding a use 
for that building. 
 
So while there was a loss on that operation, still there is a 
structure there that I think some day someone will use for an 
economic development project in that area. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Was there a settlement arrived at there, 
Minister, and could you tell us what that settlement was with 
the principals involved in that particular operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I can't. I wouldn't mind sitting 
down with the member and privately going through some 
information on it, but I really am not able to release details of 
that kind of settlement. But I would encourage the member to 
attend possibly with the CEO (chief executive officer) of Sask 
Opportunities Corporation, or in fact Mr. Mike Fix who runs 
what's left of SEDCO over in CIC. And we would be more than 
pleased in discussing the matter with you. 
 
You know how difficult it is to share a paper or documents on 
confidential files. But on the other hand, in terms of your critic 
area, I would be pleased to try to explain how that project 
finally was wound up. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I ask the question, Minister, because my 
understanding is that once a settlement is reached and there is a 
cash settlement or there's an exchange of property or something 
like that, those things become public documents because it has 
been done. And it's very seldom that there's any type of a 
confidentiality clause attached to a final settlement like that, 
when the individual either pays it out or there's some type of 
transfer of titles or documents. Are you telling me that there is a 
confidentiality clause attached to that particular settlement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I'm telling you is it's the 
policy of the corporation, or at least was the policy of the  



May 16, 1995 

 
2311 

corporation at the time I was the chairman of the board and I 
would be surprised if, at the time, the former minister, my hon. 
friend, was involved on the board . . . I don't think at that time 
the minister was the chairperson but was a member of the 
board. 
 
But it's my understanding that that policy that we worked under 
was one that was inherited from your government and probably 
you inherited it from the Blakeney administration when Norm 
Vickar and others were ministers during the 1970s when Al 
Blakeney was premier of the province. It simply is policy, and 
has been policy long standing, that on settlements like this, they 
are not made public. 
 
Now one can argue whether that's right or wrong or indifferent, 
but I would be stepping over my bounds as a former chairman 
of the board of SEDCO if I was to release that confidential kind 
of information to the committee. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I'll take you up on your 
offer. I understand, Minister, that SEDCO still provides 
administrative services to SOCO. I understand that SOCO's 
payroll, for instance, is still worked through SEDCO, that 
there's certain consulting items that are done. Is SEDCO being 
reimbursed for doing the operations of SOCO in any way, or 
would these simply show up as further losses on SEDCO's 
books? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There was a period, the member 
will recall, that in, I believe, June of last year, about a year ago 
when we were doing estimates, we indicated that there would 
be a change in July and then there would be an overlap of a few 
months where SEDCO and Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation would both continue to exist and that period 
basically lasted from July of 1994 to October of 1994. 
 
Now during that period there was some overlap in terms of 
monies that SEDCO was paying out in order to get Sask 
Opportunities up and running, and some consulting fees. 
 
But I believe by the end of 1994, there was settlement in full for 
any of that consulting fee, and SEDCO was repaid in full. So in 
fact that cost as of July 1, 1994 when Saskatchewan 
Opportunities came into existence, will all come to the bottom 
line of Sask Opportunities Corporation. And in fact the books 
will be absolutely clean and split as of July 1994. So SEDCO 
will have done some consulting, but we would have paid out of 
Sask Opportunities a fee for service so that will all have been 
reimbursed by October of 1994. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I presume, Minister, that there will be an 
addendum that shows when the transfer took place — that all of 
those administrative services and the way they are costed over 
to the Opportunities Corporation then will show up as of 
October 1994 and it will be in the next annual report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the member . . . well maybe what  

I'll do is just mark this up for you. But this is the actual Sask 
Opportunities Corporation annual report which was tabled in 
the House about a month ago. But on page 11, under the 
statement of operations and retained earnings for the five 
months ending December 31 — that would be July, August, 
September, October, November, December; it would run for 
that period  but under the expense side, advertising and 
promotion, amortization, but the most importantly is consulting 
and other professional fees, $144,000. A portion of that would 
actually be allocated to . . . not all of it, but a portion of that 
would be allocated to SEDCO. There would be a bit under 
other administration expenses and I think the other item would 
be salaries and benefits and possibly some small amount of the 
$34,000 of travel. 
 
But what I will do is I'll undertake to send this across to you and 
then I'll try to get the actual break-out that would have been 
paid to SEDCO. But it will fall into the items that I've listed out 
here. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I would like that broken 
down if at all possible. 
 
Can you tell me . . . There was a recent announcement 
involving Intercontinental Packers. Did the SEDCO board 
discuss, approve, or disburse a grant to Intercontinental Packers 
in 1994? Were there any monies disbursed in 1994 separate 
from the monies that you just announced the other day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the chairman again 
that this is getting us well into the Crown corporation area. But 
my recollection is, is that there was no grant money in 1994, but 
I will undertake to go back and review that file and check for 
sure. But my recollection is, is that there was no money to 
Intercon during 1994 by way of grant. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, you've stated in previous estimates 
that you felt that it was inappropriate for either Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation or SEDCO to be in the property 
business and that you were winding that down, that those things 
would be turned over to the Property Management Corporation. 
I understand that on a couple of issues, though, that that might 
not necessarily be true. Can you tell me what the involvement 
has been with the Fort Storage company and the property 
surrounding it? 
 
And also I understand that there has been some lobbying by 
individuals for the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation to 
take over Innovation Place in Saskatoon. Can you tell me if that 
is the case, if the Opportunities Corp is looking at Innovation 
Place rather than turning that over to the Property Management 
Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Fort Storage, as the member 
opposite indicates, is a very, very highly environmentally 
sensitive building unit in Saskatoon. The member will know 
there were many horror stories about the storage of chemicals in 
Saskatoon. And as the chemical manufacturing and processing, 
and more importantly, distribution took place, much of that  



May 16, 1995 

 
2312 

initiated to the credit of the former administration — you 
remember Hoechst being brought to Saskatchewan in a big way 
— there was a big problem with storage of chemicals. And in 
many of the warehouses the people in the fire services and 
police, when there was a disaster in a building, or a fire, simply 
couldn't find out what was being stored in the building, and 
from time to time there were chemicals being stored in the same 
warehouse as food products. 
 
And what the community decided to do, after a lot of 
consultation, is build warehouses that were completely fitted for 
the safe storage of chemicals. In order to make that happen, it 
was a decision made by the board of SEDCO that we would 
build a building with a lease option to purchase. 
 
And so in that sense we have a project whereby we have built 
the building with a firm lease with an option to buy. And we 
are, I think, earning on that investment somewhere around 12 
per cent and with a lease that will simply have it paid out, a 
certain period of time with an option that the individual or the 
company leasing it can then, for its storage, can then buy the 
building. 
 
So it really does two things. One, it's an investment that is 
making good money for the people of Saskatchewan. But 
secondly, and I think in some ways even more importantly, 
protecting the environment, the safety of the people in 
Saskatoon; but not only Saskatoon, but a large area of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So on that one, you're right. That is in a different category. 
Because of the need to build a very complicated and highly 
sophisticated building in Saskatoon that others weren't stepping 
up to do the project, we felt it necessary to become involved 
very quickly because this is something we didn't want to allow a 
period of time to pass before we started the project. 
 
The other one is Innovation Place. And you're quite right; 
Innovation Place is in the process of being moved from what 
was SEDCO. Presently it finds itself over at Crown Investments 
Corporation. But after a lot of consultation with the university 
in Saskatoon and the business community in Saskatoon and 
with agricultural leaders, it has been indicated to us that the best 
option for Innovation Place, which has been used to lure many, 
many international companies to the province and to Saskatoon, 
that this property would be better maintained as part of the 
ongoing operation of government or governance of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as it would relate to some 30 other properties that SEDCO 
had — warehouses, office buildings — all of those have been 
put on the auction block and are well under way to being sold. 
 
There's two that at the present time are still under the auspices 
of the Government of Saskatchewan that used to be in SEDCO. 
One, as you mention, Fort Storage, but there is a lease purchase 
to buy, so that one probably over the coming years will go to 
the private sector. 
 

Innovation Place is quite a different category. And to this point 
in time, I think there's broad consensus that that should remain 
as part of the mechanism of government because it's used in 
many, many ways to lure companies from all over the world. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying, Minister, is that there 
was no one in the private sector prepared to do the Fort Storage 
thing. But if the government put the money up, then there was 
somebody prepared to do it and that you now have a lease 
agreement, a lease-to-buy agreement. I'd like, if possible, the 
. . . because it is commercial you tell me, commercial rates, if 
we could have the details of that agreement 
 
And can you tell me which agency of government is going to 
retain Innovation Place? Is it going to be SPMC? Or which 
agency of government will have jurisdiction over Innovation 
Place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — At the present time, there are really 
two options being considered, and quite honestly it's very close 
to having a decision made. But the two options are leaving it in 
CIC under the board of Crown Investments Corporation to be 
managed from that organization, or moving it to Sask 
Opportunities Corporation. These are the two options under 
active consideration, and I think it would be fair to say that 
probably the stronger preference at this point in time — and 
maybe I'm expressing some personal bias, but I'll say it anyway 
— that it would go to Sask Opportunities Corporation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So in effect what you're telling me is that 
Sask Opportunities Corporation will be in the property 
management business even though your stated aim was 
previously it was one of the knocks on SEDCO. I'll remind you 
to be very careful with that with your colleague, the Minister of 
Education. She used to tell me it was similar to the gardens of 
Versailles, and it was far too opulent for government to be 
involved in that and that in fact that’s some place that 
government should not be in. 
 
I'm sure that your current head of Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation would like to ensconced in some of the office 
space there. It's a very unique setting, but there's a lot of people 
that don't feel you should be in the property management 
business, especially with Innovation Place. So I'm wondering, 
Minister, before you make that decision, if that's not something 
that shouldn't have a more open debate than perhaps what it's 
been given so far. I don't agree with the current Minister of 
Education. I never did. The Innovation Place has performed a 
very valuable service but I agree with your earlier statements 
that you probably should not be in the property management 
business because that puts you in conflict with the private 
sector. And there's always been a contentious issue in 
Saskatoon over whether that place should be competing with 
the private sector in establishing lease rates and building unique 
kind of space. 
 
So I'm wondering, before that decision is made, if there isn't 
some opportunity or some way that, because it is a very costly 
place also, that there be some better way of determining the  



May 16, 1995 

 
2313 

outcome rather than the minister's preference to remain in the 
property management business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I really, at least in my mind, I 
differentiate between property management, so-called, and 
Innovation Place. I really think there's a difference between 
owning strip malls or office buildings of the commercial nature 
and the very highly technical and scientific centre that 
Innovation Place is. 
 
And you know, but just for the sake of those who may be 
listening and not understand what Innovation Place is, 
Innovation Place is really an incubator that takes pure science 
from the University of Saskatchewan or from corporate research 
and commercializes it. And so it is looked at by our government 
not as a typical property management or a typical business 
property but a scientific property. And a number of very 
successful research centres like this are located around the 
world. Innovation Place in Saskatoon is recognized by the 
United Nations as one of five centres of excellence in the 
world. And it has happened really as a result of a nurturing not 
by necessarily by our administration, but certainly has been 
picking up speed under our administration, but started under 
Premier Blakeney. The former premier, the hon. member from 
Estevan, and yourself did a lot of work on that project bringing 
in some great and well-known companies to do research out of 
Innovation Place. 
 
(2115) 
 
And I just think because of the very different role that it plays in 
our province — I'll even put it stronger than that: the very 
important role it plays in our country — because it really is 
looked at as a scientific centre for all of Canada as it would 
relate to ag biotech, that having it lodged in a institution of 
government seems to make all sorts of sense. 
 
I would agree that when it comes to other properties, business 
offices, even the head office of SEDCO — which I understand 
has now been sold or near being sold — that these are areas we 
shouldn't be into and we shouldn't compete with others who can 
do that equally as well or maybe even better. 
 
But when it comes to Innovation Place, I really think there is a 
role to be played by the government in terms of facilitating. As 
to whether or not it makes money or loses money, I think in the 
current year . . . Let me go back to last year. It incurred a small 
loss. But when you look at all the benefits that accrue to the 
province of Saskatchewan, I think one would consider that a 
very, very small loss to handle when you look at all the 
spin-offs that are occurring from Innovation Place. 
 
And the member may also not be aware, but there has been a 
great deal of consultation with the public in Saskatoon and with 
the business community as to what we should do. And as I say, 
there's a general consensus that the government should maintain 
some involvement in that structure. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm glad to hear that, Minister, because I  

know in my time of responsibility for that particular place, the 
development community in Saskatoon were less than kind. And 
in fact one of the individuals who you put on the board of 
SEDCO shortly after taking over responsibility for that was one 
of the individuals who was my biggest critic because of 
Innovation Place and some of the things that were done there. 
 
And I'm glad to see that you've been able to reason with them 
and have turned this around, that that individual and others no 
longer are critical of the government . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I would think more over there, but I'm glad that you've 
changed that around and that you don't have that concern any 
more of being in direct conflict with the development 
community in Saskatoon. 
 
Minister, in regards — I'm curious — to Piper Aircraft, were 
there any fees or costs, besides the 2 million that you've stated, 
incurred, particularly in 1994? I'm curious. Were there any costs 
related to the Piper bid and a reopening of discussions in 1994 
with that particular entity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, it's my understanding that there 
were no costs incurred in SEDCO in 1994. I remind the 
member that this is really well into Crown corporations, but my 
understanding is . . . and I will make the commitment to go and 
check with the CEO who was managing it during 1994, Mr. 
Mike Fix, to find out for sure; but it's my understanding that 
there was no cost involved. 
 
Just for the member, I was reading an article the other day in an 
aircraft magazine that indicated that Piper is in fact doing very 
well, employing about 400 people, and has come not out of 
receivership but under chapter 11 which provides for 
companies to work while in receivership . . . is actually doing 
very well, and while not paying off its loans, is actually 
generating a fair bit of profit at the present time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I'm sorry, you mistook me. I didn't 
necessarily say SEDCO. I just asked in your role as Economic 
Development minister, were there any further discussions 
involving cost with the Piper deal in 1994? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, there was nothing in Economic 
Development, but I will go back and check for sure at SEDCO. 
My understanding is that there was no money. I'd just remind 
the member as well that it wasn't $2 million that was spent on 
that project. I believe the consulting and work that was done on 
that project was about 600,000. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I wonder if you could provide for me the 
salary ranges of the senior management at both the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation and SEDCO and 
particularly the salary of Mr. Douglas when he was at SEDCO 
and also at the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. Some 
people feel that the salaries at Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation, by and large, when you take the senior 
management, are quite a bit higher than they would have been 
at SEDCO. And I'm wondering what those salary ranges are and 
why there might be this discrepancy in size for the similar  



May 16, 1995 

 
2314 

type of a portfolio. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As you know, when we came into 
government, we made it, in our attempt to open government up, 
that the employment contracts of our minister, deputy ministers, 
and CEOs of Crown corporations, are public. And the member 
will know that he could pick up I think actual copies of those 
contracts. They're filed with Executive Council. I can get you 
those. I can get those for the member. But these are public 
documents and are filed on a regular basis. 
 
The salary of Mr. Douglas at SEDCO and in the new role as 
CEO of Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will be 
public. Just so you know, there is I believe a classification for 
sizes of our Crown corporations, depending on the involvement 
and size and complication of the various Crown corporations. 
Sask Opportunities would fit somewhere into that grid or scale 
that is involved. My understanding that the review of that salary 
scale is a very open process and one that I think the member 
would be fairly satisfied is fair and equitable. 
 
And if anything, at some point in time you run headlong into, 
with an economy that's growing rapidly in western Canada  
Alberta and Saskatchewan being the two fastest economies, as 
the member knows, in the last two years  that attracting 
people to the Crowns at the level of remuneration that we have 
at the present time becomes more of a problem than actually . . . 
and having people moving to the private sector is one of the big 
problems we have in our government at the present time. 
 
When you look, for example, in the oil industry, the 
competence of people who work as deputy ministers in our 
government and have an experience — I might add — as deputy 
ministers of Energy and Mines and the possibilities they would 
have in the private sector, some of the numbers even for VPs 
(vice-president) or directors of companies in the oil or pipeline 
industry would be three or four times what they would get in 
the public sector here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well maybe this next question will help us 
answer the fairness question. You indicated to me that 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation has only done two 
endeavours. There is the Temple Gardens Spa and the IMAX 
project for a total of about one million two. 
 
Could you tell me, in the same period of time, how many deals 
SEDCO has done? What the dollar amount would be, just the 
gross dollar amount? And how many employees do you have in 
each of the two corporations, Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation, and SEDCO currently before its wound down? 
 
Can you give me a salary comparison and also give me a 
volume of dollars on deals that they've done, and also we can 
compare the salaries of the two organizations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will know that when 
we moved from SEDCO to Sask Opportunities Corporation, the 
structure of the new corporation is fundamentally different. And 
there were those who said, well all you're really doing is  

changing the name, and then basically you'll keep doing the 
same things as you were before. 
 
But nothing could be further from the truth. SEDCO was 
involved in many Main Street investments, competing with 
other private sector investors, whether it was restaurants or 
laundromats or car washes. They did some big projects but 
there were many, many small endeavours — motels, hotels, that 
kind of thing. We have ceased to be involved in lending money 
or taking equity or being involved in those Main Street 
competitive operations. 
 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation is really an entity that 
is meant to — I'll use the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa as an 
example — be involved in community projects and to help 
finish off deals. In the case of the spa in Moose Jaw, I believe 
— what, a $5.9 million project? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
$6.9 million project — our involvement through Sask 
Opportunities Corporation was one of a great deal of 
facilitation working with the community, not as a lender but as 
an aid in assistance, advising them in a financial way, and at the 
end of the day buying $700,000 in shares. 
 
We expect and had planned and announced, when we 
announced Sask Opportunities Corporation, that over a year we 
would endeavour to keep the number of projects that we're 
involved in around 20 — two or three a month. And at this 
point in time, I think, while we're still in the start-up mode, our 
expectations of doing two or three of these kind of projects a 
month — where you talk about 40 or 50 jobs being created at 
the spa in Moose Jaw, the IMAX film which will employ a 
number of people this summer in Eastend and Regina, invest $8 
million, or a portion of $8 million, in our community — you 
then begin to see the kind of role that . . . these projects 
probably wouldn't be completed without the assistance and the 
facilitation of an organization like SOCO. 
 
And so I would argue that the importance of SEDCO or 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, that in the long run 
whether or not you have an organization that goes out and helps 
someone finance another motel or another fast food store in one 
of our communities, that if those communities need somebody 
to do that and there's a demand for the product, that's going to 
happen. And for my money, I would much, much rather be 
paying a CEO to do 20 projects that are well-based financially, 
community oriented, and have good community support, than 
the role SEDCO was playing previously. 
 
And of course these are subjective decisions, and the member 
may have a different view on this, but it's my view up to this 
stage — and this company is very, very new and very, very 
young with not a lot of experience — but I would assume that if 
we are to do 20 to 30 projects a year on average, that this would 
be a mandate that would be well worth keeping within the 
auspices of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, we're here doing estimates 
and trying to determine whether we're getting value for our 
buck for the taxpayers of the province. And you've been in  



May 16, 1995 

 
2315 

operation with the Opportunities Corporation for just about a 
year and you've done two deals worth just a little over a million 
dollars. 
 
So I ask the question: would you tell me how many deals 
SEDCO did in the same amount of time? Would you give me 
the staffing component size of both organizations and the total 
salary components of the two organizations, so I as a critic of 
Economic Development opportunities, can make that 
comparison? 
 
I think that would be fair of you to give me that year to year, the 
two of them side by side, equivalent numbers of staff or 
whatever, and let the taxpayers make some determination about 
what they're doing as far as . . . I think that would be 
appropriate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think the member's exactly 
right and just so we get into perspective how many people were 
working at SEDCO versus how many are working at Sask 
Opportunities Corporation, I remind the member again of the 
role that SEDCO was playing. 
 
There were 85 people working in SEDCO . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not in the last year. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, but when it was working at its 
peak. And they were doing, I would say, many projects that 
simply would have happened whether SEDCO was there or not. 
Many of the projects that they were doing, probably at the end 
of the day, shouldn't have been done because they added a layer 
of competition that simply made it unviable for other private 
sector people to exist on Main Street. 
 
By comparison, the number of people at Sask Opportunities 
Corporation is 18 and this is intended to be an organization . . . 
and I don't want to put too much of a restriction on my 
management, but if the staff complement gets much over 20 
there, you'll find that we will be watching that very closely. But 
I can tell you that this is a very, very lean operation as compared 
to SEDCO. 
 
Also the fact that SEDCO owned an office building that housed 
the 85 people, we now have much more modest rental space 
that we operate out of. But the projects that we're doing, I think 
it's fundamental to know that I think we've committed to three 
projects and have five that have been confirmed for a total of 
eight to this point in time. 
 
We really got up and going, I believe, in October of last year. I 
mentioned to the member we're trying to do between 20 and 30 
a year. I think if we're to accomplish that with 18 — 15, 18 — 
people, we will be serving the public well and be doing it at a 
cost that will be well within the realm of good economics when 
it comes to the number of jobs that are being created. 
 

And also I just mention to the member, this is not a normal 
lending institution. There's a great deal of facilitation that goes 
on here of working with other lending institutions. Some of the 
people that come in, we actually work with them with other 
banks or credit unions and they end up getting their money that 
they had to that point been unable to get through the regular 
lending institutions. 
 
The other thing that the member should know is that it's our 
intent to move people in, get them set up, and then get out of 
those businesses as quickly as we can so that we don't have to 
keep coming back to the treasury for more money. And this is a 
big change from SEDCO as well. We don't intend to have any 
of our positions for a long period of time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, thank you, Minister. I've heard that 
story before. But anyway, you still haven't answered my 
question. 
 
I would like the comparison from July of last year to date; 
number of deals done by the Opportunities Corporation; 
number of deals done by SEDCO. And I understand they're still 
doing deals . . . well till very recently they were. Number of 
employees, which I believe is around 34, 35, something like 
that; and the number of employees in the Opportunities 
Corporation; and a salary comparison, senior management to 
senior management and then on down the ladder; and total 
monies that the two organizations have placed; and the 
opportunities that they've each been engaged in over that period 
of time and that's . . . Have I got your commitment that you'll 
send that across? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I will get it for you. But it's my 
understanding, like in the last six months, there have been no 
deals — so-called new deals — made by SEDCO. And so you 
might argue that, well, you shouldn't have any staff because 
you're not doing any new deals and that because Sask 
Opportunity is doing more new deals, they should have more 
staff. But it's very, very much more complicated than that as 
you would know because the SEDCO files still exist and still 
has to be managed because there's a great deal of money out on 
loan. 
 
And what you may be referring to is a number of restructuring 
of loans that are going on in SEDCO and have gone on in the 
last year and will continue to go on. But I believe in the last six 
months, SEDCO has not been in the business of making new 
deals and so as that corporation winds down, what the 35 and 
reducing employees are doing in that operation are managing an 
existing portfolio. On the other hand, you have Sask 
Opportunities in a very different position of not managing a big 
portfolio but going out and finding new business and wrapping 
up. 
 
So I will get the numbers for the member, but remember — and 
I'm sure the hon. member will — that these are two 
corporations that simply can't just be simply stacked up one 
against the other in terms of how many projects they've done in 
the last six months or last year because one has a fairly  



May 16, 1995 

 
2316 

substantial portfolio to manage, and the other one is out looking 
and working with communities to do business. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well ultimately, Minister, when you get those 
numbers then, I guess, people will start to make value 
judgements as to whether it is money well spent or not well 
spent. And if we don't have the information it's very difficult for 
us to judge one way or the other whether you're spending that 
money in a wise way or not. And I simply ask these questions 
because I need to make comparisons and I need to have answers 
for people in the business community who ask me questions 
about what people are doing in various organizations around 
government. 
 
Minister, I'm wondering if you can tell us . . . there's been a 
concerted effort, I think, by all governments to lower trade 
barriers, but you made an announcement concerning both the 
beef and pork industry the other day, and you said that we had 
to do this because Alberta has spent a lot of money in the meat 
business over the years. And that's certainly a well-known 
given. It was present in the Blakeney administration, it was 
present in the administration I served in, and there's not a whole 
lot new out there. 
 
Can you tell me what efforts are being made — and you're the 
trade minister — what efforts are being made to do away with 
the interprovincial trade barrier problem that has existed in 
Canada. And are we going to see the day come when the market 
will determine whether Saskatchewan or Alberta or someone 
else should be putting money into the meat packing business? 
Perhaps we'd be better off developing our feeding industry 
rather than doing something that private enterprise seems to do 
very well in most parts of the world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the member will know that the 
ongoing debate on interprovincial trade barriers has been going 
on for some time, and we have been very much involved with 
the previous administration at the federal level, with your friend 
and my friend, Michael Wilson, very many meetings. And I 
think in fairness, Mr. Wilson did an excellent job and a very 
good job getting the provinces to finally sit down and start 
looking at a document that became the basis then of  when 
the Liberals were elected and the project continued on by Mr. 
Manley  of actually leading to a signing of an agreement with 
all the ministers of trade and all the premiers actually at a 
function with the Prime Minister where we signed the 
document to set out the strategy for the removal of barriers 
between provinces. 
 
This is never going to be easy and I think is going to be very 
difficult to achieve. And you'll know of the debate of the call 
centre, for example, recently going to New Brunswick where 
British Columbia and a number of other provinces accused New 
Brunswick of using taxpayers' money to lure jobs from another 
province. 
 
You'll also know that we become concerned when the Alberta 
government puts hundreds of millions of dollars into the meat 
processing and slaughtering and packing plants because it  

makes it very difficult for other provinces not to use taxpayers' 
money to try to compete and keep a strategic industry in our 
province. 
 
But having said that, I think it's fair to say that the barriers are 
being removed. And as well, I think we do have quite a strong 
relationship between our neighbours, especially in Manitoba 
and Alberta, although there are difficulties, and you'll hear 
small skirmishes. We do not see the kind of problems that exist, 
for example, between Ontario and Quebec or — let's say — 
between Ontario and British Columbia as it would relate to 
wine and the complication of trying to put up barriers as it 
would relate to the movement of some of those products. 
 
I think that what we're targeting for, at least in western Canada, 
is some sort of a pan-western strategy on trade barriers that 
would make it much more logical to do one industry in one area 
and do something that would not compete directly in another. 
 
And for example on the ag biotech, I think it's becoming an 
understanding that Saskatoon is western Canada's centre for ag 
biotech. While we are struggling to build an oil industry of head 
offices in Regina, I think it's hard to believe that Calgary is 
going to not be the centre for oil companies in the foreseeable 
future. And these are not all bad, that you would have some sort 
of a general agreement of where economic development would 
take place and you wouldn't be competing with taxpayers' 
money for every project. 
 
But when it comes to the beef and red meat industry I think 
Saskatchewan is not going to easily give up that ground to 
anyone. And the industry is telling us we should be in there 
scrapping to build a much bigger infrastructure for the 
production and processing of beef and pork. 
 
We have companies that are on the leading edge technology as 
it would relate to shelf life for beef products. Thomson Meats, 
for example, is now exporting probably 30 per cent of their 
production directly into one of the biggest co-ops in the world 
in Japan. And their product is growing by leaps and bounds 
within that market. 
 
Our pork is going in, for example, to the tourism market in 
Cuba. The numbers that I was told for the year 1993, that 70 per 
cent of all the pork used in Cuba tourism industry came from 
the province of Saskatchewan. And so we are going to be hard-
pressed to be talked out of not going after that market as 
aggressively as we can. 
 
Now as it would relate to the kill plants, as it would work with 
Intercon, and the reason that we were so aggressive and wanted 
to be so involved, is because the bottleneck in that process, as 
you well know, was the actual slaughtering and being involved 
with a plant that could be capable of competing with Alberta 
and Ontario. 
 
And we basically had the choice of allowing our industry to 
shut down or do a deal that would see that presence maintained 
and to grow. And some will argue and have argued that this is a  



May 16, 1995 

 
2317 

bad strategy. But I can tell you, talking to the stock growers in 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan pork industry, that they are 
very, very pleased with the announcement that we are 
supporting that industry. 
 
And I say again, it's my preference in the long haul that 
governments would get out of subsidizing. But on the other 
hand, being absolutely out of subsidizing in the light of the fact 
that your neighbours are supporting their industry, it makes it 
very, very difficult. And so for a very small amount of money I 
think we've been able to keep our position as processors and 
slaughterers of pork and beef. And actually when we look at our 
industry, it's going to be as strong as anywhere else in Canada. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well the problem that a lot of us have, 
Minister, is that this particular operation seems to know how to 
play government very well. I mean that plant's been bought and 
sold back and loaned to, and every stripe of government has 
done it. I don't point fingers at anybody, but this has been an 
ongoing saga of getting into the taxpayers' pocket whenever the 
opportunity comes along. 
 
I'm wondering . . . I'm curious because the labour strike in 
Moose Jaw had that plant shut down for a goodly long time, 
and when that plant reopened again it was considered that it 
would probably take two years at the minimum in order to 
regain market share; that they'd have to start real small with one 
shift and eventually work up. Because that plant was 
modernized extensively just prior to the labour shut-down. 
 
Was there any predication of, settle your labour strife, because 
it's one and the same company, and we're prepared to put some 
money into your operation. Was there any of those discussions 
involved at all? All of a sudden we're now putting two and a 
half million bucks into that beef kill facility when the 
management was saying it was going to take a couple of years 
to regain market share. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, there was no linkage between 
settlement of the strike and the expansion. The fact is that 
Saskatchewan red meat is in great demand, not only in Canada 
and North America, but really in a number of places in the 
world. And a lot of the processors and plants in Saskatchewan 
are gearing up very, very rapidly to meet that demand. 
 
And I say again, Thompson Meats for example, is doubling 
their capacity and it's based on contracts in Japan and potential 
contracts in Korea. Drake Meats are growing by leaps and 
bounds; Harvest Meats. And so this is not a phenomena that is 
linked only to Intercon, but a number of the processors are 
involved in as well. 
 
(2145) 
 
What is different about Intercon is their capability to slaughter 
animals, which is not done at the other processing plants. And 
this has always been the dilemma for our province is to 
maintain that as a viable operation. If you don't have it, then of  

course you know the problem. Your feedlots and hog barns 
have to ship their product to some slaughterhouse outside of the 
province. And then if you're going to have a processing plant in 
the province, all that product has to be shipped back in again. 
 
And the bottleneck has been . . . and the reason as you say, 
there's always been some facilitation by government, is because 
that is the Achilles' heel of the industry. And I believe in part is 
the Achilles' heel because they are competing with the 
government to the west of us that doesn't put money in by $5 
million quadrants, but puts it in by hundred million dollar 
subsidies. And I wish it weren't so. My preference would be 
that that bottleneck weren't there and we did have a level 
playing-field on that area of slaughter in western Canada. 
 
But the fact is we have a neighbour to the west of us that 
strategically . . . I'm not even here being critical; I just wish it 
weren't that way. I wish they weren't putting hundreds of 
millions of taxpayers' dollars into that industry. 
 
But we really have a choice. Do we want to maintain that 
industry or do we want to ship all our product to Alberta or 
Ontario. I can almost guarantee you that once we ship it out for 
slaughter, it simply is not economically viable to bring it back 
in and then ship it back out again to Japan. What would happen 
if the slaughtering doesn't occur in Saskatchewan, is the 
processing also would disappear from Saskatchewan, and along 
with it, hundreds of jobs. And I wish there were a better way. 
 
But to this point in time, Blakeney's government, your 
government, our government, have seen fit to maintain the 
integrity of that industry, and in order to do that we have found 
it necessary to support that middle bottleneck, which is the 
slaughtering area. 
 
And I've talked to Lorne and Rusty Thomson about this in 
advance of the announcement on Intercon so that they would be 
aware of what was going on and why we were doing it. I think 
there's a general understanding within the industry — within the 
pork producers, within the beef producers, within the 
processing. They understand why we're doing it. 
 
Where it's more difficult of course are industries where we are 
not putting in that kind of grant money. Gerry Bourgault, for 
example, I intend to phone him and talk to him about it, 
because Gerry's out there investing his own money, and I'm sure 
he says, how does this work that I'm over here doing my thing 
and there's no government support? 
 
But yet here it's happening. But the reason of course is because 
strategically it's a different industry and we're competing with a 
neighbour who is dumping large subsidies. 
 
The other thing of course that is causing this to grow in 
magnitude is the dismantling of the Crow benefit. And if we're 
going to have a farm community that survives in the long run, 
far from winding down beef and pork production, we're going 
to be forced in many ways . . . especially in that belt in the 
northern part of the province where frost is prevalent, we're  



May 16, 1995 

 
2318 

going to have to be feeding much more of our feed grains in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So this would seem to us a very, very strange time to allow the 
slaughter industry to wind down and move out of the province 
simply because we didn't make a strategic decision to be 
involved in that area. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that's my point, Minister. It seems like a 
very, very strange time for this particular announcement, when 
the management of the facility was making public 
announcements about taking a couple of years to get market 
share back; the plant had not gone beyond a single shift yet. 
And I've been in that plant when it was running a double shift. 
So you could run about 660 head a shift through there; two 
shifts you're over 1,200 a day. I mean they are nowhere close to 
having the ability to even buy that kind of stuff yet. 
 
All of a sudden, the government's got two and a half million 
bucks just before a provincial election is called, with jobs and a 
major beef kill expansion, when the plant is nowhere near 
capability. I mean they've got to go out and buy just to get their 
existing workers back on, which hasn't happened yet. And why 
it was necessary for the government to come in with, not loans 
but grant money all of a sudden now, in May of 1995, when 
that plant isn't even beginning to reach its potential as it already 
exists. 
 
What necessitated this announcement now, say, rather than a 
year from now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This project has been in discussion 
and negotiation for some time. And if the member really 
believes that you can make deals, for example with Canadian 
Pacific, which we announced in Moose Jaw recently, the 
double-tracking of their track from Moose Jaw to Pasqua, or if 
you can get the community of Moose Jaw to announce their 
spa, when you have literally thousands of people investing . . . 
last week that their announcement is somehow hinged to the 
potential of an election in the province. 
 
Or even more absurd that Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce, that donates big money as I understand it, to the 
federal Conservative Party and the federal Liberal Party, that 
somehow they are hand in hand with the New Democrats in 
Saskatchewan to help us win an election with their recent 
announcement of a call centre. I mean more power to us, I 
guess. But the chairman of the board at CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) would smile, I think, if somebody 
made the accusation that they were out there getting Bob Rae 
and Roy Romanow re-elected. It just isn't so. 
 
Ed Dodge, who made the announcement recently in Moose Jaw 
of the expansion of CP's (Canadian Pacific) locomotive repair 
centre in Moose Jaw, it isn't part of anyone's election plan, nor 
is the Intercon announcement. 
 
The Intercon announcement is part of a strategy to shore up the 
beef industry and the pork industry in the province — nothing  

more and nothing less. But it has been my contention from day 
one in Economic Development, that the way you could possibly 
win re-election in Saskatchewan  if the economy is working; 
you don't have to run a lot of ads, you don't have to give a lot of 
speeches. If the unemployment rate is low, people are making 
money, you'll get re-elected. So if your contention is that 
because the economy is going, we're going to get re-elected, 
with that I would agree. 
 
But if you're saying here that we somehow have the IMAX 
people out of New York in tune to our election strategy, CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) and CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway), Intercon, and Northwest Airlines and Jim 
Glass, and Lorne and Rusty Thomson and the good people of 
Drake and Cargill and the Royal Bank — if all these people are 
campaigning for the re-election of the New Democratic Party, 
either we're doing one heck of a job or the politics of Canada 
have changed very seriously in the past couple of months. 
 
I'll say again, the announcement of Intercon had nothing to do 
with anyone's election plans. In fact as these negotiations were 
going forward with the department officials, all of time 
indications were to them and to the Mitchells that the election 
was going to be in 1996. 
 
This announcement is completed now. It should be announced 
because this is the appropriate time to do the expansion, based 
on the international markets for beef and pork. 
 
I'll say again that we will . . . if we are re-elected, and if there is 
an election in the near future, you can be almost guaranteed that 
the announcements’ intensity will increase in the next six 
months even from where it is at today. I can guarantee you that. 
The reason being that the economy of Saskatchewan is moving 
so quickly and the growth rate at 4.6 per cent last year and 4.2 
the year before, second and third highest in all of Canada, is the 
reason we're making announcements. 
 
You can't make announcements if there's no announcements to 
make. The fact is is that there are many, many announcements 
that are going to be made in the next six months and if I look at 
the last six months and the ones that are on the drawing board 
for the next six months, whether the Premier calls an election or 
not there are going to be many, many announcements. 
 
This is not a structure where we make a bunch of 
announcements before the election and then there's not going to 
be anything. The reason that we're being invited out to 
Thomson Meats and Drake Meats and out to a large number of 
projects is because the economy is booming. Now you can say 
that the economy is booming so we can have an election, but 
that simply is not the way this operation works. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that while the election in 
1991 didn't go the way they wanted to — some say it's because 
of this or it's because of GigaText — the reason that I believe 
the election was lost in '91 is because the economy was in a 
downturn. That's why. Now other things mitigated and assisted 
the demise of the previous administration, but I'm of the firm  



May 16, 1995 

 
2319 

belief that if the economy is going, then governments win 
elections. 
 
And this is what amazes me a little bit about the opposition 
parties, and not tell you how to run your election, but I think 
you're on all the wrong issues. You can go out and argue that 
health boards should be elected or not elected, till the cows 
come home. That is not going to be what attracts people to a 
political party or political movement. The issues of course are 
jobs, economy, debt — and I suppose wisely for the Leader of 
the Opposition Party — taxation. Because he has picked an 
issue that is important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But for the life of me, I can't figure out what the Liberal Party, 
who I think many people had expected to do well in this 
election, are planning their election around because they're not 
speaking to any of the issues. VLTs (video lottery terminals), 
gambling, whether or not there's a casino in Regina — you can 
campaign on that if you want but I can guarantee you that is not 
where the public mind is at today. It's on the economy of the 
province, and the economy of the province is pretty good at the 
present time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that was an interesting dissertation, 
Minister. I'm not sure what it's got to do with your estimates, 
but anyway it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was interesting though, wasn't it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — You’re absolutely right. A lot of what takes 
place in this province has very little to do with your government 
or anybody else's government. It's the events that happen, and 
thank goodness that things like free trade came along and other 
issues that simply took out of the hands of provincial 
governments the ability to mess around in the market-place. 
 
A lot of the things that are happening are because we now have 
a free-trade corridor right from South America to North 
America and that's why the Soo line has to be double-tracked. I 
mean it had nothing to do with any provincial government; it's a 
necessity of life. You can't move potash and grain south and 
other products unless you've got more trackage and that line . . . 
I just wish some other people would get out of the road so we 
could run some more stuff down there. I'd like to use the barge 
system on the Mississippi rather than having to run everything 
on a rail to some port thousands of miles away. It doesn't make 
any sense and I'm glad the minister agrees. 
 
But I do say to you, Minister, I am terribly curious; you put five 
and a half million bucks into that operation after you came to 
power in 1992, meat plant in Moose Jaw; thing went down on a 
strike for just about two years. People have said . . . and I do 
know the cattle business a little bit. I was chasing 26 of them 
around most of yesterday morning. 
 
But it . . . you do not move back in and get your supply, number 
one, your trained workers on your shifts in a place like that. 
And I don't know if you've ever been on a kill floor; it's  

hard work. It's not a nice environment and the kind of people 
that you've got to have on a kill floor to get the numbers 
through, especially when you go to double-shifting, it takes a 
lot of management. That isn't going to happen in that plant for 
months and months and probably years because you have to 
reacquire a lot of skills, you've got to find your market niches, 
and you've got to, number one, buy the cattle somewhere. 
 
(2200) 
 
A lot of that stuff's been going into Alberta and all of a sudden 
you've got another two and a half million bucks in a grant — 
not a loan or anything else — it's a grant, okay, tied to jobs. 
And it's out there just before an election campaign and I just 
find it a little strange that we would want to upfront some 
money on something that's going to be a long, long ways down 
the road. 
 
And yes, there are markets and yes, our beef is good, but for the 
life of me I don't know how you could in all good conscience 
put up that much taxpayers' money this quickly after that plant 
got re-going again. I mean they've got some wounds to heal 
around there on that kill floor between the union and 
management for one thing . . . that aren't entirely happy. All you 
have to do is walk around Moose Jaw, and you'll know that. 
That isn't a happy situation yet. 
 
So you can give me a song and dance about the growth of the 
meat industry offshore, but I wonder what the urgency was to 
put all of that money up front on a plant that's months and 
perhaps years away from coming anywhere close to its 
potential. You still haven't told me. Have they got a bunch of 
new markets? 
 
Have we got 500 tons of beef earmarked for some place that 
they're going to ratchet that kill floor up? And if they are, where 
are they going to access the meat from? Are they taking it away 
from BP in southern Alberta? Are they taking it away from 
Cargill? Where are they going to get the fat cattle from to put 
that extra shift on in that plant without even expanding the 
thing? You haven't answered any of those questions, and I think 
you owe it to the taxpayers of this province to answer those 
questions before you give that money away. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the member makes a good 
point because there won't be any money given away unless they 
do that. And just so you know how the deal is structured . . . 
and there is some misinformation around, and I don't accuse the 
members opposite of the misinformation. But the fact is that 
unless the jobs are created and the ramping up does occur, not a 
cent of money is paid out because the money is only paid out as 
the jobs are brought on stream, and the jobs have to be for three 
years. 
 
And if you think about it for a moment, these are jobs, as you 
say, that are not low paying jobs. They're 30, 40,000 a year. If 
you think about the tax alone that an individual would pay in a 
year on a $40,000 salary, you recoup that in a year. And these 
jobs are . . . 



May 16, 1995 

 
2320 

An Hon. Member: — We used to do that on 7,500 bucks a job 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, but my point is that you see 
that your concern about whether they ramp up or not is a 
legitimate one. But it isn't on whether or not the money is paid 
out because the money won't be paid out unless they wrap them 
up because this is not a grant. And some people argue, well a 
forgivable loan is a grant. It's not because it's tied to the jobs. 
We're not just giving out the money. We're only giving the 
money to the company if the jobs are created and they're 
maintained for three years, and this is a fundamental, important 
difference. 
 
The other thing the member will know is that companies like 
Intercon are having difficulty in getting workers. We're having 
difficulty getting workers at the farm gate this year, and there 
have been a number of stories about large numbers of people 
coming from the Maritimes to work on the farms in 
Saskatchewan because those people who have been working at 
the farm gate have moved into higher paying jobs in 
manufacturing, full-time jobs in Flexi-coil, places like that, and 
there's a bit of a dilemma in rural Saskatchewan that will 
escalate if these job numbers stay at 9, 10,000 year over year, 
which they have for December, January, February, March, and 
April. 
 
And in large part we now see the need to bring people in from 
other parts of Canada. And while it's a problem, it's a nice 
problem because it doesn't happen that often in Saskatchewan. 
It happens from time to time. It happened during the mid 1970s 
when the economy was doing better, and it's happening again 
now. And the population numbers are showing that, that we've 
had population growth in the province of Saskatchewan now 
for nine consecutive quarters. 
 
And so when Intercon and Western Canadian Beef start their 
hiring, there will be more jobs, particularly for young people. 
But to allay your concern about this money being paid out and 
then the company not wrapping up or not creating the jobs, it's 
not happening that way because the money isn't paid out unless 
the jobs are created. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — What are the conditions attached to the five 
and a half million dollars you put out in 1992? That existing 
loan, I understand, was for plant improvements. Can you tell me 
what the conditions are around that money that was already laid 
out for that plant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, the arrangement that I 
understand  it took place in early 1992  and it was $4 
million in preferred shares. And that was the way the deal was 
structured at that time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So preferred shares; the Government of 
Saskatchewan participates what, in any profit that the operation 
may generate? Or are we in a position of simply holding some 
equity that down the road at some point in time the company 
buys out. What's the performance tied to the shares, if you will? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Because they're preferred shares 
they have an automatic and guaranteed rate of return. I can't get 
for you right now that rate of return, but it's a guaranteed rate of 
return. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Was that rate of return guaranteed all through 
the time that the plant was down with the strike? Was the 
government receiving any remuneration at all during the time 
that that plant was basically shut down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Here again the member will know 
that I can give out the amount of the shares and the fact that 
they were preferred shares. But like loans with SEDCO, while 
we give out the amount, we don't go into the detail of the actual 
interest rates. Here again I wouldn't mind having a discussion 
with the member about this program, but it just is the policy 
that we not go further in giving out details on the preferred 
shares. But fair to say that the rates are guaranteed and were in 
good standing during that period. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I don't need to know what the 
interest rate is. I just wanted to know if the government was 
being paid the whole time that that plant was shut down. And 
you're telling me that it was in good standing, so I'm assuming 
from your comment that there was a continuous money flow on 
those preferred shares, whether that plant was up or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I just prefer to do with the 
member is I will undertake to talk privately about it. Because 
once I get into it, it just discloses parts of a deal that I don't 
have the authority to release. But I wouldn't mind talking to you 
about how those shares were structured. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I can appreciate your difficulty, 
Minister, but I'm just trying to determine here whether the 
taxpayers are getting a good deal. You've got $4 million, you 
tell me, in preferred shares . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I want to bring the attention of the 
members to article 336 of Beauchesne's, which states in part: 
 
 . . . Speakers have also consistently attempted to 

discourage loud private conversations in the Chamber, 
and have urged those wishing to carry on such 
exchanges to do so outside the House. 

 
I say that for the edification of all members. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What we're trying 
to determine here is if we've got an appropriate deal going for 
the taxpayers of this province. You've already got $4 million in 
shares in this plant over the last three and a half years. We're 
now going to put another two and a half million in, plus another 
two and a half, as I understand it, in Saskatoon, all with the 
same family, and most of which you can't talk about because of 
confidentiality. And yet we don't necessarily see performance 
right off the bat. 
 
I mean I can understand the ministers want to go out and buy 
some jobs to try and get yourself back up to the job numbers  



May 16, 1995 

 
2321 

that were in place in 1991 when you took office. But is it 
appropriate for the government to invest shares plus a whole of 
bunch of incentive capital into a company in order to do that 
when that company has to live by the dictates of the 
market-place which are based on supply and demand, being 
able to buy the product to put into the plant before you can kick 
it out the other end? 
 
And that is causing a lot of questions, Minister. And I took the 
opportunity to do some phoning around cattle country before 
raising these because I didn't want to act foolish or be looking 
silly, but there are a lot of people questioning sort of this 
chronological process that you've put in place over the last three 
and a half years really with this operation; and are prepared to 
pump a lot more sunshine into it in the hopes of creating some 
jobs when you have no indication at all that the end product has 
a home or that the company has the resources to define and 
build those market-places within this three-year span. 
 
And yet the company seems quite prepared to pay you, on a 
preferred share basis, a continuous flow of money even though 
the plant was shut down for two and a half years — two years. 
 
And I find it kind of mystifying that if they have that kind of 
capital available to them that they needed more capital from you 
to do some things that obviously are way off in the future. And 
the whole thing just seems to ring kind of hollow. 
 
If they'd gone out and got 2 per cent of the Korean market or 
something, I could understand your urgency. But that isn't the 
case. It simply isn't the case. So I think you need to explain this 
in a little more detail so that people in the province clearly 
understand what you're up to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite 
that . . . and I'm just going to take him through some of the 
announcements we've made so that . . . just to bring the 
committee up to speed and then I will respond to his other 
query. 
 
The projects that we've announced — I have here a list of I 
understand about 20 projects since the first of the year. There's 
Thomson Meats, there was no money put in by the government; 
the Northwest Airlines, we were invited to their announcement; 
of course we didn't put anything into that. Athabaska airlines, 
their link into the United States, and our member from Prince 
Albert went on the inaugural flight on that today, although I did 
attend the announcement. Flexi-coil announcement, there was 
no government money involved in that project. 
 
The Cargill crushing plant, $3.9 million, but of course that is 
less than the 4.9, as I understand it, they would have got if they 
would have taken their tax reduction option. 
 
(2215) 
 
Microgro, no money from the government; Twin-Pak, 
$200,000; Intercon and Western Canadian Beef, which we've 
been discussing here, 5 million; CIBC call centre, no money  

involved in that but possibly some job training — and that 
hasn't been announced yet; Canadian Cancer Society, no 
money; the PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) 
load cell at Humboldt, I believe it's at Humboldt, 175,000; 
Hitachi announcement of their next expansion, $200,000; 
Pelorus, the navigational aids system that was announced by 
that company, no direct government money but Highways has 
agreed to purchase some of the equipment that would flow from 
that — no money from Sask Economic Development. The 
T-Rex IMAX, as I mentioned, SOCO has $550,000, and I 
believe Saskatchewan Economic Development, 100,000. 
 
We have had a number of regional economic development 
authority announcements. Massload Technologies did an 
announcement. There is some small amount of marketing 
involved in that. 
 
Big Quill expansion, there was no government money; Brandt 
Industries, no government money; the spa in Moose Jaw, 
100,000 for studies from the department and Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation bought $700,000 in shares. The CP 
expansion at Moose Jaw, we put no money into that; and 
Weyerhaeuser, we put no money into that project. CIBC, the 
500 jobs at the call centre here in Regina, there will be some 
job training money on that, and that's the list since January 1. 
 
As it would relate to the one item that is mentioned in here, and 
that is Intercon, the $5 million for the 400 new jobs — which 
will be in addition to, I believe, the 1,100 which are now 
employed, in addition to the 1,100 now employed by Intercon 
and Western Canadian Beef  which will bring that total 
complement to 1,500 jobs. It was seen that, I say again, with a 
factor of 3.5 in terms of spin-off jobs, you're talking about an 
industry that directly, with the spin-off jobs, creates close to 
6,000 jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The industry, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association as 
well as the pork producers, say this is an integral part of 
maintaining not only those 1,600 jobs spin-off within the 
outgoing area of the economy, but also in the feedlots and at the 
farm gate; that this is just a deal that had to be done. 
 
I say again that if the jobs aren't created, the money doesn't flow 
from the government, and so the risk is minimal. Either the jobs 
are created or no money flows. 
 
Now you say, does the company know what it's doing and are 
the markets there? That is, by all the analysis that was done by 
the company, both Western Canadian Beef and the Intercon in 
Saskatoon, which is mainly pork, that in fact the market is there 
and is growing very, very rapidly as a result of new export 
markets. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So your anticipation is, Minister, then, that 
the preferred shares that you have in Western Canadian Beef 
will be redeemed by the company and you'll be out of that 
operation entirely in a fairly short time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We expect to do that in the shortest  



May 16, 1995 

 
2322 

possible period of time. I can't give you the details on when, but 
as to the expansion plans, these are not expansions that are 
going to start in a year or two. These expansion plans start 
immediately. And the same is true of Thomson Meats and the 
same is true of Drake Meats. Drake's is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon? No, but your point is that how can 
there be expansion in the industry. My point is that there is 
expansion in the industry everywhere. It's not only at Intercon 
or Western Canadian, it's at Drake Meats, it's at Thomson 
Meats, it's at Harvest Meats. And so the . . . and it's mainly 
export driven. And the business plans for all of these companies 
are, I assume, solid and professionally done. And I'm not 
surprised at all that Intercon has this kind of an expansion plan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, our hats off to those people that can 
go out and find those markets and develop them and do those 
things without having to go to the taxpayer. What we're talking 
about here, though, is the amount of money that you're putting 
out on behalf of the taxpayer into this particular operation. 
 
I'll leave that for now. I guess we'll just have to see how it 
unfolds, but I'll be very surprised six months from now if that 
the plant has acquired enough animals on the hoof to run a 
double shift. I'll be really surprised. I hope they can, but it will 
be really interesting. 
 
Back to the CIBC; I've just got one question for you. Did the 
CIBC, by coming here with that call centre, were they offered 
the lead banking role for the province of Saskatchewan? Did 
they supersede the institution that was in place prior to that 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, there was no discussion of that. 
And at the meetings that I attended . . . I wasn't involved closely 
in the negotiations, but I did attend with the board of CIBC in 
Toronto for one of the presentations. And it was all about who 
could deliver the technical services most ably, who had the 
trained workforce, who had the telco that could deliver the 
service, and as well who had the rates and the cost of delivery 
that was competitive. 
 
And when all the bids came in — and I think all the provinces 
put in bids on this project; all were asked to submit, and all 
submitted — two provinces or two jurisdictions, because this is 
a split project between east and west, Saskatchewan and I 
believe Nova Scotia, Halifax, were the two cities . . . or Regina 
and Halifax were the two cities that were seen to be the most 
qualified. And it was based on a technical proposal as opposed 
to any other trading or bartering that you might suggest. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I want it very clear for the record. CIBC 
obtained no further banking services with the Government of 
Saskatchewan at all by bringing that call centre here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No. There was no discussion that I 
know of. And certainly there has been, at least at this point in 
time that I know of, no increase or change. In fact I think before 
the deal was completed, the tendering process for banking 
services for the province had been started, and obviously we  

have dealt with the Royal Bank in the main for many number of 
years. And we feel that in terms of the ongoing operation of 
government, that should be tendered. And so that process, I 
believe, at the present time is ongoing. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I haven't had an opportunity, Minister, to go 
through your global answers and it's getting late in the day. I 
guess what I would like from you is the commitment that if 
there are questions arising out of those globals, if we submit 
them in writing, that you'd be prepared to answer those. 
 
My colleague says that he has one or two that have come up out 
of that. For my part, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wouldn't mind commenting to the 
member, as he takes his place, that I appreciate his questions 
and there were a number of answers that I undertook to provide 
for the member. 
 
And I just say to him that he is one of the members of the 
opposition who has taken on occasion the opportunity to set up 
meetings with staff of the department or of the Crowns. And I 
think this kind of a liaison with members of the opposition is 
excellent and also makes the job here in the Assembly much 
easier because you deal with an individual who has some 
experience on an ongoing basis with the department and with 
Saskatchewan Opportunities and SEDCO. So I thank him for 
that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
it's my understanding that the funds available through the 
Saskatchewan Growth Fund or through SOCO are available for 
manufacturing enterprises, perhaps small manufacturing 
enterprises in some cases. Is that one of their purposes and one 
of the issues in which you can invest the monies of either of 
those two programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, the member's right. I mean 
obviously it would depend on what was being manufactured, 
the business plan, and as I indicated at our last session, the 
marketing plan — whether or not there is a market for the 
product being manufactured. But manufacturing is one of the 
areas that would qualify. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Down in 
Wawota, there is a gentleman there who is trying to get a 
program off the ground for heat pumps — Dennis Lamontagne, 
perhaps you're familiar with the name. And he has approached 
SEDCO now for a number of years. He had arrangements with 
WDO (western diversification office) to get some funding to 
provide support for his heat pump program that he's trying to 
develop. And as I'm informed about it, he had an agreement at 
one time with SEDCO to provide some funding along with 
WDO and some independent or some private financing. 
 
When WDO and the private financing came through, for some 
reason SEDCO withdrew from the proposal and that has put, 
say, a kink in his financing arrangements. Would it be possible  



May 16, 1995 

 
2323 

that Saskatchewan Growth Fund or SOCO would be interested 
in this type of an enterprise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we'd be interested in talking to 
him. And maybe what I . . . rather than use up the committee's 
time, I would undertake to have you meet with the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of Sask Opportunities Corporation, and if you 
would act as a intermediary at least for the initial contact, we 
would be more than interested in looking at it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister; we'll 
make those arrangements. 
 
I wonder if we could go over some of the numbers out of the 
globals that you have presented to us. I believe that this year on 
your travel allowance you have $875,000 for travel in the past 
year. I wonder if you could give us some indication what your 
particular personal travel was in out of that money, what you 
did with that. And why was there an increase of about $275,000 
over the previous year's travel allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to give to the member a list 
of the out-of-province travel. And maybe I can just go through 
this quickly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Send it to us; that will be fine. 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well it's all mixed together here, 
and what I want to do is take it and break it down so that it 
makes sense. And the total cost of travel — this includes in 
province, everything — the total is something just over 30,000. 
But what I want to do is take it and break it down into in 
province, out of province, and international. 
 
I can tell you that the main international trips that we went on 
during the year you're referring to were to Europe in the 
summer of last year. And I believe the cost of that trip was 
something over $2,000. But if the member will bear with me — 
if he's got some other questions — I'll break this down and give 
it to you in some detail. This is public at any rate. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. If you 
can go through all those, and in your trips I wonder if you could 
include which staff members accompanied you and what were 
the purposes of those trips. You mention the trip to Europe. I'm 
sure that you did not go on this trip by yourself, so there would 
have been some of your officials that went with you  if you 
can identify who those were and what the purpose of the trips 
were. 
 
One of the items that I notice in here under staffing are transfers 
to STA (Saskatchewan Tourism Authority). I wonder if you can 
indicate what STA stands for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is the new Tourism Authority 
where we have moved a number of people and also a chunk of 
money from being totally government over to the new agency,  

the new Authority, which is combination private 
sector-government. And so that's the term used. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. It 
seemed like there was quite a number of people that were 
moving to STA, and I was wondering if that was a new spelling 
for Saskatoon or something. So I'm glad to know that they are 
going some place important. When a person is terminated . . . 
oh and that's not to indicate that Saskatoon isn't important. 
 
Mr. Minister, when individuals are terminated either voluntarily 
or for whatever reasons, particularly in the cases of 
resignations, would they receive a severance at that particular 
time? Leona Gorr, who was the associate deputy minister, 
ended January 31, '95. Would this individual have received a 
severance or any of the other people — Frank Hart? — when 
they resigned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I'm not sure what list the hon. 
member from Souris-Cannington is reading from. But the two 
you mention . . . Frank Hart, who was my deputy minister, 
returned to the private sector. There was no severance paid 
there. And Leona Gorr has taken another position in 
government, and therefore no severance was paid there. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Were severances paid to any of the 
people who were terminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, if the member is referring to 
the general information, he will find that under the reason, if it 
refers to lay-off, then there would have been a severance. I 
think there's six, as we have downsized the department, where 
there would have been a severance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Can you give us some indication as to 
the extent of those severances? What would have been paid to 
which employees? I notice here Wayne Probe who was the 
industry and commerce consultant, was laid off April 30 of '94, 
as an example. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The policy of the government is 
severance is paid on a standard formula based on years of 
service and age of the individual. So these all would meet the 
criteria as it would apply to the general civil service. There's no 
extras, bonuses, or any variance from the formula. I don't have 
the exact formula. I will undertake to get that for the member, 
but these are standard lay-off agreements as per the public 
service formula that applies. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can 
understand length of service being a part of the formula, but I 
have some difficulty understanding where age would fit into 
that. I mean if you've worked for 20 years within the 
department, surely you're entitled to the same severance as 
another employee who has worked for 20 years, without regard 
to their particular age. So can you clarify the age structure on 
that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The reason is that if somebody has  



May 16, 1995 

 
2324 

five years and is 25-years-old, the courts have said that it is 
fundamentally different than if you're 50-years-old and have 
worked five years, because of the potential for re-employment. 
 
But what I'll get for you is the actual formula because these are 
very, very standard severance packages. These are not the kind 
that you might hear of in the upper echelons of government 
where somebody sues for severance and there are exorbitant 
amounts of money paid. These are standard formula severance 
packages, and I will get you the exact formula and how it might 
apply. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Another 
couple of names, I wonder if you could indicate where they 
have gone to — Leanne Thera and Elaine Torrie. They have 
gone on to, it says, accepted positions at different agencies. I 
wonder if you can give some indication where they are at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Leanne Thera is at Liquor and 
Gaming and Elaine Torrie is at SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another 
couple of names, Krystal Piche and Susan Pierce. They were 
new employees as of, I believe, in the case of Krystal Piche, 
April of '94; Susan Pierce, November of '94. And then they also 
show up in the terminations. I wonder if you can give some 
indication why they were in and out so quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — For the member's information, 
Piche is presently employed in the department, and Pierce has 
gone to another job in government. And I don't have where she 
has gone to, but I'll get that for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see 
under advertising and communications that most, if not all, of 
your advertising is done with Cooper, Quine & Fraser. Was this 
tendered out, and why is the date all August 30 of '94? Was all 
of your advertising developed at the same time, that particular 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, it was tendered. The only 
reason that date is used is that is the contract date, but they 
would be paid out on a regular basis for services rendered, but it 
was a tendered contract. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You also have 
under advertising and communications some . . . annual report 
for 4,000; Saskatchewan Economic News for 2,500; and 
Business Unlimited, Partnership in Progress publications for 
81,000. Who printed those particular items? There's no one 
listed here as having printed them. 
 
The Chair: — Before the minister answers, can I appeal again 
for cooperation of members. The business before the committee 
is the consideration of estimates for the Department of 
Economic Development. If members want to ask questions, 
they need only be recognized by the Chair. If members do not 
have anything to contribute to the proceedings, I would ask 
them to either take their conversations outside the House or to  

the back of the House but in any event not to interfere with the 
proceedings. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, I'll repeat . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'll get them for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Mr. Minister, another question, 
dealing with polling this time. You did a poll in July of '94 with 
CanWest. Can you give some indication what that poll was 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We from time to time undertake to 
purchase questions on the omnibus poll which my friend and 
colleague, the deputy leader, releases from time to time. The 
two issues that we were asking about at that point in time were 
state of the economy and regional economic development 
authorities — those two issues. 
 
(2245) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On computers, 
I see you have quite a large purchase of computers, valued at 
approximately 173,000 or $187,000. How many computers did 
you buy for that much money? And perhaps I should ask, did 
you buy them through SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — They were bought through SPMC, 
and our recollection is around 70. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Seventy computers, Mr. Minister, for — 
I believe you have about 187, 190 people in your department — 
approximately one new computer for every three people. Didn't 
you have computers in your offices before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This was our year for an upgrade of 
our computer systems, and as the member knows, you go 
through periods of times when you don't buy any computers, 
and then when you do an upgrade you have to buy a number. 
This was the year we had to buy 70, and they were in the midst 
of an upgrade in the department and it was seen as a necessary 
expenditure. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 
Vote 167 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 — authorized by law. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 



May 16, 1995 

 
2325 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Vote 158 
 
Item 1 — authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program 

Vote 68 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd just like to 
thank the minister and his officials for the Economic 
Development estimates. And see you some time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to 
say to the members of the opposition again, I have thanked 
them already for their questions, but I will prepare for them the 
list of questions that they gave to us and try to get a quick 
response within the next couple of days. Hopefully even 
tomorrow. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
under your personnel report for the infrastructure program you 
have listed here for out-of-scope permanent employees no 
employees, and yet you've got $26,000 listed in there as having 
been paid out. Can you give us some indication what that 
money was for? Mr. Minister, it deals with the out-of-scope 
permanent employees. You have no employees listed on the 
globals and yet you've paid them $26,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I'd be pleased to 
respond to the member. The way the infrastructure program has 
worked is that the cost of administration has been paid half by 
the province and half by the federal government. The money 
referred to is the half-share that the province has had to pay. It 
was for Mr. Dickson Bailey who is no longer there because he 
has been seconded to the Department of Health to work on 
establishing the health board elections. But it's half of the total 
cost and at the provincial share. 
 
The Chair: — I wonder if the Deputy Premier at the next 
opportunity could, for the record, introduce the officials who 
have joined us here for this part of the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Actually the way it was going, I 
was going to do that at the end. But you're right, Mr. Chairman, 
and I should do that. To my right is the director of the 
infrastructure program presently, Russell Krywulak, and 
immediately behind him is the director of administration in the 
Department of Provincial Secretary, Cathy Dermody. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I'd like to welcome the new minister and 
his officials here this evening. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can 
give us an indication as to the travel for this department, 
$3,750. Where you went or who went, and what was the  

purposes of the trip? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, this may take 
a little time. The travel was for Mr. Bailey and Mr. Krywulak 
who took the position of Mr. Bailey when he left. And they 
were predominantly to do with management meetings, because 
they're a management committee between the federal 
government and the provincial government jointly, as well as 
with the municipalities. And the travel of Mr. Bailey was to 
Balgonie on April 25, infrastructure announcement; 
Cumberland House, infrastructure announcement. Do you want 
to know all the details? 
 
We'll arrange to get you this information. You have the total 
number and that's there. But they simply are for infrastructure 
announcements and for meetings of the management committee 
which didn't always take place in Regina. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you'll 
provide the information that'll be fine. I wonder if you could 
also, when you're providing that list, provide a list of all the 
infrastructure programs in which you're involved in all the 
difference projects. 
 
And I have one last question dealing with personnel. One of 
your employees was reclassified and received a raise of $2,080 
in a year. Why was that person reclassified, and why were they 
not hired at that rate if they deserve that particular rate since 
your operation has been in place for less than a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The reason for the increase was 
because of a reclassification, because Mr. Krywulak, who took 
the place of Mr. Bailey, took on the higher position with added 
responsibilities. And it was within the normal reclassification 
process that is prescribed by the Public Service Commission. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 68 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 
The Chair:  This is authorized by law. Are there any 
questions? No questions. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Vote 153 
 
Item 1 — authorized by law. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:02 p.m. 


