













































March 6, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 6, 1995 

 

 

663 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair: — If the minister cares to he may want to 

reintroduce to us the officials who have joined us here this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left is 

Mr. Clare Kirkland, deputy minister of Highways; to his left is 

Lynn Tulloch, director of finance; directly behind me is Don 

Metz, assistant deputy minister of operations; and to my right is 

Bernie Churko, assistant deputy minister of policy. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 

it's good to get back at something important like highways and 

talk to you about the direction that you're planning to take your 

department . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I certainly will be. 

As the member points out, we definitely have to get to work 

here and get something done. 

 

Minister, I continue to get requests from people in the southern 

half of the province to find out what you're going to do about 

Highway No. 1. And it seems appropriate that having received 

thousands of people whose names are now on petitions that are 

being presented on a continuing basis to this Assembly, it 

would seem appropriate that you should address this question 

for those people and give them some positive direction and an 

absolute, definitive answer as to when you're going to double-

lane Highway No. 1. Could you do that, Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek for that question. I guess if he sometimes has a petition 

that isn't full, I would certainly be willing to sign it because I 

really believe that No. 1 is a priority, as is No. 16. And we 

would like to twin it as soon as we can, and we will do that. 

 

As you know, the federal government turned us down on the 

national highways proposal that we had. We were proposing 

$50 million, to be matched by the federal government, and with 

that money we were to twin No. 1 and 16. Of course, as you 

know, that was turned down. So we will do it the Saskatchewan 

way. We will try to create partnerships with the private sector 

companies, like trucking companies, and work on No. 1. 

 

It's very important to us because it's access to the Alberta border 

on one side and the Manitoba border on the other side. It's a 

busy highway and certainly the people along that highway, for 

instance people from Gull Lake, would certainly like to see it 

twinned. Truckers would like to see it twinned; travellers — 

tourists — would like to see it twinned; and certainly the 

Department of Highways and the province of Saskatchewan 

would like to see it twinned. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, just for 

the record, what is the traffic count on Highway No. 1 from 

both sides of the province, coming in from Manitoba and from 

Alberta, and how would that differ from the numbers that 

would maybe be in the centre? We'll just pick, say, Moose Jaw 

or Regina, some place in that area. Could you give us those 

figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. The traffic count on No. 1, right at the Alberta border, 

the average daily traffic count is 2,000 vehicles per day, and at 

Swift Current it's 3,500 vehicles per day. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Could you give us that 

figure also for the Manitoba entry and, say, some place along 

the line by Regina out here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. The average daily traffic count at the Manitoba border is 

about 2,000 vehicles per day, and right near Regina it's about 

11,000 vehicles per day. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, those figures, without making 

any more comment about them, ought to tell you that there's 

enough potential risk for life and limb that something ought to 

be done for those roads. 

 

Now you alluded in your first answer to Highway No. 16 up 

North. And I'm glad you did that, Minister, because obviously 

Highway No. 1 should be a priority in this province but the 

people up North definitely do need to have that road fixed as 

well, and to such an extent that we do have some questions 

from people out in the province about these specific roads. 

 

And we do have, through the auspices of our “Mr. Premier, I 

want to know” program, we have questions coming in from the 

people in the province. We would like to address one of these 

to you at the moment because it's pertinent to this discussion. 

This question comes from Donald Mann from North Battleford 

and it says, and I quote: I want to know when you plan to finish 

twinning the highways between North Battleford and 

Saskatoon. Some sections have been complete for over a year 

and are still not open. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek for that question and to the constituent — I'm not sure if 

it was Donald or Don Mann — but certainly I would like to 

thank him for that question. 

 

The provincial government and the federal government 

announced a joint program back in 1992 called SHIP, or 

strategic highway improvement program. Thirty-five million 

dollars was set aside to complete No. 16 from Saskatoon to 

North Battleford over a five-year period. The five-year period 

will end in 1998, so we expect that section to be completed by 

that time. In fact, we have some good news for Mr. Mann. 



March 6, 1995 

 

664 

Maymont to North Battleford will be open this year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, 

Minister. I'm glad to hear that answer and we certainly will pass 

that information on to Mr. Mann and to as many of the other 

folks up there as want to know. 

 

But just for those folks up there to know exactly what's going 

on on their road, could you give us the traffic counts on that 

road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. The traffic at North Battleford is about 4,000 vehicles 

per day and the traffic at Saskatoon is about 5,500 vehicles per 

day. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Now that's important to 

know. Obviously that would tell me that most of the traffic on 

that road is through traffic, that there isn't a whole lot of 

localized traffic such as indicated by your figures that you gave 

us for No. 1 Highway, which indicates that 11,000 near Regina 

means that we have an awful lot of in-province traffic generated 

right around the city, and of course not as many people coming 

and going. So that might lend to defeating your notion that you 

proposed in this Assembly the last time we discussed the 

Highway estimates, that notion being of course that you 

suggested that you didn't want to get too much in a hurry fixing 

No. 1 Highway because too many people would be leaving the 

province to go and shop in the other provinces. The reality is 

that you've only got 2,000 people at the edges, so not all that 

many people are coming and going; most of them are travelling 

No. 1 within the province. That's indicated by the higher traffic 

count at Swift Current, and of course the very, very high one at 

Regina. 

 

So considering that that is in-province travel to a very large 

extent, all you're really doing is providing for a very dangerous 

highway situation for our own citizens. Therefore that road 

should get priority, and needs priority. Those kind of traffic 

counts, I suggest to you, would double if you fixed the road 

properly and took the danger out of people travelling on it. 

 

Now, Minister, I want to go on to ask you another question 

from one of our constituents who has passed on to us a question 

for you through our “Mr. Premier, I would like to know” 

initiative. This question comes from Jim Lacey from Maple 

Creek, and I quote: the No. 1 Highway from west of Gull Lake 

to the Alberta border is a very unsafe piece of highway since it 

is single-laned. Our understanding was that it would be twinned 

by 1988. Even though the federal government backed off on 

their commitment, it doesn't mean that the Saskatchewan 

government should go back on theirs. That's the end of the 

quote. 

 

I just want to say, Minister, that there is a possibility there that 

that 1988 figure might be different than that; that could be a 

typo, I don't know. But I read it to you exactly the way I have it 

on this sheet as it was presented to me. So I will ask you for 

your answer on behalf of Jim Lacey from Maple Creek. 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. First of all, you commented about the No. 1 versus No. 

16 and I want to state to the member that they're both very, very 

important. If you look at accident rates and fatalities on the two 

highways, I would think that will determine our priority to No. 

16 at that time. And certainly I will send you those figures so 

that you will have them for your information. 

 

I want to tell Mr. Lacey — and I hope you did — that he is 

likely right that the highway was to be twinned in 1988. I'm not 

sure; we were not in government at that time. But you were in 

government at that time. And so I guess you should be 

explaining to him what you did when you were spending all that 

money you spent and not twinned Highway No. 1. I would have 

thought that instead of spending it maybe for the GigaText and 

things like that, that certainly would have been far wiser to 

spend it into Highway No. 1, I would think. 

 

And you could tell Mr. Lacey that it's a priority with us and that 

we will twin it as soon as we can, and we'll continue to work in 

partnership with private sector. And as soon as we're financially 

able, we will certainly work on Highway No. 1. There's 

certainly areas of concern like the Tompkins hill area, and we 

know that improvements have to be made. And as we pay off 

our debt — our deficit is now balanced — as we pay off our 

debt and are able to afford more money into highways as we go 

along, certainly we will be giving it its due consideration. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I want to find out from 

you how much of a No. 1 Highway double-lane could you build 

for $5 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. The distance between Gull Lake and the Alberta border, 

for an example, is about 108 kilometres, and the cost is between 

32 and $40 million, the estimated cost. It works out to . . . 

depending on conditions, of course, and there's a lot of 

variables here depending on bridges, depending on soil type, 

and that sort of thing. But I guess the general average would be 

about 20 kilometres for $5 million. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. That's very helpful, 

because while that would be a pretty good, significant piece of 

road in 1995, just imagine what your government could have 

done back in the 1970s, when they blew $6.5 million on a 

project called Nabu and totally threw the money away. They 

could have probably, in 1970 terms, they likely could have 

double-laned the whole road for that kind of money back in 

those days. 

 

So getting realistic about this, Minister, we can't dig up your 

dead computer program, and we can't rescue money from the 

1980s that I didn't really have much to do with because I really 

wasn't here at the time. So revisiting the past might be good fun 

and games in politics, and maybe we can have a little joke over 

that sort of thing while we're here. But the reality is now, 

Minister, we have to get down to brass tacks and the reality of 



March 6, 1995 

 

665 

living in 1995. What is past, I'm afraid, is done and gone. The 

milk that has been spilt has long since soaked into the ground 

and it's disappeared, and we can't go and pick it up or fetch it 

back. So we'll deal with the realities of the world as they are 

now and we will seriously approach the problem that Mr. Lacey 

has presented to us. 

 

In that seriousness I suggest, Minister, that you should deal with 

the problem in a forthright manner, upfront, and use some of 

the extra monies that you've got available to you and start to 

invest them where they belong. 

 

In south-west Saskatchewan the government has received from 

leases sold to oil companies hundreds of millions of dollars 

over the past year over and above what was ever expected, over 

and above what was ever budgeted for. 

 

You have a surplus budget position not only from those figures 

alone but also from the $188 million from the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance plan) accounts that you threw away and took 

away from the farmers. Threw away another $300-some million 

I hear the other day, as you pushed it back to the federal 

government because you didn't live up to your end of the 

obligations. 

 

Now with 32 to $40 million as your projected figure to double-

lane the highway, that 188 million that you threw away to the 

farmers could have built a lot of that road — all of it  maybe 

three or four times. And the 300 million that you cast away to 

the federal government, just the tax spin-off from that could 

have built the No. 1 Highway double-laned, not only on our end 

in the western-southern corner of the province, but also going 

into Manitoba. I would suggest — and very seriously — I think 

it could have been done. 

 

You took in all that lease money and a lot of that money is 

spent by companies who need to use roads in order to do the 

job that they intend to do as a result of having bought those 

leases. Therefore I think you have a moral . . . and, reasonably, 

a commitment that has to be made to developing those roads so 

that those people can do their work. 

 

So in light of all of those monies that you have available to you, 

is it not fair to say to Mr. Lacey and the people from the rest of 

Saskatchewan, who all use that road at some time or other, that 

you will in fact get busy and do it right away? Because you do 

have the money, and there's every reason in the world why it is 

justified to spend that money on that project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member for Maple 

Creek. I'm sure he's aware that Saskatchewan has 25 per cent of 

all the roads in Canada, a little over 3 per cent of the population 

to pay for those roads. 

 

And certainly the people in Saskatchewan are very happy that 

we were able to balance the budget this year, but the debt is still 

there. It hasn't gone away. And that $15 billion is still there, and 

we have to pay $870 million in interest, and so each department 

shares a little bit in that responsibility. And we're going to chip 

away at that debt now that we do have a balanced budget. 

 

And in our four-year plan, we tell the people of Saskatchewan 

how we're going to chip away at the debt so that in fact at some 

point in time we will be paying less interest to Zürich and to 

Hong Kong and to Montreal and to New York. But we just can't 

wish it away, and the member from Maple Creek should know 

that. We can't wish away that $15 billion debt; we can't wish 

away the interest. We have to pay it. 

 

So certainly we will do as much as we can, year by year, to 

improve the roads in Saskatchewan. And the people are very 

understanding because they know where we come from, and 

they see where we're going, and they appreciate that honesty, 

and they appreciate that attempt. Certainly a lot of it is maybe 

fix and patch and fix and patch when we would really like to do 

a new road, but they're very understanding of that. And we will 

continue with that process until in fact we can afford that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, once again we are happy to 

say that there are some things that we can agree with you on, 

and of course balancing a budget is something that we naturally 

would agree with you having done, and we would even 

congratulate you for doing that. 

 

But the reality is that there are choices to be made with the 

monies that you have available to spend, and you allude to debt 

being there and that it has to be paid and that's fair ball — we 

have to do that. Nobody would understand that better than a 

man like Jim Lacey who has worked all of his life very hard 

through the agricultural industry as well as being in business 

and working in and around the community of Maple Creek. 

 

Nobody will understand better than Mr. Lacey would that the 

$4 that you had as a debt in 1970 would accumulate just by the 

interest alone to probably $16 billion . . . or $16 by now, 

because 4 becomes 16 when you start to pay the interest and 

compound the interest through the 1980s and the kind of 

interest rates that we saw as a reality in life — revisiting the 

past again — and certainly we will have to get away from that 

at some point. 

 

But we do have to point out to you, sir, that Mr. Lacey will 

understand that $4 of debt back in the 1970s could easily have 

become $16 of debt by 1995 if you compounded the interest on 

it and never, ever paid that off. And the reality is that no 

government ever did pay off the debt from the 1970s, which 

was $3 or 4 billion, and of course that has, without any 

question, compounded through the years and has become our 

$15 billion debt. 

 

So the reality is that that is just an inflated figure which may 

not, in fact, be any more difficult for a government to manage 

in today's inflated dollars than, say, $4 billion would have been 

in the l970s. And I'm sure that a man by the name of Blakeney 

could explain that to you because I understand that he was 

rather good with figures and understood economy and 

economics quite well. So maybe you should revisit him some 

day and ask him about compound interest, and how it builds up, 



March 6, 1995 

 

666 

and whether or not a $4 billion debt back in the '70s was any 

more difficult to manage than a $15 billion debt would be 

today. 

 

All things being equal and considered I understand, from some 

of my colleagues, that back in the 1970s the entire budget of the 

province was only a small percentage of what the budget is that 

we're handling today. And of course that has to be a reality 

when you consider that we've gone from $4.2 billion in 1991 up 

to 5.2, or something like that, that you're taking in, in revenues 

and spreading around the province today. Which only of course 

indicates that you do have choices. 

 

Now to be sure, Minister, we don't want to neglect No. 16 

Highway and the people up North; they obviously need a road 

as well. And the choice to fix that is not a bad one, it's a good 

one, and we want you to know that. But we do have another 

question to point out to you just for sure how many of the 

people in the province and up in that area really do look at these 

roads as being very important. So this question, Minister, comes 

from David Nicholson from Lloydminster. You perhaps will 

know him. And here is his question and I quote: I want to know 

when will the Yellowhead, No. 16, be four-laned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek, and I will try and make my point once again. We were 

very fortunate to be able to come to an agreement with the 

previous federal government on a SHIP program, the strategic 

highways improvement program. It was a $70 million program; 

35 million went into Highway No. 16, and we are twinning 

from Saskatoon to North Battleford, and that will be four-lane 

very shortly. 

 

We were hoping that we would complete that section under a 

national highways program. Of course you are well aware that 

on December 15 of this year the federal minister said no, they 

weren't interested in the national highways program, so we were 

left on our own. 

 

We have 8.6 per cent of the national highways, the network in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And again I mentioned earlier, 

3.7 per cent of the population. We certainly believe that the 

federal government has some responsibility in our national 

highways network. In the United States, for an example, their 

federal government pays 33 per cent of that infrastructure. The 

infrastructure on national highways network in Canada, only 

about 6 per cent is paid by the federal government, and that we 

do not believe is fair. 

 

But we will continue to work on it in the Saskatchewan way. 

We will work on it through Transportation Partnerships 

Corporation. And we will attempt to utilize partnerships with 

the private sector industries like the trucking companies. 

 

And in fact, hopefully some day soon — certainly we can't give 

dates or anything — whether that's 1 year or 5 years or 10 years, 

I can't answer that because of . . . I told you earlier that we were 

still paying the interest on our debt. But as soon as we can get at 

it, and the people of Saskatchewan know that, they 

know that we will make every attempt to continue the twinning 

of 16 and No. 1. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. Well we're back to 

having to talk about how to manage money I guess. And I guess 

maybe it is time that you did talk to Mr. Blakeney and some of 

those folks and find out how to handle a dollar and how to 

make choices and decisions of where to spend money. 

 

Everybody that I know has a mortgage on their house at some 

time in their life, or on a car at some time of their life. I doubt if 

there's 1 per cent of the population that doesn't have a mortgage 

to pay at some time in their life. I know I certainly have paid my 

fair share. And it's a question of making choices. It didn't mean 

that we went broke or that we quit farming back home or that 

we stopped doing our business or stopped feeding our families. 

We just got on with the job and we made the choices of how to 

spend the dollars. 

 

And that's exactly what Mr. Blakeney will tell you if you go 

back and have a little chat with him about how to handle the 

debt that he left this province in back in the 1970s. He would 

tell you that's a price of doing business and you have to learn 

how to manage your money better and make the choices better 

as to where you spend your money to help the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Minister, having gotten to the point where you're not going 

to make any realistic commitments to the roads that we 

mentioned, perhaps we should talk about a few of the others, 

just to let you know what a disastrous state you and your 

department have allowed the highways in Saskatchewan to 

become. 

 

I'm not sure how many numbered highways we have in the 

province but maybe as you answer this question you would also 

throw that in for me. Because irregardless of what the final 

number is, I suspect that I have a question on every highway in 

this province, about something being wrong with it. And that 

has to be a very sad scenario for the Department of Highways. 

 

If every highway in this province comes across my desk as a 

numbered highway with a problem, then you are seriously 

delinquent in your department at getting the job of repairing. 

And fixing patch, as you put it, even hasn't been done. So I 

think we're going to have to have a serious look at what you're 

doing and, more realistically, what you're not doing, and the 

choices that you're making with the spending of the money that 

you have available. 

 

Anyway, I do want to get on to asking you, sir, direct questions 

from the constituents of this province. This question comes 

from Isabelle George from Arcola, Saskatchewan. I quote. I 

want to know why the 30-mile stretch of road between Arcola 

and Stoughton on Highway No. 13 has been allowed to 

deteriorate to such a deplorable state. With the amount of big 

truck traffic hauling oil out of the south-east to fill provincial 

coffers, we should have the best roads in the province, not the 

worst. End of quote, Mr. Minister. 



March 6, 1995 

 

667 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you very much, the member from 

Maple Creek. First of all I want to state my firm objection to the 

statement that the Department of Highways are not doing a 

good job. I refuse to accept that. 

 

The Highways crews in this province, under extreme 

circumstances this year, worked very hard. Conditions that were 

very, very wet; fall very, very cold; winters, we had a lot of 

roads in this province explode — and added traffic in certain 

areas, large truck traffic. Our crews worked night and day to fix 

those highways. And they are in very good condition under the 

circumstances that we had. So I want to object to that statement 

very strongly. 

 

Arcola to Stoughton. That road definitely needs to be improved. 

There is no question about that. Because of the interest — and I 

told you this 100 times but I'm going to tell you one more time 

— because of the interest we pay, our budgets are a little less. 

So what we try to do is spend . . . or worry about the primary 

highway system first and the secondary highway second. 

 

We know that this highway needs improvement. And as we get 

more money to spend on the secondary highway system, we 

will certainly take highway . . . the Arcola to Stoughton 

highway into consideration. As the province turns around and 

moves forward, we'll be able to reassess some of these 

secondary highways more quickly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 

your government has spent the last two months going through 

the process of developing a budget and bringing it to the 

province of Saskatchewan and to the people, and you've spent 

all of your time bragging about the fact that you've come in with 

surplus amounts of money. So the continued complaining and 

talking about the fact that you can't manage to do anything 

because you're paying some interest doesn't seem to wash very 

well. 

 

And on one hand you say, oh we're all strapped, and we're all 

broke, and we've got debts and deficits and problems. And the 

reality is on the other hand you're bragging all around the 

province about the big surplus you got and all the money you've 

got to spend. And yet you can't seem to find it possible in your 

philosophy to make a decision to spend this money in the right 

places, the places where it deserves to be spent: out in rural 

Saskatchewan. And that means on highways as a starter to try 

and get things fixed up so that folks can't legitimately, 

legitimately talk to us about roads that are in such bad shape 

that you could almost lose a small truck in some of them. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now the truth of the matter is, sir, we've had semi-trailer trucks 

getting stuck on some of our highways to such an extent that the 

wheel hole marks in those highways would, if you could split a 

truck in half and set it in the ruts, disappear a truck. A small 

half-ton truck could easily be buried in those ruts. That's a 

reality in Saskatchewan. That's the kind of total disaster that our 

highway system has come to, and we stand here in all fairness

honestly trying to bring to you a list of the concerns and 

problems of the people of Saskatchewan and all you can say is 

that you can't figure out how to make important choices on 

where to spend money and that what a great job everybody's 

doing of fixing up the roads. 

 

Well how can the folks make any kind of effort at fixing up the 

roads when you fire half of them. You got no crews left. You 

don't spend any money in your department because you haven't 

got any left. You allowed the cabinet to talk you out of all the 

highway money to spend on union trade-offs and deals with 

your big buddies there in the cities. And the reality is that you're 

letting these big surpluses sit around and not be allocated to the 

proper projects. 

 

So, Minister, having said all that, just so you'll get the story 

straight for a change, maybe you'll work a little bit harder on the 

reality of how to manage a dollar and spend it in the right place. 

 

But we do have to ask these questions on behalf of the 

constituents of the province, some of whom I suggest probably 

may have voted for your government but likely wish they 

hadn't. But I've got a question here now that comes from . . . I 

don't know if it's a Mr. or Mrs.; it just says B. Schindel from 

Yorkton. And it says and I quote: I want to know why our 

highways are so deteriorated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I want to tell the member from 

Maple Creek that he should tell Mr. or Ms. Schindel that the 

province is now booming. I'm sure they heard the 

announcement of Cargill this morning and are really excited 

about that — many, many more jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan, another industry moving into the province. 

 

The oil industry is booming; the mining industry in the North is 

booming; the lumbering industry is booming; small machinery 

manufacturers — that industry is booming. 

 

So the province is turning the corner, and it's moving forward, 

and people are coming back to Saskatchewan; again over a 

million people in the province of Saskatchewan. They're 

moving in from Alberta and Manitoba to work in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Of course that means more taxpayers as well. 

So as the province turns around, we'll be able to re-assess many 

of the highways that perhaps Mr. Schindel is talking about. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I open-armed welcome all the 

people back to Saskatchewan that are coming and will come. 

And I say that in all sincerity. I'm glad to have them come, and 

I'm here to welcome them with my arms open, and hug each 

one of them, and thank them for coming back to Saskatchewan. 

 

But the reality is that, Minister, we've gone from 50,000 people 

on welfare in the last three years ago, up to about 82 or 4,000 

now. Is it possible that the only increase in population that you 

allude to is the people that have come back to go on welfare 

because the Alberta government offered them free bus passes to 

get out of their province? And they came here because it was an 



March 6, 1995 

 

668 

easier welfare system to get on to and therefore they have built 

our population on the backs of the rest of the taxpayers perhaps. 

 

There's something, food for thought for you there, Minister. 

Now you say the province is booming, and it is in some sectors, 

and we're very happy about that. And the truth of the matter is 

that that's all the more reason why you should be allocating 

some of your choices of dollars spent into the right areas and 

highways happens to be one of those areas that you are 

neglecting. 

 

For example, you talk about the great boom that's coming to 

Saskatchewan that is demonstrated by Cargill coming into the 

province to build a crushing plant. I'm really happy to hear that's 

happening. I'm a canola grower, among other things, and it's 

really good to see that extra competition coming into our 

province. Who could argue against that? After all, that's one of 

the best things that could ever happen to our province is to 

diversify. And we're really happy that's happening. 

 

But we've got to look at the deal a little bit. You gave three and 

a half million dollars to this company to locate in our province 

— another choice of how you spend money and the 

contradiction of the way you deal with your whole philosophy. 

But when the past administration talked about spending money 

in order to attract business and build a tax base, you and you 

people were all against that. 

 

You were against Saskferco, a company that incidentally was 

associated with Cargill. And you people stood in this very 

House and you cried day and night about how terrible that was. 

Now here you are planting those same kind of dollars in another 

company to come to our province. 

 

Well, sir, as the Minister of Highways, I suggest you might have 

argued in cabinet to spend some of that money building some 

highways so that they, in fact, could drive into Saskatchewan to 

get the job done. You also talk about the booming times and 

certainly you're right. In the oil patch we have told you earlier 

today exactly that; things are going very well, both the south-

east corner and the south-west corner of the province, and 

millions of dollars are coming in from those leases. Those 

millions of dollars are over and above anything you ever 

budgeted for. Those millions — hundreds of millions — of 

dollars are dollars that your government now has choices as to 

where you're going to spend them. 

 

And I'm saying to you spending at least a portion of that money 

on highways is not only fair, it's right. And it is incumbent upon 

you to go to your cabinet and see to it that you get that fair 

share of that money and spend it on those very roads that the 

people of this province need. Now we don't need more people 

out in the country stuck in the ditches; what we need is more 

highways built to a safe standard so that people can come and 

go without taking their lives in their hands. 

 

I have another question, Minister, that comes from a constituent 

of our province, and I would like to address that to you at this 

time. The question comes from Dave Snare from Carrot River. I 

quote: I want to know about the Yellowhead highway problem. 

After travelling on that route myself, I see that 50 per cent of 

the problem is the attitude of the drivers. Where are the patrol 

cars? I have never seen any on my travels on that route. Are 

they scared of the bad drivers? Can your government set up a 

safe driving program for these people that have a problem 

driving safely on highways? I have seen problems even on the 

routes that are twinned. End of quote, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you for the question from the 

member from Maple Creek and on behalf of Mr. Snare. I too, I 

guess, travelling on Highway 16 sometimes see the impatience 

of some drivers, as I do on No. 1, and often even on my way 

into Regina from Tisdale. And I do urge all drivers to drive the 

speed limit and to be careful and cautious when they are 

driving. It's impossible for the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) to be everywhere at once, so there is certainly 

. . . responsibility has to lie with many of the drivers. And so I 

would urge they drive carefully and safely on our Saskatchewan 

highways. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the members of the Assembly . . . 

 

The Chair: — Does the member have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 

introduce to you the 87th Cub Pack from W.H. Ford School in 

Regina North West. There are 24 of them here tonight with 5 

leaders who have committed a good deal of their time to 

working with these young people. I will be meeting with them a 

little bit later in room 218 for a chance for refreshments and a 

chance to talk about their legislative experience. And I'd ask 

members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm sure that the 

Minister of Highways will be happy to say hello to these folks 

as well as I am. We're glad you came out to watch how we work 

in the House tonight. We're discussing the business of our 

highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

My sons have been Cubs in the past, so I guess a little advice to 

you, and I'll say stick with it because it definitely has prospered 

all of our family, and it will prosper you as well. I'll let the 

minister respond as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. I too would like to welcome the Cubs from Regina 

North West. Wonderful uniforms. I think I should hire you all 

as traffic officers. How about that? Welcome to the Legislative 

Assembly. 



March 6, 1995 

 

669 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 

guess we have to get back to the realities of the world here and 

talk about why we have so many people with so many concerns 

about our highway system in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems like when I started in this job in 1991 that we had a 

few folks that were mentioning to me, as the critic for the 

Department of Highways, that we had some problems out in the 

country. Mostly we concentrated on Highway No. 16, and then 

Highway No. 1 became more and more as a popular focal point, 

and I think justifiably because those are the two roads where we 

saw the highest counts of accidents and tragedy for people 

driving and getting into accidents and that sort of thing. So 

realistically, I guess that was bound to happen. 

 

But it has been a total and absolute amazement to me how we 

have progressed, almost a doubling of concerns and problems 

brought to my attention each year since we've gone through 

from 1991 to 1995, where we are today, and it has just gotten to 

the point where we're receiving all kinds of people telling us 

about just about every highway in the province. 

 

In fact just for the record, how many numbered highways do we 

have that carry their own individual numbers in the province, 

Mr. Minister, so that we can find out fairly whether or not we 

have a complaint about every highway in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 

Creek. We could stop and count them but it would take several 

hours. As I mentioned earlier, we have an $8 billion 

infrastructure of roads in the province. Twenty-five per cent of 

all the roads in Canada are located in this province. And so 

there are many, many numbered highways. But certainly I 

would be pleased to get that number to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister; we will await that with 

anticipation because I honestly believe that in these piles that 

I've got here I have a complaint about every highway in this 

province. I'm going to be really surprised if you can find one 

that there's no complaint about. 

 

Now you've alluded a little while ago, Minister, to the American 

system. And I'm glad that you did that because I quite agree 

with you. We don't always disagree, and I want to, for the 

record . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. 

 

I'd just like to read from Beauchesne's, paragraph 336: 

 

 Although difficult to enforce on occasion, Speakers

have also consistently attempted to discourage loud 

private conversations in the Chamber, and have urged 

those wishing to carry on such exchanges to do so 

outside the House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I wanted to compliment the minister on his observations of the 

world around us because I think it's important to our highway 

system that we look at programs that do work, not only in the 

allocations of money which of course he is falling a little short 

on, but in the way that highways are planned and the reasons 

why things are done the way they are. 

 

The American system of course, as you said, includes a lot of 

highways built by the federal government. And that is because 

they know that it's important to tie a country together with a 

good transportation system. 

 

Now in Canada, when we talk about transportation, we seem to 

always think just about railroads. Reality is that transportation 

covers the airways, the railroads, and highways and a lot of 

other ways of travelling. Even I suppose you could get down to 

a saddle horse. 

 

But the truth of the matter is, Minister, that you are absolutely 

right. The federal government does have a responsibility to 

develop an interprovincial road system and a national road 

system. And they have fallen far short in Canada in doing that. 

And if they would take a look at the American system, they 

would find that it would be much, much better for the federal 

government to get involved and to build an infrastructure of 

highways . . . and travelling through this country . . . that would 

make things easier for people to get around. And it would 

develop this country to a tremendous amount . . . more than 

what we have been. It would help infinitely in Saskatchewan if 

we had that kind of approach to life. 

 

And I quite agree with you and support you wholeheartedly in 

any attempts that you make to try to get the federal government 

to live up to their responsibilities of keeping this country united 

and put together with a good road system. That all goes hand 

and glove with so many of the other things that we talk about in 

terms of pulling our country together and making this nation 

work. 

 

So, Minister, anything that you say along that line, I definitely 

support you. And if you decide to go to Ottawa some day, I'd be 

happy to come along with you and tell them just exactly that. 

 

So, Minister, I want to get on with the questions from the 

constituents because I think it's important that we get answers 

for them on all of these specific roads. And I know that you're 

going to assure us about your attempts to go down to Ottawa to 

get some more help for us through infrastructure programs, and 

perhaps you do have in fact some plans on the table or maybe 

you are negotiating at the present time. And just while we're 

discussing that, would you tell us about those plans, if you have 

any, or if there is any action in the forefront for getting some 



March 6, 1995 

 

670 

monies from Ottawa or some kind of a plan out of Ottawa. 

Would you like to discuss that with us for a few minutes, 

Minister. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member for Maple 

Creek, and I certainly do agree that there is need for federal 

government to understand the importance of our national 

highways network. There's savings in costs to the users. There's 

added economic activity. Of course there's less cost when it 

relates to accidents and to fatalities and to injuries. 

 

And I note that you would join with me, and I appreciate that, 

on any trip to Ottawa. You may have to share in some of the 

expense because of the tight budget situation, but certainly I 

would invite you to talk to me about that. 

 

I did travel to Ottawa on February 8 and talked to the federal 

minister and asked him to reconsider the December 15 decision, 

and at that point the federal minister said no, that there was no 

chance of that at this time. But we will continue to work, and I 

will be talking with the other western ministers of 

Transportation, and in fact all the Transportation ministers from 

across Canada, in the next while to see if there is something 

else that we can suggest to the federal government to have them 

reconsider their position on the importance of a national 

highways program. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I'm glad that I asked 

you about that because I hadn't realized that you'd been there so 

recently and been treated so shabbily. And if you are certainly 

in a situation where you need a little help financing your trips to 

Ottawa, you can count on us chipping in a little here and there, 

at least enough for a meal or two so that you can go back and 

plead our case for us. 

 

I do wonder though, when you talk about national 

responsibility, why you don't make our case a little more 

strongly in light of the fact that we have so many federal 

highway projects connected with the Maritime provinces. Now 

they seem to have all kinds of money to share with the 

Maritimes to build a highway system out there. And maybe you 

have to throw that into the argument a little more. 

 

What about this causeway or big bridge, or whatever the right 

word is, that's going to go to Newfoundland? Who's paying for 

that? I understand that that whole project might be federal 

money. 

 

Certainly you might use those kinds of arguments to convince 

the federal government that western Canada deserves at least a 

passing glance from the eastern part of this country. Or perhaps 

you could tell us that you've done that. What have you done in 

that area, Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thanks for the question from the 

member for Maple Creek. Certainly the fairness of the budget is 

one thing that . . . the federal budget is one thing that we 

complained about loud and clear, and certainly we feel that the 

national highways network across the country of Canada is in 

bad need of repair. 

 

Saskatchewan, certainly we see here the national highways 

network as needing some upgrading, needing twinning. Other 

provinces have other concerns. Perhaps it's the condition. And 

if you talk to a truck driver that drives the national 

transportation network at all, he will say that the whole network 

is in need of repair. 

 

So you know, I don't have any problems with other provinces 

requesting help from the federal government. But certainly we 

know our problems in Saskatchewan and we'll continue to work 

on fixing those problems. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, when we're talking about 

these highway problems as they relate to our nation, we've just 

heard about the fact that we're going to lose the money from the 

Crow which . . . the Crow benefit. I think everybody 

understands and knows what that's about and knows how much 

money we're going to lose. 

 

What they seldom talk about, though, is the fact that the federal 

government has indicated there will be $300 million each year 

for side-effect problems related to the adjustment of removing 

the Crow benefit from western Canada. Now that $300 million, 

it would seem to me, might be partly targeted towards our 

double-laning of Highway No. 1, for example, because quite 

realistically, an awful lot of canola and feed grains like barley 

leaves south-western Saskatchewan and goes to Alberta. There's 

a crushing plant at Lethbridge and of course that is a canola 

crushing plant. Lots of the seed from Saskatchewan goes there 

because it's as close to go there — and closer — for most 

producers than going to the plants up North. Now maybe when 

we get the new one in Saskatoon that may be another thing to 

consider. 

 

But realistically, right now we've got a lot of feed grains going 

across on those roads, and they're being trucked with big trucks. 

And as a result, of course, we need those highways improved. 

 

So you should qualify under that part of the proposal for monies 

to help to double-lane that highway. Do you think that's 

possible, Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member of Maple 

Creek. And he's right that the federal budget includes an 

amount of $300 million of money to sort of move the grain 

transportation system into a mode of efficiencies, I guess. 

 

Now the $300 million apparently is over a six-year period. Of 

that, I would suspect that Saskatchewan's share would be 

perhaps 150, $160 million, over six years. So that works out to 

about $25 million a year. 

 

And if we take a look at the pooling alone, the pooling cost to 

the producers in the province of Saskatchewan will be $40 

million a year. The added costs . . . or the costs that the alfalfa 



March 6, 1995 

 

671 

industry . . . or the amount the alfalfa industry is looking for is 

$14 million a year. So just those two alone would eat up that 

$25 million almost twice over. 

 

So as you can see, it doesn't appear that in that $300 million 

there will be anything for the highway network. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I understand your reasoning 

and the way you did it. What I don't understand is why you 

would give in so easily. Realistically your highway system has a 

claim to some of that money, and in all fairness, you should be 

able to get some of it to spend on the highway system because it 

is going to be dramatically impacted by the change in the 

methods of payments. We're going to see a lot of trucks on our 

roads in a lot of different places, and with the eventuality of a 

lot of rail lines being abandoned, you certainly must face that 

reality. 

 

So, Minister, I don't want to get into that part of the discussion 

too far just now because I've got a tonne of questions on 

transportation that relate to the Crow benefit and all that. But I 

want to have you concentrate a little more right at the moment 

on a few of these questions from the individual constituents, 

because I know that they are anxiously awaiting for your 

answers. 

 

So I have a question here, Minister, that comes from Debbie 

Bodker from Moose Jaw. I quote: I want to know when the 

Trans-Canada Highway is going to be twinned. It is a real pain 

trying to pass a truck on the single portions of the highway, 

especially when one truck is tailgating the truck in front of it. It 

is also darn scary when one or more large trucks are tailgating 

you even though you are doing the speed limit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I thank the constituent for that question. 

And again, I will repeat to her as I have to you, that a priority of 

this government is to twin the Trans-Canada. We are living in 

times of financial restraint, and I'm sure she's aware of that. 

She's also probably aware that the province is turning around. 

We're moving out of that; we've balanced the budget. And the 

province is booming, certainly. And so we will continue to look 

at the Trans-Canada as we move forward. 

 

I want to speak a little bit about being a little tougher with the 

federal government in regards to the $300 million. I guess you 

would be aware that, when the WGTA (Western Grain 

Transportation Act) benefit was cancelled on the federal Liberal 

budget, the cost to producers on shipping grain will double or 

triple in some areas. And so we believe that the farmers are the 

legitimate people that should claim any monies that the federal 

government would put forward. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier this 

afternoon, Mr. Minister, in visiting with the minister 

responsible for Community Services and rural municipalities, 

urban municipalities, she mentioned that you were the lead 

minister in relation to the Crow benefit and discussion about 

transportation and the Crow. Now I'm not sure whether she was 

giving you more credit than was your due, but in that respect, I 

guess, there are some questions that we need to ask, continuing 

on from what our discussion was last week. 

 

In the newspaper they talked about 800 to 1,000 miles coming 

off of the lines that are going to be . . . that are being held to the 

year 2000. Is that accurate or is that speculation? In your mind 

and the department of transport, what would those 800 to 1,000 

miles of rail line abandoned do in relation to the elevator space 

available and the elevators that are on those lines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 

Indeed the federal budget included some areas that concern us. I 

took the opportunity on March 1 to write to Mr. Young in 

regards to our concern about the abandonment of the grain-

dependent branch lines. In fact branch lines, but the light steel 

lines in particular. There are approximately 6 to 800, about 600 

miles in the province of Saskatchewan of light steel lines. 

 

What is going to happen to those lines is that the federal 

government are going to do an analysis on those lines to be 

completed by November of 1995. If at that point in time they 

feel that there is no justification on keeping them, they will be 

able to be abandoned beginning January 1, 1996. This gives 

farmers, municipalities, communities, very little time to look at 

alternatives. 

 

I know in my constituency, for an example, or the constituency 

just north of me, there's the Arborfield subdivision, for an 

example, and at the end of that line is an alfalfa plant. The 

alfalfa plant would like to expand, but of course as of budget 

day they are not willing to expand and I cannot blame them. So 

they're sort of in limbo, as many other communities are. 

 

So what we asked Mr. Young is to delay that and to talk to 

communities, to offer some options and a plan prior to allowing 

these lines to be abandoned, and we're awaiting his reply. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Grain-dependent, light steel lines — would 

you have an idea of how many elevators there would be on 

those lines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. I 

cannot give you the number of elevators. I don't have them, but 

I can get them for you. 

 

There are 39 communities that sit on the lines — Zenon Park, 

Arborfield, Big River, Holbein, Reward, Salvador, Cactus Lake, 

Mawer, Central Butte, Lawson, Riverhurst, Weekes, Somme, 

Carragana, Porcupine Plain, Chelan, Bjorkdale, Meacham, 

Peterson, Benson, Griffin, Riceton, Gray, Estlin, Henribourg, 

Paddockwood, Rhein, Simmie; that's on CN (Canadian 

National) line. And on CP (Canadian Pacific) is Simmie, 

Esterhazy, Stockholm, Dubuc, Grayson, Killaly, Burr, Fulda, 

Pilger, Middle Lake, St. Benedict, and McMahon. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Martens: — I think the last one is McMahon . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the member from Swift Current 



March 6, 1995 

 

672 

was probably born near there, too. 

 

Probably the average would be about two elevators per location, 

if you took and averaged it out, because Riverhurst probably 

has three or four. If you have roughly two and something like 

that, you're probably losing . . . or the possibility of losing 80 to 

100 elevators out of that system. When you talked to the 

Minister for Transport from Ottawa, were there any others that 

were being considered, rather than just the light steel? 

 

Like the CN has the majority of light steel, as I understand it. 

And even from your list, the volume of towns was about a third 

CP and two-thirds CN. And so I would say the majority of light 

steel is on the CN, and that's where the biggest problem is. 

 

What kind of response have you got from the minister about 

medium steel and the amount of elevators that could be lost on 

those lines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 

As far as we understand, all other lines fall under the NTA 

(National Transportation Agency) rules. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. Then we have places like Shaunavon 

and the line that Shaunavon is on. And if you go to Meadow 

Lake, because you didn't mention those lines that run further to 

the north and further to the south, they then would be, from 

your observation, protected to maybe have construction of high 

through-put elevators on those lines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. It 

is my understanding that all branch lines, the prohibition orders 

are lifted on all of them. But the light steel have no NTA rules 

applied to them so there's no 90-day and then 60-day period for 

the communities to put in their complaints or their questions. 

 

Under the NTA there's a process of appeal, but on light steel 

there is not that process. 

 

Mr. Martens: — On the lines of . . . or miles of lines in the 

light steel, did you have a number that you gave earlier? Was it 

800 or 600? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — It's 600 miles, to the member from 

Morse. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Have the Department of Highways, and 

through Municipal Affairs as well, any idea on the road costs? I 

know that there have been significant amount of real test places 

that the grain has moved along highways, especially in the 

South moving from Moose Jaw. And the member from Thunder 

Creek was talking about that earlier, moving from Moose Jaw 

south to the American border, or you go from Swift Current 

south to the American border, or you go to Gull Lake and south 

to the American border. Have you got any idea on what it has 

taken to re-establish the roads to even a respectable capacity for 

regular traffic? Have you got an idea of what those costs have 

been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse 

for that question. I guess if we do nothing and the federal 

government does nothing but what it's announced, we estimate 

the costs to be in the neighbourhood of $50 million. 

 

That's why we were asking for options. We would like to 

maintain some of the branch lines. We would like to have 

appropriate legislation that would give producers the option of 

short lines where it makes sense and we will continue to work 

with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) in regional planning so that regions 

can develop their needs in that particular area, and this is the 

way we can see in protecting the roads as much as possible. 

 

But if we're not allowed any of those options, the cost could 

reach $50 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Are you going to make any representation to 

the federal Minister of Transport on transition money of that 

$300 million to do an assessment and put a price tag on the 

volume of dollars that is going to be required to keep those 

roads in a reasonable amount of repair because we're going to 

be moving grain a lot more than we ever have before on roads. 

 

The interesting thing is not going to be on roads that are good 

roads. They're going to be those tarred roads that have to carry a 

whole lot of traffic. And in those outlying places in the 

province, that's all we've got. If you go to the south of the No. 1 

Highway, the roads that lead from the American border up to 

the main line are tarred, most of them, or they're second-grade 

highways. And those are the highways that are going to have to 

carry that volume of traffic, and it doesn't stand up to it. What 

happens . . . and even on the good roads, with that added weight 

and the volume of traffic, they just break up. And even in 

wintertime they break up. 

 

Are you going to make representation to the minister in Ottawa 

that that transition money needs to be identified and earmarked 

for corridors of some kind where this grain can move? And it 

may be of some significance to have short-line railroads — and 

I believe in it — but not all locations are going to benefit from 

them. So what you're going to have to do is have corridors 

where these grain terminals are, and that's going to have to be 

the way that you deliver the grain. Are you going to ask the 

minister for some transitional funds for that purpose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 

As you are quite aware, the $300 million is not designated just 

for Saskatchewan. The $300 million transition funding . . . we 

estimate that we would receive, if it sticks sort of under the 

WGTA system, to get about $160 million. Over six years, that 

equals to about $25 million a year. But if you take a look at 

some of the additional costs to the producers, pooling alone will 

be $40 million. The alfalfa transition . . . I know the alfalfa 

people were asking for $14 million per year and there's a lot of 

other people involved in that so there is very, very little money 



March 6, 1995 

 

673 

there to go anywhere. And it doesn't appear that any will go 

towards roads. 

 

And we're not, I guess, as fortunate as the Atlantic provinces 

where the one subsidy was cut off but in fact the federal 

government is now putting in 325 million approximately into 

their highways infrastructure. Well we were not that fortunate 

in the West and that's why we argued . . . one of our arguments 

to the federal government was the fairness of their budget and 

so we don't believe it's fair. 

 

We're going to have to manage. We're going to have to work 

with SARM and SUMA because it's not only . . . You're right 

that the majority of the additional traffic, we believe, will be on 

the highways but there will still be additional traffic on 

municipal roads. So we'll work with SARM and SUMA and the 

Department of Highways to try and manage this as best we can 

under the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Martens: — You mentioned pooling as a part of that 300 

million. As I understand, it's $20 a tonne to move that grain 

from Thunder Bay to Montreal on average. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — The $20 a tonne, I believe . . . the 

Thunder Bay to Montreal fee is on the traffic moving east and 

it's not on the traffic moving west. So I guess it wouldn't be $20 

a tonne in total but it's $20 a tonne on whatever moves east. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So that any of the grain moving into Thunder 

Bay — if I have this correct from you — any wheat moving into 

Thunder Bay from western Canada moves through the lakes at 

$20 a tonne to get to salt water in Montreal. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Yes, approximately. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I know that in some years there's been 

12 million tonnes. There's some years, 7 million. What was the 

volume moved last year, or give me what was moved last year, 

and give me an average over the last 10 years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — To the member from Morse, we will get 

you those figures. We do not have them handy. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well you were talking about 40 million going 

into pooling from that account. If I have it figured out right, the 

$20 times 7 million tonnes is $140 million. Is there some that is 

going to be continued to be paid by the producer in lieu of that 

and . . . Well as I understand it from the paper, and I'd like to be 

corrected if they're wrong, or that to be corrected, the farmer is 

going to pay all of it from point A to Montreal if it moves east. 

And if that's wrong correct me; and if it's not wrong could you 

elaborate on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — We have nothing concrete, to the 

member to Morse, on that except that the Canadian Wheat 

Board and the national grains bureau are talking and we believe 

about 4 million tonnes which would equal to about 10 to $12 

per tonne. 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I believe the highest year that they had 

was 12 million tonnes, so that would make $240 million. Most 

of that money came out of the pooling from the Canadian 

Wheat Board. And the concern I have — and it's something that 

the Manitoba government will push for — and that is the 

pooling will become a part of the total volume of the Crow 

benefit. 

 

And I'm not sure whether — I'll repeat that — the pooling of 

the grains and that is the . . . and the cost of moving grain from 

Thunder Bay to Montreal will become a part of the pooling, or 

is a part of the pooling; and they, in Manitoba, want that 

amount of money to be taken out of the Crow. It never has been 

before. It's always been taken out of the pooling account for 

wheat and barley or the grain board grains. And in all of the 

discussion that I ever had with the ministers of Transport and 

Agriculture, that was something that Manitoba government 

always wanted to have. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'd like to know from you if that is still the 

case and if they're going to take a bunch of money out of that 

1.6 million yet on top of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. It 

is our understanding that the pooling is coming out of the $300 

million, that any compensation for that would be coming under 

that $300 million. 

 

And I just wanted to correct that 4 million estimate that I gave 

you before; that's just the Saskatchewan figure. Okay. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well that's quite a bit more reasonable, Mr. 

Minister. Because the dividing line is west of Regina here and 

that stuff moves east and the rest moves west, so the volume of 

grain would include a lot of what Manitoba will give yet too, 

and that could make two and a half million tonnes too. And so 

. . . Because that all moves there except what moves to 

Churchill. 

 

Is there any consideration, because of the lines as it relates to 

the track at Churchill, is there any consideration in that being 

upgraded in any of this transition money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 

What's going to happen with the $300 million is still basically 

speculation, and I hope you realize that. 

 

It is our understanding that there was an article in the Winnipeg 

Free Press today that suggested that some  an amount 

between 25 and $30 million  would be going into Churchill, 

but we do not know if it's into the elevator or into the track or 

. . . In fact we do not know or haven't verified that statement. 

 

Mr. Martens: — In the Leader-Post it had an article about 

repercussions seem endless. And there was information there 

that said that a farmer from Swift Current who paid $14 a tonne 

will likely be paying 30. A person from eastern Saskatchewan, 



March 6, 1995 

 

674 

which represents anything from Scott going east — actually 

would include Swift Current almost — the volume of grain 

moving from the south-west part of the province moving east or 

moving west, but the crop moving east would be about $35 a 

tonne to get it to Montreal, which if you discount the $20 a 

tonne, is 15 to move it to Thunder Bay. Would those numbers 

be pretty close to being accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member for Morse. 

This is preliminary and the department is just working out these 

figures, but our earliest estimation: Estevan, for an example, the 

current freight rate is 11.80 — that's the producer's share — and 

with no pooling change, that would go to about 22.83; and with 

pooling change, it would go to about 34.64. Swift Current, 

currently 13.82 to the producer, it would, without pooling 

change, would go to 28.58; and with a pooling change would 

go to about $32.38. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What we have at this point is . . . or we need 

to start talking about what variable rates would do in relation to 

that. Is it of some significance to the federal government to 

have it move as cheaply as it possibly can? Because now I, as a 

producer, am paying the full shot. 

 

Now how are we going to work — we being agriculture in 

Saskatchewan — going to work with a monopoly that has 

absolute control over the agenda, and setting regulations that 

are going to dictate for us a principle that I think needs to be 

followed? One is that the higher the volume, the longer the 

distance, the cheaper the rate. And that has to be established by 

some body because a monopoly is going to regulate and govern 

this, whether it's in the CN line or whether it's the CP line. 

 

And would you have some information as it relates to how this 

would be handled or how it could be handled, or how your 

department is looking at making presentations on how to handle 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 

We've always said, as we've been discussing this with the 

federal government, that efficiencies must reflect the cost to the 

producer. It's got to be least cost to the producer for a good 

system, and it's got to be from farm gate to the ship. And so 

we've always stated that. 

 

We've also stated that there has to be true competition. The 

monopoly system would have to end in order that the producer 

does get the full benefit of any efficiency. And we continue to 

say that. 

 

So from the ashes of the WGTA's death, there is supposed to be 

a new, competitive environment of some kind, and I guess we're 

sort of waiting to see what that might be. I guess we're a little 

concerned that the WGTA was gone without this plan being 

there. Because it would have made sense to me if the plan 

would have been there first, and maybe the reduction of the 

WGTA tied to efficiencies, least cost to the producer, which 

would have made a lot of sense to the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But that was not done. 

So we've been saying that I think they put the cart before the 

horse here. And so that's one of the reasons I asked Mr. Young 

to delay in fact rail line abandonment, because I think he should 

step back, talk to the producers, talk to the communities, talk to 

producer organizations, municipalities, provincial road 

authorities, before making these kinds of decisions. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well you're right about the role of a 

monopoly-controlled entity. And I know enough about the CPR 

(Canadian Pacific Railway), and most people do, because I live 

along the CPR, and you probably know enough about the CN to 

begin to believe that there is a monopoly and there is no 

competition. And how can you get efficiency when there is 

none of the above? 

 

And therefore is there some way that in your discussions with 

Mr. Young that you can make him understand that you need to 

have some regulatory function come into place so that it can 

handle that and determine whether that is going to be efficient? 

And that is very important in order to get any reasonable 

adjustment because you're going to have to have a different rate 

for Swift Current in relation to Thunder Bay and Estevan into 

Thunder Bay. And going west you're going to have to have a 

difference. If there's grain moves out of Estevan to Vancouver, 

that's going to have to be a different price than Swift Current to 

Vancouver. 

 

And that's where you're going to have to have something to 

regulate this because there is no competition. There is no 

efficiency in the rail system; there never has been as it relates to 

the Crow. So if we're going to build it in, then we've got to 

build a regulatory body that is going to function in some way to 

regulate and control that, and then we go from there. But I'd like 

to know from you where that's going to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I certainly agree with the member for 

Morse that there's some regulatory functions here that we are 

very concerned about, and we've expressed that to Mr. Young. 

Some of those are the regulations for short-line railways. Can 

they in fact be an option to producers, to communities, and to 

rural municipalities and provincial road authorities in regards to 

a lower cost to the producer, lower costs on road maintenance, 

and the such? 

 

Joint track usage is another area where we believe that 

competition in that case may actually give the producer less of a 

freight rate, and this would be beneficial to them. 

 

So certainly we are aware of those. We are hoping that the 

federal minister is listening, because this is a very serious 

concern. The producers are just about to go into the field and 

they don't know a lot of these things and so we're very, very 

concerned. And farmers are not dreaming in technicolor when 

they realize this problem. They realize that there's a problem. 

 

Mr. Martens: — You mentioned earlier that this $300 million 

has some functions that are likely going to be paid out on the 

basis . . . pooling could be 40 million, alfalfa is asking for 14. 

On the basis that I've heard complaints from Quebec and 



March 6, 1995 

 

675 

probably some from eastern Ontario on transportation, is there a 

reason to believe that some of this money might go to that? And 

if it is, then I would say that we really have to get our backs up 

pretty high because they've received a benefit of cheap 

transportation all of the years. 

 

Their livestock producers have received the benefits of that 

freight rate and the livestock people in Saskatchewan have not 

received the benefit of that. And therefore it's been a kind of a 

backwards kind of a focus as to how Quebec and eastern 

Ontario have benefited, and the livestock sector and the western 

Canadian livestock producer has suffered under it all the time. 

And is, in your mind, some of that money coming from the 

transition fund going into paying . . . to have those Quebecers 

maybe be quiet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member for Morse. As 

you're aware, the old Crow's Nest Pass Agreement was sort of 

the backbone or the cornerstone of Canadian farming. And it's a 

western Canadian payment or a payment to the railways in lieu 

of our difficulties in transportation, our distance to the ports. 

And it was put there for a purpose. In 1984 it was changed to 

the WGTA, but certainly we expect the full $300 million of 

funding toward changing the system would come to western 

Canada. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair: — Perhaps the minister could reintroduce to us the 

officials who have joined us here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm very 

happy to welcome again to the House, Mr. Duane Adams, 

deputy minister of Health; Ms. Andrea Smandych, who is 

acting manager of financial services; Lorraine Hill, associate 

deputy minister; Steve Petz, associate deputy minister; Glenda 

Yeates, associate deputy minister; and Maureen Yeske, 

executive director, health planning and policy development. 

 

(2030) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman and welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and your officials. I just have a few questions I'd like 

to pose to the minister tonight and then my colleague, the 

Health critic, will be resuming his discussions with the minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, it was reported in the Moose Jaw paper of 

Saturday last that on Wednesday there's going to be 

approximately 70 lay-off notices issued to health care workers 

in the city of Moose Jaw. And this is a result of a million dollar 

shortfall in funding that was expected to occur with the local 

health board. And I'm wondering if you could shed some light 

on that for us tonight. 

 

A million dollars disappearing on short notice and everyone 

declining comment — from the health board, the Providence 

Place, Providence Hospital board. So I'm wondering if you 

could tell me why 70 health care workers in our community are 

going to be laid off and why this million dollar shortfall 

occurred. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, thanks to the member 

from Thunder Creek for the question. It is, as he knows, of very 

topical interest in our community. He will know from the article 

that appeared in the press that the staffing downsize — the loss 

of about 70 positions, full-time equivalents — is essentially a 

result of taking three buildings which have served the health 

care needs of Moose Jaw and district for many years, and 

moving those three buildings into two. Essentially what is 

happening, as the member is well aware, is that acute care 

services are now being offered totally at the Union Hospital site 

and the long-term care services which are now being offered 

both in St. Anthony's Home and in Providence Hospital are 

being consolidated in the new Providence Place. And so what is 

happening here is essentially the downsizing of staff relating to 

housekeeping and maintenance primarily. 

 

In terms of the funding for the Moose Jaw district total and for 

Providence Place, in fact the funding is marginally up in this 

year's budget. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I find that explanation a little strange, 

Minister, because a number of health care professionals in the 

community who were making comments, who didn't wish to be 

named, obviously felt that they didn't want their names made 

public because of the criticism they were levelling. And the fact 

that most local people involved with the boards were declining 

comment on the shortfall tells me that there was something 

inordinate because the individuals on that board, most of whom 

the minister knows and who I know, have been in the past quite 

vocal about the things that they've been doing and quite frankly 

have not hung their heads in shame over commenting on those 

issues. And I'm wondering now why all of a sudden we have 

this silence, why we have people reluctant to let their names be 

in the media on this issue. If it was something that is totally 

within the ordinary, I don't think those comments would have 

been made. 

 

People are very afraid that the new facility will not be properly 

used because of this cut-back and the fact that there is a 

shortfall in funding, and I think you owe the people in your 

community and mine a further explanation. You owe the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

We're talking about a building that cost tens of millions of 

dollars, renovations to another building that cost tens of 

millions of dollars, and some very significant changes to Moose 

Jaw and area through the Thunder Creek Health Board, and I 

don't think that explanation is suitable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I will further explain to 

the member, and I am surprised at his comments that people 

seem reluctant in our community to comment. That I don't 

believe is the case. People have made a number of comments 



March 6, 1995 

 

676 

publicly and privately on the issue surrounding Providence 

Place, Union Hospital, St. Anthony's Home consolidation. 

 

The member will recognize that this plan has been in the works 

for well over a decade. For the many years that he sat in the 

government benches it was approved in theory on many 

occasions and I am proud to be part of a government that gave 

this project the final go-ahead and we have seen the resultant 

construction. 

 

Now when the member talks about a million dollar shortfall, I 

want to again remind the member that funding for the Thunder 

Creek/Moose Jaw district health board in this budget year is 

actually up over last year. I would remind the member that all of 

the existing programing will be moved into the new Providence 

Place. 

 

Now as the member will know the building has been so 

designed to serve us over many years — not just for the next 

few years, but over many years — and has been designed to 

incorporate within its walls a whole wide variety of programing. 

At this point in time, there had been some recommendations for 

enhancement of programing. At this point in time those 

enhancements are simply not available given the fiscal realities 

we're all living with. That may be described as a million dollar 

shortfall. But I want to reassure the member that in total, 

funding is up and that all of the existing programing . . . it's up 

by . . . it's pointed out to me that it's up by 2.81 per cent and that 

all of the existing program — the geriatric assessment, the 

hospital, and adult day care — is in fact moving intact. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I guess, Minister, then if I have 

misunderstood, there's a lot of other people have 

misunderstood, the capability and the quality of health care 

that'll be delivered out of that particular facility in conjunction 

with a revamped Union Hospital because they do share many 

components which were not done in the past. We all applaud 

that. That has been a long-term proposition that even 

superseded my government in the 1980s. Those discussions had 

been ongoing. 

 

Perhaps you could then tell the Assembly what those 

misconceptions are that people in our community seem to 

believe were going to occur that, as you say, cannot occur 

because of fiscal restraint. And perhaps that's where the 

problem lies. Perhaps people in Moose Jaw and district don't 

understand what they thought they understood because . . . 

Minister, I'm going to ask you to provide for a me a breakdown 

of the costs associated with the administration, with nursing, 

and with the long-care components of that hospital. And I know 

you don't have that with you tonight, but I'm going to expect 

you to provide those figures to me, and that will help me clear 

up some of the misconceptions, as you say, that exist in the 

communities. 

 

So could you tell me what people were assuming that isn't going 

to occur? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Chair, I'll repeat again for the 

member. The programing that exists, in fact with some 

enhancement to the existing programing in terms of staffing and 

so on, is moving into the new centre. Now there have been a 

wide variety of discussions in our community, as you know, and 

there is potential — I will agree and say — for yet further 

enhancements. There were further enhancements desired that 

we're simply not able to fund at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — What you're saying to me, Minister, is this: 

there's space in the existing facility, that if there was budget 

allowable, there would be other activities taking place in there. 

There would be further staffing taking place. There would be 

further patient care. There would be a more holistic health care 

delivery system in place for the community if you had more 

budget. Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think that's a fair comment that the 

member makes and I think that would be true of almost any 

facility in the province, in fact. With added financial support, 

we can offer more programming out of almost any facility, but 

it is particularly true in this case. And some of the areas for 

certain that the Providence board has looked at seriously is 

quite a major expansion, for example, in day hospital care. 

 

But again I want to reassure the member that most of the staff 

loss — and it's not a happy circumstance for any individual or 

any community to see this kind of staff loss — but most of that 

is related to the rationalization of three buildings into two. And 

if I may say, we worked with the district board, worked with the 

Providence board, and as you know, have worked provincially 

to provide as much mitigation as is possible in these kind of 

circumstances. 

 

When Providence Place opens its doors, we know that building 

will serve our community, we hope, for many, many, many 

years. And I think we can only, we can only imagine now the 

kinds of programming that can and will be offered out of that 

facility over the years. 

 

When the doors open, all of the programing that now exists in 

Moose Jaw . . . And some of it is very exciting, with the 

concept of the geriatric assessment unit, for instance, which is 

hoped to serve not just our community but the broader range of 

southern Saskatchewan, that's a very exciting and new concept 

in long-term care and geriatric care. So you and I, I'm sure all of 

our community, and indeed the province, can be excited about 

this new development. 

 

Will there be changes and will there be enhancements in future 

years? I certainly hope so. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, you can empathize with 

people in the community because there are other events 

occurring that would make people believe that some of these 

things needed to happen. I am told that there is going to be 40 

beds shut down in Pioneer Village; that a number of the other 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you may shake your head. 

My 96-year-old grandmother is a resident there, and I can tell 



March 6, 1995 

 

677 

you that every time I go for a visit I don't get to spend much 

time with her because I have to talk to other folks around there 

who are less than happy with some of the things that have 

transpired there lately, of which you're aware. 

 

But if you'd knock 40 beds out of there, the pressures that are 

on many of the other facilities in the city are going to dictate 

that those folks are going to have to go somewhere else. If you 

do not have a day care component and if you do not have 

existing bed space anywhere else within the district to move 

these people, then you can see why people are upset and maybe 

they're having misconceptions about what your government was 

telling them was going to happen with the new facility of 

Providence Place. 

 

And if it isn't 40 beds at Pioneer Village and a major 

restructuring occurring there, then how many is it? Because I 

know there's been plans made to create a bigger open space in 

order to do activities there. Now if it's not 40, what is it then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I'm going to commit to 

the member that we will get for him the exact number of beds 

and how the beds are going to work out in the Moose Jaw 

context. What is happening, I think as he knows in terms of the 

Pioneer Lodge circumstance, is some of the beds there are being 

converted so they may handle a more heavy level of care, level 

3 and 4. Some of that conversion is happening at Pioneer Lodge 

to in fact replace some of the beds that will be lost when both 

St. Anthony's and the Providence close. 

 

And so some of the beds at Pioneer are being converted to the 

level 3 and 4 care, which if I may say, knowing that institution 

as I do, there have been a number of residents there, I think, 

who have been approaching the level 3 and 4 care level in any 

event, and it's appropriate. 

 

But we also know this, that with the work that can be done 

through, for instance, the geriatric assessment unit — and we've 

already seen, I think, some real, solid evidence of that in our 

community — with the work that will be done to the geriatric 

assessment unit, we know that the need for the heavier level 

care beds will diminish. There will be a diminishment of the 

need for that heavier level care as we continue to build the 

home-based and community-based services, and very 

particularly work with the geriatric assessment unit. This is 

already being demonstrated in our community and it's being 

demonstrated in other communities across Canada. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I'm sure you're familiar with 

the facility, but I think you need to take a walk around again 

because there is a waiting-list, as there is at Ina Grafton, as 

there is all over the town. 

 

And there's a whole whack of them approaching 3 and 4. In fact 

I would estimate right now the residents up there, probably 50 

per cent of them could be classified 3's right now if you wish to 

do that. And I don't see the need for those heavy beds going 

away. 

 

And I think one of the things that gave people in the community 

hope was that along with geriatric assessment where you take a 

look at the individual and their needs, that you also had things 

like the day care and others available. 

 

And if you're telling me that those things are not going to be 

available, then we're going to have a lot of people in our 

community — and I would suggest other communities around 

the province because this isn't unique to Moose Jaw; we're 

lucky we have a new facility that is designed to do certain 

things, other people don't have that . . . but with the drastic 

reduction in the number of beds, which is going to occur 

because that building is smaller than the one it is replacing by 

far, and with reductions occurring in other facilities, that you're 

going to have a lot of senior citizens in that community that are 

going to need something more than a return to their own home, 

or being shipped somewhere else in the district. Which has 

occurred in other districts — away from their home community. 

 

And I would find that very unpalatable if you have to start 

shipping former residents of Pioneer Village, or lodge, off to 

Central Butte, or Avonlea, or Craik, or something like that 

because that would be utterly bizarre. 

 

And the numbers don't add up to me, Minister. I walk through 

those facilities, and I look at the individuals involved, and I 

don't know how in the world you can honestly say that you're 

just going to boot them out, and they aren't going to have any 

recourse to anything else. I don't know how you can explain 

that. And I'd like you to try. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I want to reassure the member, 

perhaps he didn't hear me earlier, that the existing programing 

— including the day hospital and the adult day care — is 

moving, and with some small enhancement, into the new 

building. So those programs will exist. 

 

Now what is new and exciting in the Moose Jaw context, and in 

the context of southern Saskatchewan, is the geriatric 

assessment unit and program which is also moving as it now 

exists and is working in the Providence Hospital. Of course 

we're working with the Moose Jaw District Board, and with the 

Providence Hospital, and with Dr. Pillay, and the geriatric 

assessment unit to review its progress, and how it's functioning, 

and the results it's obtaining. 

 

But we're very confident, very confident — and I think the 

member should share this confidence — that the work of that 

particular unit is going to play a very, very key role in providing 

the appropriate assessment leading therefore to the appropriate 

care for our seniors primarily. But not only seniors, there will 

be others in our community who will need supportive and long-

term care. 

 

So I want to repeat again for the member. The programing that 

now exists, with some enhancement, will move into Providence 

Place and we're looking forward very much to the work of the 



March 6, 1995 

 

678 

GAU (geriatric assessment unit) and tying that work with the 

growing range of options that are available for people in their 

homes and in the community. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I'll ask you this question then. On the adult 

day care facility which has been run successfully out of the 

Providence Hospital, with the staffing cut-backs that are 

occurring, is there the ability, with the current staffing levels, to 

pick up a heavier load than currently exists at either Providence 

Hospital or St. Anthony's Home if, because of bed closures in 

other facilities, those people are no longer in the facility, they're 

no longer in a permanent care situation? Do you have the 

budget and the staffing component in order to allow those 

people to use Providence Place as they now currently use the 

other two facilities or, in fact, an enhanced ability to use 

Providence Place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to make it clear to the member 

that those who are now occupying the long-term care beds will 

continue to occupy the long-term care beds. The geriatric 

assessment unit primarily is to deal with people who are now 

approaching the need for more supportive care, whether it be 

care in their home or care in a long-term care facility. The 

answer is yes, the staffing will be there. 

 

There is now a physical plant that will serve us many years, and 

I expect that programing over those years will change within 

that physical plant, that it has been built in such a way to 

accommodate the possibility of change in service and change in 

role as the years unfold. With the GAU — geriatric assessment 

unit — and the other programing that's now being offered, we're 

working with the board, I say again with the Providence board, 

and with the staff of the geriatric assessment, that we'll be going 

through a review process to test its capabilities and see if it 

needs further enhancement or some other appropriate use of the 

money that we have. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

and to your officials, again welcome. I'm going to go back to 

. . . a few questions back to some of the discussion the other 

day, and at the end of our discussion we got into some respite 

beds and funding, and you had indicated that there was a 

funding increase for respite beds. I take it that we're talking 

across the province, globally. And what I'm wondering is how 

much of an increase, what was the increase, how many beds 

will this affect, how many additional beds will be funded, and 

where will the beds be located? I wonder if you could give us a 

bit of an overview, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, we're trying to get as 

accurate as information as we can for the member in terms of 

targeted funding for respite services and respite beds. In this 

budget there is an additional $1.5 million and in the year 

succeeding, in that budget, there will be another $1 million. 

 

Now by our calculation, and again because this funding is 

provided to our districts and each district in their own context 

will decide the appropriate mix of respite and so on, but if we 

take an average, this amount of funding should provide for a 

doubling of the number of respite beds across the province. The 

hard number we don't have here tonight. We can get the actual 

number for the member. 

 

Respite, of course, as the member well knows, is key to 

providing support for those who will be caring for loved ones, 

sometimes a child, sometimes a parent, sometimes a spouse. 

The respite bed becomes an opportunity for the person who is 

being cared for to be cared for in a more institutional context 

for a few hours or a few days to give a rest, respite, for the care-

giver. So it's an extremely important and key component of 

community-based care. 

 

I'll give the member the best number that we have tonight. We 

are aware tonight of 144 respite beds across the province 

tonight — 144. This is our best estimate and we'll expect that to 

double to around 280, 288. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly some of 

the discussion we had last week was centred around — and I 

think my colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, raised 

that point too — the fact that in rural Saskatchewan . . . and 

that's an issue that's been brought to my attention on a number 

of occasions. In fact tonight it was raised again as I was talking 

to a couple of constituents out in my area. 

 

The big concern, Mr. Minister, is the fact that because there 

isn't sufficient funding for respite beds, that we do have people 

moving from one community. And in a lot of cases they're 

being taken from the community that they've grown up in and 

they're being moved maybe 80 miles to a respite bed that 

happens to be open in one centre. They're there for a month, 

then they're moved down the road another 50 miles and then 

maybe 40 miles and back again. And it's just a vicious circle. 

And for a senior who is having a lot of problems remembering 

or maybe having memory loss and problems with say even 

Alzheimer's disease, it becomes very confusing. And families 

are just finding this very discouraging. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister. You indicated that this money is 

going to the district boards and that the district boards will then 

determine where the funding will go. And I guess what I'm 

wondering, what I'm going to ask you . . . You're saying the 

district boards have the choice. Do the district boards really 

have that choice, or is there still going to be some directive 

coming out from the department telling the district boards 

where they can or may spend the money for respite beds? 

 

If I could throw out something, Mr. Minister. We have a lot of 

facilities around our province, a lot of them that are still 

functional or operational; some of them that aren't actual 

hospitals any more but are termed wellness clinics. You 

announced the other day a substantive increase in home care 

funding. And what I'm going to ask you and what I'm 

wondering is why we couldn't take some of this money — if the 

rooms are already there; there are physical beds available — 

why we couldn't designate a few more of these beds as respite 

and for them to be used for that purpose. 



March 6, 1995 

 

679 

And even in a community that doesn't have an active hospital 

but has a wellness clinic, what they've done is taken the old 

hospital, turned it into a wellness clinic. They do have rooms 

available. They do have a nurse on duty 24 hours a day. And it 

would seem to me that it would be actually quite convenient 

and it wouldn't be that much more costly to make a bed or two 

available in some of the local communities where they could be 

utilized. 

 

And maybe, Mr. Minister, you could comment. Maybe you 

could look at that as an option, or maybe your department has; 

I'm not sure. But I would think that with what we already have 

in place, we could have looked at ways of finding more 

efficient ways to spend our dollars and spend it effectively 

versus just closing down centres or closing down facilities and 

taking away services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To the member, Mr. Chairman, the 

member should understand that yes, the districts do have both 

the freedom and the responsibility to make those decisions, that 

the districts are and have assessed their needs and their 

populations, and they do have the responsibility and the 

freedom to make those decisions. 

 

And yes, in fact most of the existing respite beds now will be 

beds in integrated facilities, and we would encourage this kind 

of use of the facility. The respite bed, providing short-term 

relief to care-givers and to individuals needing the care, in the 

course of a year could easily serve maybe 20 or 30 different 

families. And so they are a key component. And the answer to 

the member's questions essentially are yes. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we'll 

certainly look forward to chatting with some of the local district 

boards to see, at the end of the day, if what you've told us is 

actually true, that they really feel that the funding has been 

allocated and that they do have the ability to then determine 

where it would be most appropriate to channel those funds. 

 

And that brings me to one other question, and I guess we'll just 

move a little bit further, and we're going to . . . When we talk 

about district boards having that choice, a question that's been 

on the minds of people for the last two years is board elections. 

Now you've indicated that we're possibly going to see board 

elections this fall. I see a figure in Estimates, page 74, of some 

$975,000 tacked in there. I would take that for board elections. 

 

If there's anything that people in general are saying across the 

province, it's that they would like to see not just eight members, 

but all 12 members elected. And I think people are saying that, 

Mr. Minister, because they feel that if all 12 were elected, then 

the 12 members would be accountable to the constituents they 

serve versus the fact that, as you're proposing, as your 

government is proposing, four will continue to be appointed 

and I believe one of the four is also going to be the chairman. 

 

And the perception is that if that indeed is the case, then the 

direction is still going to come from the four appointed 

members and the elected board members really will not have 

the say or have the ability to have a say and really feel that they 

have a voice to address the concerns that are brought to their 

attention on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder, would you mind clarifying for us the 

election process — when you anticipate seeing the elections 

take place, why you decided to not hold elections in 

conjunction with municipal elections last year, and the fact that 

if we go this year, Mr. Minister, where we're looking at an 

additional cost, where we could have tied that into the 

municipal elections. 

 

And also the other question, it seems to me . . . And the 

question I'd like to know is what it cost for Mr. Stevenson to 

determine the boundaries or the ward system that we have put 

in place for our district elections when, I believe, we would 

have had the people, qualified people right in our own areas, 

that could have drawn up those boundaries fairly quickly and 

fairly efficiently without paying another individual $500 a day 

just to determine that we need a ward system in electoral 

boundaries. 

 

Now I know I've thrown out a number of questions and 

concerns and I'd like your response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the member did raise a 

significant number of issues there. We could spend, I think, a 

fair bit of time in this answer. I will try and highlight some of 

the issues that he raised and then I'm sure he'll want to come 

back for more detailed questioning. 

 

He asks about the when of the health board elections, and we 

do anticipate those elections being held this fall. They will be 

held in this calendar year — we anticipate this fall. 

 

He talks about the why of appointed and elected mix. Now the 

member will know that when we proposed the formation of 

regions and districts for health care delivery, as has been talked 

about in this province for many, many years — certainly during 

his time in government there was much discussion about 

regional or district delivery of health care services — when we 

made the decision to move in this regard, we then had to face 

the decision of governance of the districts. Now there were 

many people in our province, many people, and some who 

continue to argue that all of the health board members should 

be appointed, either by local government or by provincial 

government. There are those who take that view. I continue to 

get letters from those who take that view. There are others who 

take the view, including yourselves, that all 12 of the district 

board members should be elected. 

 

We made the decision, and put that decision in legislation that 

was debated in this House at length, I recall, that the majority of 

the boards should be elected, to ensure that democratic input 

into health care decision making. And so the majority of every 

health district board in the province will be elected. 



March 6, 1995 

 

680 

We made the choice that a third of the board, or 4 out of the 12 

members, would continue to be appointed. We made that 

decision based on some of the arguments presented to us by 

many people in our province that there should be on those 

boards room to appoint so that we can ensure that the whole 

population and all of the interests of a community and a district 

are represented on that board. 

 

Let me give the member this example: if, for instance, we have 

a district in Saskatchewan — and we may have many of them, 

for that matter — with a high percentage of seniors, if through 

. . . and let me say that seniors will have a particular interest in 

health care decision making. I think that's obvious. If, through 

the electoral process only, a senior is not elected, or someone 

who may well represent the interests of seniors is not elected, 

then it seems to us appropriate that a senior should be therefore 

. . . or someone who can represent the interests of seniors 

should be therefore appointed to that board. 

 

I want to explain to the member, as with the current boards in 

their make-up, all of the nominations of people who will serve 

on the boards, all of those nominations will come from within 

the district. This will not be a matter of either the bureaucracy 

or we involved at the political level here in Regina hand-

picking individuals. We will depend on nominations that will 

come, as we did in the first appointed boards, from the districts. 

They will be appointed, hopefully to balance interests that may 

not be present at the board level through the electoral process. 

We think that's both fair . . . it maintains the democratic 

majority in health care decision making, and yet it also, we 

think, will provide health boards that can be completely in tune 

with the issues and the population of their communities. 

 

In terms of the election of the eight, the first historic election 

will occur this year — first time in Canadian history that there 

will be an election of health board decision-makers. Each 

district will be divided into eight separate wards. That work is 

going on even as we speak. The districts are now working in 

their own communities with people at the district level to 

determine the ward boundaries. 

 

I want to correct the member at this point. The ward boundaries 

within the district are not being imposed by the province. They 

are not being written by the province. Mr. Stevenson did not 

describe the ward boundaries. The ward boundaries in each 

district are being worked out at a district level. Each district is 

now in that process. In fact I saw in the Regina Leader-Post, I 

saw a big ad just the other night where the Regina district is 

advertising to the people of this health district their proposals 

for ward boundaries, inviting public input and comment. That 

process is going on. 

 

It is not, as the members can well imagine, just a simple process 

to fairly divide these various districts into wards. And we made 

that decision to use wards to ensure that all communities within 

a district can have, and sense that they have, fair representation 

at the board level. This year, in this calendar year, we will elect 

a board member from each of the eight wards. 

However, in succeeding years and elections, the ward elections 

will be staggered. And so, for instance, if we number the wards 

odd and even, two years from now four of those wards will go 

back to the electoral process to elect for a four-year term. Half 

of the wards this year will elect members to the district board 

for a two-year term and half of the wards will elect for a four-

year term, and that will then put us on the staggered process so 

that we can ensure continuity on the boards. 

 

The member is correct. In this budget there is an amount of 

$975,000 dedicated to the board elections. The member will 

know that one does not conduct any election in this province, 

particularly an initial, pioneering election, without some 

expenses. So that is correct; there is $975,000 in this budget 

year dedicated to health board elections. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it 

just sounds to me like you basically said that the people in 

Saskatchewan do not have the ability to elect fair representation 

on the boards. And that's the only reason that you are having 

four appointed positions. I think if you took a look at the board 

selection and the board make-up across the province and many 

areas over the past number of years, you'll find that people . . . 

there was pretty well a fair representation on the hospital boards 

in the past. And certainly a lot of that . . . there were a lot of 

changes coming place. 

 

There were more people taking an interest in health care and 

becoming involved in district boards. And I happened to serve 

on a couple of boards where we did have quite a different 

make-up in age, from young to older, from male to female. And 

I think, Mr. Minister . . . And it's fine if the member from 

Lloydminster wants to ask some questions, she can stand up 

and ask some questions, there's lots of time for her to debate. 

 

But I would like to say to the minister that people have been 

telling me, from day one, even prior to the formation of the 

larger districts, that they would like to have elected board 

members. That was going back to even when we had the boards 

as they were before. And I would also like to bring to your 

attention that many of the communities had changed, were in 

the process of changing from four separate health boards in 

their communities to one health board. And even in my area, 

Mr. Minister, hospitals were working together. 

 

So basically you had almost a district concept in the way they 

were supplying services and the way they were buying 

equipment — it wasn't each individual hospital. But they were 

doing it together on, I guess if you will, on a mass scale so that 

they could cut some of the costs. So there were a number of 

ideas already out there. 

 

Again I think, Mr. Minister, we should take into consideration 

that people themselves, I believe, want to have the process to 

elect. They want to have the ability to elect all the board 

members. And I believe that they can make fair and honest 

choices. 

 

One question, Mr. Minister; is this election of board members 



March 6, 1995 

 

681 

going to take place before or after the next provincial election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the answer is for sure one or 

the other. If the member knows the date of the next election he 

knows more than I do. I know that the next provincial election 

will be held the next 18 months. I know that. And I know that 

the board elections to the district health boards will be held in 

this calendar year. I do know that. 

 

I want to say — and I want to just go back to some of the 

member's earlier comments and then make further comments — 

I think in his earlier comments, and I forgot to address it while I 

was on my feet earlier, I believe he made a comment to indicate 

that the chair of the boards would be coming from those that are 

appointed to the boards. That is not the case. That is not the 

case. I'll underline the word; that is not the case. 

 

After the boards have been elected and then the appointments 

have been made, it will be up to the boards to choose their own 

Chair from amongst their membership, the same kind of process 

that goes on in school boards, I believe. So I want to just 

underline that, that the board Chairs will not be appointed; they 

will be selected from within the context of the board. 

 

Now the member knows and says in the House tonight that the 

people of Saskatchewan have desired more democratic input 

into health board decision making. Agreed. He said he was 

hearing that while he was yet in government. And I guess I 

would ask, well then why, why didn't you take some steps to 

move in this regard? You did not take steps in this regard. 

 

We have taken the historic step, the first jurisdiction in all of 

Canada to so open health board decision making to this very 

democratic process. We're very proud of that. We're very proud 

of that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, that's a bunch of nonsense, really. 

It's a bunch of nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the member from Rosthern says 

that elected health boards are nonsense. Well he sits in his seat, 

Mr. Chair, and says elected health boards are nonsense. He says 

that the process has not democratized the system. I invite him to 

get on his feet and say that elected health boards are nonsense. 

 

I know there are some in our province who take that view. Yet, 

as I said earlier, receive correspondence from some who believe 

that health boards should be appointed. We don't share that 

view. We share the view that there is a role for democracy in 

health decision making and that we have struck what I think, 

and we think, is the appropriate balance. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I just want 

to bring to your attention . . . first of all, thank you for the 

clarification because a lot of people were quite concerned, and 

that was the impression that they were left with, as far as 

chairmen of the boards. 

But, Mr. Minister, you made the implication that the 

government I was part of should have started an electoral 

process. And I'm not saying they shouldn't have, but I think 

there were some changes that needed to take place. And I 

indicated in a few moments . . . or just a few moments ago, that 

there were some changes, actual changes taking place. 

 

But you can go back to . . . actually Graham Taylor was the first 

minister who suggested to communities that it was time they 

consolidated their boards into one health board, so we didn't 

have boards fighting amongst themselves — the home care 

board or the care home board or the hospital board or the 

ambulance board, such as we had before. And I can say in the 

constituency of Moosomin that basically prior to 1991 many of 

the communities had moved to a one-board concept. That one-

board concept then opened itself to government then saying, 

well then we go one step further, and we elect these boards. 

Now that was there, but there wasn't anything as far as bringing 

forward a forum of having elections at the time. But we had 

gradually moved into that. 

 

What we've seen today though, Mr. Minister — and I reiterate 

just in some of the discussions this evening — most people do 

not feel that under the present system they really have direct 

access or an ability to address many of the concerns that are 

taking place in their communities. The feeling is they don't 

really have the ear of the district health board representative that 

they used to have when they had the local boards up and 

operating. 

 

Hopefully after the election of district board members, people 

will find or will feel that they have at least more of an 

opportunity to be upfront and to address some of the concerns 

that were raised. 

 

But I come back to one other point, and you pointed out, as I 

indicated earlier, an expenditure of $975,000 for board 

elections. Now it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that last year 

when you appointed Mr. Stevenson at $500 a day to determine 

whether or not we should have a ward system, all you were 

doing was playing politics in the area of health. And you 

appointed Mr. Stevenson to tell you what you wanted to hear, 

something that you had already told him, that you were going to 

have . . . design a ward system in our district boards. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I've talked to you. You can talk to SARM. 

You can talk to SUMA. Even last spring, a year ago in the 

spring, they had already ideas out and motions brought forward 

whereby you could set up boards if that's what you wanted. 

They could have been established, as you say, even as we talk. 

We have people from SARM and SUMA, I know out in my 

area, that are presently working to design boundaries to 

accommodate ward elections within the districts. 

 

Now what I'm saying to you is we could have saved $975,000 

by having had those ward elections last year. Now what I'm 

wondering . . . A couple questions, Mr. Minister. What did it 

cost the people of Saskatchewan to establish a phoney 

commission with Garf Stevenson running it, to come back with 



March 6, 1995 

 

682 

a recommendation that you already knew, a recommendation 

that we should have a ward system? And because of that 

process and that commission, we weren't . . . and your 

government was not able to allow for the election of elected 

board members last fall, as would have been possible if you 

would have gone to the people locally at that time. What were 

the costs of that commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to the member from 

Moosomin's specific question about the cost of the Stevenson 

Commission and work that Mr. Stevenson did for us, we will 

get — by tomorrow? — or the next time we're sitting in 

estimates, we will get you the exact number. But I know for a 

fact that that commission came in significantly under budget. 

 

Now the member makes a claim, makes a claim in the House 

tonight that somehow if the district board elections had been 

held with municipal elections last fall that there would have 

been no cost. Well that is just not true. There would be 

significant cost. I hope the member supports the concept that 

we will have wards within our health districts. Now these wards 

do not, will not, correspond with municipal boundaries. Our 

districts are not coterminous with municipal boundaries. And 

there would have to be, there will have to be, a separate 

electoral process in each and every ward. 

 

Now we're talking 30 districts. We're talking therefore 240 

wards. Now to conduct elections in each of those wards does 

not just automatically correspond with the municipal polling 

stations. And even if we'd have gone . . . by example, as you 

know, education, the boards of education appear in the 

municipal process. I'm only going to take both the city of 

Saskatoon and the city of Regina. For those two cities alone, the 

school board costs in elections were $400,000 — $400,000 in 

those two cities alone, for the school board portion of the 

election. So it's not a matter of just joining in for free. If one 

were to go with the municipal elections, there would be equal 

costs. 

 

Now I think it can be and should be argued that the health 

districts . . . we're only now — and it's a complicated bit of 

work — we're only now working through the ward divisions. 

And I'm sure you did not want us to impose those ward 

divisions from the centre but to go through the process we're 

going through now. I think it's obvious that that process simply 

could not have physically been done in time for the last round 

of municipal elections. But it is erroneous to believe that 

somehow, if health board elections were simply held with 

municipal elections, there would be no cost. There would yet 

be, and still be, substantial costs. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think anyone is saying 

that it would have come for nothing or come free, that we'd 

have had that ability. There's nothing free these days. But I 

think you could have certainly found a substantial saving by 

having combined the elections and the election of district 

boards. Now I guess at the end of the day, though, the reason 

we didn't have district board elections last year was because of 

the fact that you had determined that there would be a ward 

system set up. Now I'm not sure if that determination or if that 

decision was made just a year ago, which meant there just 

wasn't enough time to put the process in place, or, for that 

matter, when you started talking of . . . when you first 

established these district boards, whether you had determined at 

that time that you were going to have some elected positions. 

And I'm certain just on the basis of your arguments and just in 

the past few years and certainly in the past about a ward system 

for local government, that that would have been a concept 

already on your minds regarding district health boards. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Minister, that that process could have 

been instituted from the time you asked for and set in place the 

district health boards, asking them to also look up and set up a 

process whereby there would be a ward system so 

representation would come equally throughout the district. If 

that process had been followed, Mr. Minister, I would suggest 

to you, you could have had the process in place, you could have 

had the ability to have district health board elections in 

conjunction with municipal elections the last time around. 

 

And I think it was there. I'm sure that as . . . and, of course, I 

recognize you weren't the Health minister at the time when all 

these decisions were being made. In fact you were involved in 

cabinet, I believe, but a lot of these decisions you didn't have a 

direct involvement in. But I think that had some of those 

decisions been made originally, I think the process was already 

there, the determining factor was there. Had it been done, there 

could have been some savings. We could have had board 

elections by now. 

 

And before I get into another subject, maybe it seems to me the 

minister has a response and I'll allow him to respond before we 

change the train of discussion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well not to repeat the arguments . . . I 

think we've had a good discussion about it. I do want to point 

out, though, that the member in some of his earlier comments 

talked about some members of the public feeling they don't 

have access, perhaps, to the district boards. There has been 

almost a revolution in community access to health care decision 

making through the process of the last two and three years. 

 

For example, for the first time again in our province's history, 

health care decision makers are actually going to their 

communities in wide open public meetings to conduct what 

we've called needs assessment — going out and actually talking 

to people and saying to people, what is your view? What do you 

believe that we should be doing to improve the quality of health 

in our communities, in our families, and in our province? For 

the first time in history, the districts are going to communities 

in public meetings and saying, what are your views through the 

whole needs assessment process? 

 

There have already begun the rounds of public accountability 

meetings where the district boards are now required by law to 

go to their communities again in public meetings, to report on 

their budgets, to report on where they're going and also to report 

on the health status of their district. Again, this is 



March 6, 1995 

 

683 

pioneering in Saskatchewan — the first time that this has been 

done. 

 

And so the public access to health care decision making . . . and 

then add to that all of the various advisory groups and 

committees that exist almost in every district situation. When 

you put those together, there is more public input, more public 

accountability in health care, than we have ever known in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I think that the people who have 

worked so long and hard on these initial district boards deserve 

only our praise and our thanks. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I was going to move to 

another topic just for a minute before we possibly looked at 

adjourning and wrapping up for the evening, but it seems to me, 

Mr. Minister, you've made some assertions that the system is a 

lot more open and accountable. Well that's not what I'm 

hearing. 

 

In fact one of my colleagues had a problem with his vehicle the 

other day and had to call for a taxi, and when the taxi driver 

heard who he was and where he was from and what he was 

doing, all the taxi driver, from the point of his residence to the 

Legislative Building, talked about health care. 

 

And it wasn't all that pleasant. He wasn't all that happy with 

what's taking place, and he's talking of the city of Regina. And 

what I'm bringing out is the problems in health care, and the 

concerns that I hear raised on a daily basis certainly aren't just 

conditions and problems and services that people feel they have 

lack of access to or fewer services than they had even three 

years ago. And that's not just confined to rural Saskatchewan; 

it's even in the larger centres. 

 

And as I indicated the other day, I've taken the time just to drop 

in and visit constituents and visit in a hospital and visit with 

people, and what I found in certain cases . . . you'll talk to one 

person and they've been more than thrilled and pleased with the 

service they've received while they've been in the hospital. On 

another occasion, you've run across an individual that has been 

totally disgusted with the type of service and the way they've 

been cared for. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Minister, I ran into an individual just on 

Saturday evening . . . I talked to a constituent who happens to 

be a fairly close resident, who spent almost six . . . basically 

they spent the last six months in and out of hospital because the 

type of care they received after what was supposedly a minor 

operation. 

 

And for you to stand in the House tonight, Mr. Minister, and 

tell us we've got a better system, I would suggest to you that 

there are many people across this province who would say that 

we do not have a better system, that the system we have today is 

not meeting the personal care of individuals. In fact we're 

showing a lack of concern for the care of individuals in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And that's why, Mr. Minister, I think 

that maybe you should rethink the election. 

And I think it's time — as was pointed out the other day — I 

think, Mr. Minister, you throw the election out totally on all 12 

board members and allow the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, whether they be in the city of Regina, or 

Saskatoon, or all the other district health boards across 

Saskatchewan, to have the ability to elect all board members. 

And as far as accountability, I don't know how boards can really 

be as accountable as you're talking up, when the fact is you are 

telling boards these are the parameters you can operate in, and 

these are the services we expect you to offer to the residents of 

your district, but at the same time you keep taking away the 

funding. And they just don't have the funding to provide the 

services that most of the residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan are experiencing or looking for. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, it seems to me while on one hand you say 

it's a better system than we had before, what I'm hearing, Mr. 

Minister, it certainly isn't that Utopia — if I could use that word 

— that people are expecting in health care. And people aren't 

asking for everything to be handed to them. People aren't saying 

we want all these services handed to us on a platter. People 

realize that the cost . . . it's costly to maintain a solid and sound 

financial health care system. And people are willing to offer 

and to make some offers. They're willing to pay for, and willing 

to be involved in, the health care system and health care 

delivery services across this province. 

 

So I think, Mr. Minister, there are many people across this 

province who do not totally, and will not totally agree with you, 

as to the assertions that we have a more open, more responsive, 

and more accessible form of health care in this province. And I 

think, Mr. Minister, before I move on to another area, I should 

at least allow you the opportunity to respond because I'd like to 

take some notes so I can come back with some more questions 

next time. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I thank the member for the invitation to 

respond, if only briefly. 

 

Listen, I and no member of government would suggest that 

we've reached Utopia in health care delivery. But now I do 

remember sitting my time in the opposition benches; and as I do 

today — probably more frequently than the member does — I 

did in opposition, and that was to receive concerns from 

individuals for whom the system may have not served them as 

well as it might. But I want to tell the member, and I want to tell 

the members of the House, that today in Saskatchewan there's 

been 10,000 people in long-term care and the vast majority, the 

vast, vast majority of those 10,000 people have been very well 

cared for today in institutions across Saskatchewan. I can tell 

the member that there have been literally hundreds of people, 

literally hundreds of people will have approached our hospitals, 

our emergency wards, and the vast, vast majority of them have 

been very, very well served, very well cared for. Now they don't 

. . . their stories don't get told in this House. Their stories don't 

get on the front pages of the newspaper. But there are thousands 

of people on a daily 



March 6, 1995 

 

684 

basis who are being well served by the health care providers in 

our province. And to suggest that the providers are not doing a 

good job, the member wants to be very, very careful about that. 

 

Now in terms of how the system has changed: we know that by 

simply adding more resources to the system, we are not 

improving the quality of health care in our province. We know 

that. We've learned that — that we have to change. And if we're 

going to make medicare and universally accessible health care 

available in the long term, we need to make it financially 

sustainable. And some of those decisions have been very 

difficult to make. But we've made the decisions, we've changed 

course, and we have now put ourselves in a situation where we 

are well positioned to maintain in this province both universal 

medicare, quality medicare, and medicare that we can know will 

be there for us, for our parents, and for our children well into 

the new year — into the new century. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, I want to share this with the member because 

he said that no one views the system as having improved over 

the last two or three years. I want the member to listen to these 

words because I think he will recognize the author of these 

words. I am here quoting Mr. Ted Azevedo as he is quoted in 

the Nipawin Journal, Wednesday, February 22, 1995, just a 

couple of weeks ago. Mr. Ted Azevedo, president of a national 

seniors' organization and a long-time supporter of seniors' 

issues said this in the Nipawin Journal, and I quote: 

 

 We have to say a thank you to the Romanow 

government and the minister of health. It was 25 years 

ago that I was fighting to get home care and less 

hospitalization and institutions (but) the government of 

the day wasn't in favor. Everybody wanted new 

hospitals and care homes. It took (us) a long time . . . to 

smarten up. 

 

Quote, Mr. Azevedo: 

 

 "I'll only encourage the people who run the health 

boards . . . to save the millions of dollars we should 

have saved years ago” . . .  

 

 “We still have to do a little more for some people with 

no one to look after them," he said, (but) “We're very 

glad the government is taking a better stand to keep 

people healthy." 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:36 p.m. 

 

 


