













































February 13, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 13, 1995 

 

 

117 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a follow-up to 

the petitions I presented earlier, I have more petitions that the 

Minister of Highways will want to pay attention to: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 

than allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projections in the province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come, Mr. Speaker, from the town of Maple Creek and 

Golden Prairie, I see. And that's basically where those are from. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 

which have previously been laid on the Table in the Assembly, 

so I'll just read the prayer today. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate the total amounts 

of funds garnered from the taxpayer for fuel tax, vehicle 

licence fees, and provincial sales tax on new vehicles 

toward the maintenance and capital costs of 

Saskatchewan roads; and further, that the Government 

of Saskatchewan dedicate any monies available from the 

federal infrastructure program toward Saskatchewan's 

road system rather than provide these sums toward 

capital construction of casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have petitioners from the communities of 

Eyebrow, Saskatchewan; Marquis, Saskatchewan; Brownlee, 

Saskatchewan; Foam Lake, Saskatchewan; Moose Jaw, 

Saskatchewan; an individual from Kenora, Ontario; an 

individual from Weyburn, Saskatchewan. Obviously people 

from all over concerned about this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so present. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Commission: (1) what is the total revenue to the 

province in the fiscal year to date for video lottery 

terminals; and (2) what is that revenue for each 

community in which video lottery terminals are located? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Commission: (1) how many studies have been done on 

the problem of addicted gamblers; (2) what was the cost 

of those studies; (3) who conducted those studies; and 

(4) what are the results, findings, or recommendations 

of these studies? 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Teacher and Staff Appreciation Week 

 

Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a former teacher 

and principal, I would take great pride today in recognizing the 

significant contributions that teachers and school staff members 

in Saskatchewan have made to the lives of children throughout 

this province. 

 

This week has been proclaimed as Teacher and Staff 

Appreciation Week in Saskatchewan. During the week, parents 

have organized community events in recognition of the personal 

dedication and professional service of teachers and school staff. 

The impact Saskatchewan teachers and school staff have made 

on children is invaluable and will help guide them through the 

changing world. 

 

These teachers and staff members are the most important people 

outside the home in helping children to learn and grow as 

individuals and citizens. I salute our teachers, teacher assistants, 

guidance counsellors, school secretaries, nurses, custodians, 

and bus drivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we are committed to high quality 

education. Teachers and staff play a major role in achieving 

this. On behalf of all members of this House, I would like to 

express appreciation for the hard work and long hours 

Saskatchewan teachers and staff contribute to the development 

of one of our richest resources: our children. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

1995 Canada Winter Games 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to tell 

you that Saskatchewan is represented by an outstanding group 

of men and women at the 1995 Canada Winter Games being 

held in Grande Prairie, Alberta. Team Saskatchewan '95 has 

representation from all areas of the province, including my own 

riding, the riding of Wascana Plains. 



February 13, 1995 

 

118 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan contingent includes 325 people 

and is comprised of the athletes, coaches, and other support 

staff. The games effectively demonstrate the collaboration 

possible between provincial, territorial governments, the federal 

government, the host community, and others working together 

in partnership to increase sport development opportunities at all 

levels. 

 

They bond Canadians together, focusing attention on the many 

positive aspects of being Canadian. In other words, the games 

are a much-needed expression of unity between Canadians — 

something which is desperately needed in this time of Canadian 

history. The games' theme, Capture the Vision, is a very 

positive one and reflects the goal of the athletes of Team 

Saskatchewan to be the best that they can be. 

 

The 1995 Canada Winter Games will be the first games to 

include wheelchair basketball as one of the events. The 

Saskatchewan team is made up of some outstanding athletes 

and is coached by a former Olympic medalist. These games will 

also provide an opportunity for athletes who are visually 

impaired or physically disabled to compete in alpine skiing. The 

games will be an exciting and enriching experience for every 

competitor, and I'm sure all members here would wish that our 

Saskatchewan athletes have the best of luck at these games. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Housing Starts Increase 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with 

good news about the number of housing starts in Saskatchewan 

and in my riding. In Saskatchewan, housing starts in the last 

quarter of 1994 were at their highest level since the second 

quarter of 1993. The total number of housing starts in urban and 

rural Saskatchewan increased 73 per cent in the fourth quarter 

of 1994 compared to the same period, 1993. 

 

A quote from Bruce MacDonald, a research analyst with 

Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, printed in the 

Lloydminster Meridian Booster February 8, 1995 reads like 

this: 

 

 It is significant that much of the increase in housing 

starts stems from families purchasing new single-family 

dwellings . . . This is a clear sign of rising consumer 

confidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of optimism we're hearing across 

the province and in my own riding. I would like to add that for 

the first time since 1988 that total number of housing starts in 

Saskatchewan reached above 2,000. In addition, construction 

began on 692 houses in the fourth quarter compared to about 

400 in the same quarter last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of how a renewed 

optimism is sweeping the province. People in Saskatchewan are 

displaying the kind of consumer confidence that indicates  

economic renewal is moving in the right direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Discrimination in Minor Hockey 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I would like to speak about a discrimination problem 

affecting a constituent of mine. My constituent coaches in a 

Regina minor hockey league which has run up against a 

discriminatory rule of the Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey 

Association. The SAHA has forbidden boys from playing on 

girls' teams. That's part of the Queen City Hockey League and 

it's now bereft of male participants. 

 

A six-year-old goalie who had been playing on the girls' team 

since November became a bystander on the weekend. The 

SAHA does not permit girls to play on boys' teams, hence this 

young six-year-old boy did not dress for the Tigers during the 

QCHL's (Queen City Hockey League) novice coaches' 

tournament this weekend. His coach faced a suspension if the 

boy played in the tournament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that this incident is a case of 

gender discrimination perpetrated by a bureaucracy on the lives 

of children who just want to play hockey. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Casino Agreement 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the gambling minister. Madam Minister, let's 

recap the story as we left it off on Friday. The Premier of 

Saskatchewan formed a gambling partnership with the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), gave them one 

and three-quarters of a million dollars to form that partnership, 

then gave them 25 per cent of the profits from a venture which 

will be totally funded by taxpayers, and now has allowed them 

to open their own casinos. 

 

Madam Minister, being that tomorrow is Valentine's Day, it 

would be appropriate to call this a sweetheart deal. 

Unfortunately, it appears that this relationship has been formed 

under duress. 

 

Madam Minister, you have been saying in the media that you 

and your Premier had to sell the farm to avoid conflict. Could 

you elaborate on your comments regarding potential conflict. 

Was this deal signed under a threat? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank the member for his question. I 

would have to say that there was no duress involved because 

our goal has always been to improve regulation, to limit 

expansion, and to affirm provincial control over casino 

regulation. This agreement does all of those things. In the area 

of regulation, I think we've greatly enhanced our ability to  



February 13, 1995 

 

119 

regulate charitable gaming on reserves by establishment of the 

Indian first nations' licensing authority. That's going to much 

improve that level of regulation on reserves. 

 

They have also conceded that we're responsible for the Criminal 

Code enforcement and that they will back us up in our 

obligation to do that. So if any casino is to proceed, there's a 

whole regulatory framework that gets put in place, and the 

province is still responsible for implementing that. 

 

As far as limited expansion, we have not exceeded the original 

agreement of Regina plus Saskatoon, and the only casino that 

has any approval at this point is Regina. The rest have a very 

thorough process of market study and community approval that 

they have to go through. So this agreement has only approved 

one casino and a process for the future with a cap at the level of 

the original agreement. 

 

As far as the jurisdictional issue goes, I don't doubt that there 

will be further discussions across Canada on this issue. But I 

have to say right now that this agreement is . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, it becomes quite obvious 

that you must be under a fair amount of duress. No person of a 

sound mind would have come forward with this kind of deal. 

The Premier wouldn't. Oh, you laugh. I say to you, the Premier 

wouldn't. If there was no duress, the Premier wouldn't because 

in Saturday's paper it quotes him, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Privately . . . Romanow . . . wished (he) had never heard 

of gambling. (He) didn't want to see a proliferation of 

casinos around the province, maintained it was not 

sustainable economic development and believed on-

reserve casinos would turn into social and economic 

nightmares. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what we have. Your own 

consultant's report said that too many casinos would result in 

marginal, if any, profits for the facilities and jeopardize the 

industry as a whole. 

 

Madam Minister, if your Premier sees a nightmare, your 

consultant sees marginal profits, if any, the public hasn't had 

any input, you say you're not under threat, the FSIN (Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) now has jurisdiction, then 

why on earth are you proceeding? Why, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member from Rosthern for 

his question. Mr. Speaker, we are not under duress. We have 

come to an agreement which I think enhances every aspect of 

how we are approaching gaming in this province. And I might 

add, under the Conservatives in Manitoba they get 15 per cent 

less at the government level from these revenues, and there is  

no revenue-sharing formula in place; it just goes directly to the 

location where the casino is. So maybe you might want to 

discuss that a bit; see if you can get some consistency 

happening over there. 

 

The Fox report said that one casino would be sustainable. Any 

other proposal that's put forward by the FSIN must have market 

study. And there's not really much advantage. I tend to think 

that they have thought about this quite carefully, and certainly 

the chief does not strike me as someone who would not be 

considerate in what he's doing here. And what would be the 

advantage to him to set up competition to the Regina market 

where he already has a share in the revenue? It would be a bad 

business decision. So I think within the range of all of the 

economic development options that the FSIN are pursuing, that 

they would look very carefully at this as one of many possible 

options. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All right, Madam 

Minister, then let's see what's in it for the FSIN. I can see why 

they are proceeding and would want it. In Saturday's paper, 

Chief Pillipow of the White Bear Indian Reserve said that he: 

 

 . . . believes the agreement represents another step 

toward total recognition of Indian jurisdiction over 

gaming and other economic activities on reserves. 

 

Now you have sold the farm, and you don't even know what the 

consequences are. Madam Minister, can you tell this Assembly 

if you have considered the impact on local communities and 

small businesses should the PST (provincial sales tax) not be 

charged on all items sold on surrounding Indian reservations? Is 

this the economic nightmare that the Premier has been talking 

about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member from Rosthern for his questions. 

 

I'll just aside for a moment the fact that the Tories would advise 

anybody on how to conduct a business deal. 

 

But aside from that I would have to say that one of the 

particularly good features of this arrangement is that the chiefs 

unanimously, without exception, at their recent assembly agreed 

to get approval from any community in which a casino would 

be located as well as any municipality affected by the market. 

And this shows to me the kind of relationship that they hope to 

establish in the municipalities. And I think it's very negative 

that you are running against the chiefs’ intention to set up a 

partnership arrangement with municipalities. 

 

So I would suggest that you watch a bit as this unfolds and give 

people a chance to be active players in their economy. You 

never complained about all the exhibition associations where 

the money all goes to urban charities. 



February 13, 1995 

 

120 

Well these people also have needs for recreation and sports and 

other services in their communities. And I think it's absolutely 

appropriate that they would have some funding to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I get into my 

question I should apologize for elevating Mr. Pillipow up to 

Chief Shepherd's status there. So I apologize for that. 

 

But, Madam Minister, getting back to the economic situation, 

you are in the process of setting up tax-free islands all around 

the province, Madam Minister. You are giving up gambling 

jurisdiction along with economic and taxation jurisdiction and 

you have no idea of the consequences to small towns and 

villages and to the small-business families that operate them. 

And you're talking about pitting community against community. 

 

Madam Minister, Mayor Henry Dayday of Saskatoon said that 

you are driving a wedge between local government and the 

natives, or between the local government and the electorate. 

 

Madam Minister, could you explain how this sweetheart deal is 

going to build bridges, given the overwhelming opposition to 

it? Or was it simply your Premier from the city of bridges trying 

to build another political bridge. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member from Rosthern for his question. At some point in this 

discussion I think it's probably necessary to have a little less 

rhetoric and a little more common sense on what we're 

discussing here. 

 

We have communities in our province who need employment, 

who need services. I know it is their intention that people get a 

pay cheque and not a welfare cheque. They're looking at a wide 

range of economic development options and they're certainly 

asserting through this agreement their desire for accountability 

for the gaming that already takes place. 

 

I would suggest that a responsible thing for a member of the 

opposition to do would be to urge SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) to work in partnership 

with the reserves in their areas, so that we can get on with 

having a real relationship in this province where there's some 

equity and some provision of services to communities who very 

desperately need it. And I would suggest that it would be greedy 

to suggest otherwise, as you were doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, a caucus 

colleague of yours and a former member of the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) cabinet has been charged and found guilty of  

fraud. This fraud involved receiving a kickback from Phoenix 

Advertising Group, your government's advertising agency of 

record, a company your government has done millions of 

dollars of business with over the years. Mr. Minister, can you 

tell this House, is the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

conducting any further investigations into the activities of 

Phoenix Advertising? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm not able to advise whether that's 

happening or not. As the member will know, ministers of 

Justice by long tradition in this province, and by good practice I 

think, are not informed of the investigations that are going on, 

have no authority over those investigations, and nothing to say 

about whether or not the investigations lead to prosecution. So I 

simply don't know the answer to the member's question. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, 

even though the member of Quill Lakes was found guilty of 

accepting a kickback, no charges are being laid against Phoenix 

for giving the kickback. Why is that, Mr. Minister? Why has 

your department chosen not to lay charges against Phoenix for 

its involvement in this incident? What did the Crown prosecutor 

mean when he said, further charges would not be in the public 

interest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid I don't 

know the answer to the member's question. As I have said, I 

think it would be highly inappropriate for the minister to be 

trampling around in the prosecution's department or in the 

investigation conducted by the police force, bringing a political 

dimension to either of those two activities. I keep out of it. I'm 

advised from time to time as to decisions that are made in the 

department but I wouldn't for a moment think about questioning 

them with respect to an issue like that. 

 

I can attempt to learn what decisions have been made in the 

department and communicate those to the member and I will do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Phoenix 

Advertising is your government's agency of record. It received 

millions of taxpayers' dollars in government contracts each year 

and I'm sure you want to clear the air regarding the dealings 

between your government, your caucus members, and Phoenix. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you considered an independent investigation 

into the dealings between Phoenix and members of your caucus, 

or will you today consider appointing an independent 

prosecutor to conduct an investigation to ensure that there have 

been no further incidents of wrongdoing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, I will not, Mr. Speaker. For the 

information of the member, Phoenix Advertising is not the 

agency of record for the government. The government doesn't 

have an agency of record. 

 

Furthermore, investigations in this province are traditionally 

undertaken by a police force, either the RCMP or a municipal 

force, depending upon where the offence is located and the type  



February 13, 1995 

 

121 

of offence it is. So I think we can leave it to them to investigate 

any allegations of crime and no doubt they will hear what the 

member’s had to say here today and take that into account. 

 

Provincial Income Tax Revenues 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question will be for the Minister of Finance this afternoon. 

 

I presume that the government's budget predictions for income 

tax revenues have been based on their expectations of growth in 

jobs and the economy. They claim that there have been 

thousands more jobs than they thought in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, income tax revenues 

should have at least met or surpassed their projections. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for themselves. The 

government actually earned less income tax revenue than they 

budgeted for, by $65 million in 1993, and by $16 million in 

1994. The Minister of Economic Development claims that we 

have thousands more taxpayers in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

My question to the Finance minister is: how do you explain why 

there is less income tax being generated than you budgeted for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

In the absence of the minister, who is at a federal-provincial 

conference, as I think members know. 

 

Thursday, I say to the member opposite, I'm sure she will join 

all Saskatchewan people on Thursday in expressing a good deal 

of pride in a budget in which it will all come together. The 

sacrifice, the hard work over the previous four years, is going to 

come together in a budget in which I think Saskatchewan 

people will be quite proud and should be quite proud. All the 

more so because it's being done at a time when the economic 

activity in the province is increasing, jobs are increasing, as is 

the revenue from them. 

 

The member opposite may be interested in knowing that in 

Saskatchewan our unemployment rate is down by 2 per cent, 

while in New Brunswick, to pick a province out of the air, their 

unemployment rate has remained static over the past year. That 

is partially as a result of the budgetary steps which we have 

taken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Finance 

minister would like everyone to believe and the associate 

Finance minister would like everyone to believe that there have 

been thousands of new jobs in Saskatchewan created over the 

last two years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Even though, even though, Mr. Speaker, 

we still have fewer people working than in 1991 when they 

came to office. But there appears to be a very unsolved  

mystery, Mr. Speaker. In 1993, the Minister of Finance 

budgeted $1.1 billion in income tax and missed that target by 

$65 million. In 1994, she missed her income tax target again by 

$16 million. Mr. Associate Minister, don't you agree that if 

there were more jobs you should be exceeding your income tax 

targets, not falling short? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 

think all members will know that our very capable minister is in 

Ottawa attempting to assist the federal government in working a 

similar sort of miracle nationally. I may say, given the 

convoluted nature of the question from the members opposite, 

if it's any indication of Liberal thinking, our minister certainly 

has her hands full in attempting to work with the federal 

minister. 

 

I say to the member opposite there is little connection between 

income tax revenue and jobs. It is interesting that in the search 

for a statistic that will buttress their position, they have gone 

from StatsCanada which they abandoned; gone from Revenue 

Canada which they've abandoned. The Premier offered up 

Environment Canada. They seemed to have abandoned that and 

they're now into 1993 income tax revenues apparently. 

 

I do wish the member opposite good luck in trying to find the 

statistic which will buttress her position if jobs have decreased. 

I think she's going to need a lot of good luck, because she flies 

in the face of the bald facts — and that is that the jobs in this 

province has increased markedly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For every two 

jobs that are created here, Mr. Speaker, this government's 

policies destroy one. 

 

I think I can explain, Mr. Speaker, why the government keeps 

missing their income tax targets. The Premier of this province 

said in this very legislature, on May 2, 1991, and I quote 

directly from Hansard: 

 

 . . . Won't you agree that taxes are the silent killer of 

jobs, that enough is enough, that higher taxes do not 

create jobs, higher taxes take jobs out of the economy. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, will you admit that your own policies 

are the reasons that you're missing your income tax targets; that 

the policies of your government have caused you to miss your 

income tax targets, and actually held Saskatchewan at the 

bottom of the job recovery list — the bottom relative to the rest 

of the nation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Notwithstanding the best efforts of 

the member opposite to contribute to the unemployment 

situation in Saskatchewan, I gather you've added one more to 

the list. I gather yet another communications officer has left 

your office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 13, 1995 

 

122 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Notwithstanding, notwithstanding 

your best efforts, Madam Minister, the number of jobs are up 

by 12,000; the number of unemployed are down by 9,000. I say 

to the member opposite, there is little connection between 

budgeted and forecast income tax revenue and jobs. If the 

member believes there is some connection, you may want to try 

to draw that for us. But I say to the member opposite, there's 

none. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, in 1991 this very Associate 

Minister of Finance was quoted as saying, and this is a direct 

quote: the NDP won't raise any personal taxes for four years. 

End of quote. 

 

In June of 1991, this very minister, the Associate Minister of 

Finance, was saying, and I quote: just as the prodigal son needs 

not more income but more discipline, so government opposite 

needs not more income but more discipline in its spending. End 

of quote. 

 

The evidence clearly points to one thing, Mr. Speaker: this 

particular government — your government, Mr. Associate 

Minister — cannot be trusted. 

 

Mr. Minister, when is your government going to start practising 

exactly what both the Premier and yourself were preaching in 

1991? When are you going to start learning to live within your 

own means, instead of gouging the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I say in the flight of the members 

opposite from one set of statistics to another, may I suggest that 

you may want to pay a fleeting visit back to StatsCanada. May I 

suggest you may want to review the level of personal taxes for a 

family of 25,000. Saskatchewan is second lowest in Canada and 

indeed is lower than Alberta at that level. 

 

So the member opposite, in developing these arguments, may 

want to pay a visit back to StatsCanada and begin to use their 

material again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Polling 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for government polling, the Provincial 

Secretary. Last week your government released the results of 

some recent polling about the federal gun control legislation. I'd 

agree that this is an important issue to consider for the people of 

Saskatchewan and doing some polling on this issue is a 

worthwhile exercise. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell us what other questions were asked 

as a part of the poll, and will you release those results today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

be pleased to respond to the member's question. And I can tell 

him that all of the poll that was asked that was pertaining to that 

particular issue was released, as is the practice of this 

government, which is a change from the way it used to be. 

 

The polling that is done, paid by the taxpayer, that is prepared, 

other than the commercial things that would effect on 

competitiveness in the Crown corporations, has been released 

for the last two or three years on a regular basis — I believe 

every three months — and the questions that were asked are the 

questions that are presented in that information when it is 

provided to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, could you tell us whether there 

were any political-type questions asked? For example, I have a 

copy of the questionnaire from the recent poll about gun 

control. Among other things, it asked respondents to rate the 

performance of the federal Liberal government; who they would 

vote for if a federal election were held today; who they voted 

for in the past provincial election; and who they would vote for 

if a provincial election were held today. 

 

Mr. Minister, I thought you had assured us that your polling . . . 

your government does not do this type of political polling. Why 

are these voter preference questions part of a government-

commissioned poll, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, may I respond to the 

member opposite? I want to say very clearly to him and to the 

House that the polling for which the government pays for does 

not ask any political preference questions. The pollsters, as the 

members may very well know, may have various questions on 

their poll which are not part of the questions that are being 

purchased by one particular organization. There may be other 

questions paid by other organizations, but I want to say with 

absolute certainty, Mr. Speaker, that no political preference 

questions have been paid for in the polling that the government 

does, by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, will you provide to this 

Legislative Assembly, first of all, a breakdown of the questions 

in the poll, and then the costs attributed to each one of those 

questions so that you can show it to this Legislative Assembly 

and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan that you did 

not pay for with taxpayers' dollars the polls that dealt with the 

questions that I asked you just today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite in response to his question that the questions 

which were asked for which the taxpayer paid for through the  



February 13, 1995 

 

123 

Government of Saskatchewan have all been made available to 

the members already, and to the media, as they are on a regular 

basis. And I don't know what more information can be provided 

because as long as . . . ever since this process was begun, it's 

part of the democratic reform system the government has 

implemented. And there have been a lot of those measures that 

have been implemented. 

 

The questions that are asked for which the taxpayer pays for, 

which are not questions that may affect some commercial 

sensitivities of the business side of the government, are always 

provided, as they were in the last release to the members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you today a friend and fellow minister from British 

Columbia, Mr. Glen Clark, who's the Minister of Employment 

and Investment. He's also the House Leader and minister 

responsible for B.C. (British Columbia) Hydro. He's the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Vancouver-

Kingsway and is here in Saskatchewan to meet with a number 

of various groups, including people associated with the changes 

to the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act), because of 

the important role and change that is occurring as a result of a 

change in policy at the federal level. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wish all members to join with me in 

welcoming Mr. Clark to the Assembly and wish him the best in 

his visit here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Crop Insurance Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Apiaries Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Apiaries Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. 

Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. Protection Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I would move: 

 

 That the Public Accounts of the province of 

Saskatchewan for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1994 

be referred as tabled this session to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Regina Churchill 

Downs. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 

understand, by agreement of all members in the House, I have a 

condolence motion I'd like to introduce and speak to. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you, members. Mr. Speaker, it is with much sadness and much 

regret that I rise today to note the passing of a well-loved friend 

and former member of this Assembly, Mr. Hans Ove Hansen, or 

Ove Hansen as he was known, of Wilkie, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hansen died quietly at the Wilkie Union Hospital on July 3, 

1994 at the age of 89. He leaves to mourn his loving wife of 60 

years, Marie, and their children, Byron and Carole, and several 

grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Hansen was a man of vision who saw clearly how to best  



February 13, 1995 

 

124 

serve his fellow man. Throughout his lifetime he kept abreast of 

economics and political issues and when he was unable to 

personally participate in public discussion, he turned to the 

power of his pen. He was well known for his precise, hard-

hitting and well-documented and numerous letters to the editor. 

And more often than not those letters would lean, obviously, to 

the political left. 

 

Very early in his life, Ove Hansen developed a strong socialist 

political ideology, and even with the passage of time, his 

passionate convictions never dimmed. His political interest led 

him to the philosophy of the blossoming of the CCF (Co-

operative Commonwealth Federation), which paralleled his line 

of thinking. 

 

And in 1933 he attended the party's founding convention in 

Regina. He later served as a member of the CCF provincial 

council. Mr. Speaker, Ove Hansen was a builder of both the 

CCF and the New Democratic parties, and a builder of his 

constituency and of his province. 

 

On June 21, 1941, Ove was nominated to contest the Wilkie 

constituency for the CCF and he was elected and served as an 

MLA in the first Tommy Douglas government from 1944 to 

1948. He won that seat after having introduced a new method 

of campaigning to the electors. 

 

For the three years in which he was the candidate, Ove found 

his way into nearly every home. He ate with the constituents, 

and spent the night at their homes as often as possible. 

 

This type of close, personal contact was something new to the 

area, and his victory was a testament to both the man and the 

message and his closeness with the ordinary folk. 

 

(1415) 

 

Losing his seat in the legislature did not dim Ove's interest in 

politics. He maintained a keen interest in the economic and 

political life of his country and he maintained an even keener 

interest in the well-being of the political party that he helped to 

form. 

 

Ove believed that with any political party there is always the 

danger of time causing a shift in its basic ideology or, as Ove 

thought, a shift to the right. And he made it his personal 

mandate to prevent that shift in his party from taking place. 

 

Well as all of us, he personally mellowed with age, except for 

one thing — his politics did not. As a reiteration of his views, 

he was fond of saying: I just never saw it any other way. 

 

Ove did not want to be known as a politician nor were all his 

interests political. He gave wholehearted support to the 

cooperative movement as well. I've heard of how he borrowed 

his father's old Ford car and ploughed through mud and bucked 

through the last remaining snowbanks to help launch the Landis 

Co-operative Association back in 1929. 

He also served as a director of the united farmers. He was the 

first president of Canadian Co-operative Implements Limited in 

district 12. 

 

In his own modest way, Ove never claimed any of the credit for 

his successes and instead shared the accolades with his partner, 

his wife, who he said stayed home to allow him to carry the 

torch of a new and better social order. And that surely must be a 

loving, understanding relationship. 

 

His quest, his thirst, for knowledge and understanding never 

diminished. The CCF and now the New Democratic Party in 

Saskatchewan owes its success to people like Ove and Marie 

Hansen, who throughout the years never ceased to follow the 

ideals of progress, freedom, compassion, cooperation, 

community, and security for all of our people. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that all of the people of this province 

owe a debt of thanks to Ove Hansen and all the other brave 

women and men of his generation — and brave they were as 

they fought against formidable odds — all those people of that 

generation who did see a better way and worked incredibly hard 

to bring about a new and better order. The high quality of life 

we enjoy in Saskatchewan today can be directly traced back to 

their convictions and to their actions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members will join with me 

in supporting the following motion which I'm going to 

move, seconded by my colleague, the member from Morse. 

Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

express its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and this 

province. 

 

 Hans Ove Hansen who died in Wilkie on July 3, 1994 

was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Wilkie from 1944 to 1948. 

 

 Mr. Hansen was born on August 14, 1904, on a Danish 

settlement in Iowa, United States of America. At three 

years of age he moved with his family to Saskatchewan 

where his parents established a homestead east of 

Leipzig. 

 

 His parents provided his early schooling until the 

Standard School opened nearby in 1916. He completed 

his studies at Concordia College in Edmonton before 

pursuing his lifelong interest of farming. 

 

 On June 28, 1934, Ove Hansen married Marie Baron of 

Wilkie. The family farmed in the Wolfe district for three 

years and then established their own family farm near 

Reford. 

 

 Mr. Hansen took an active interest in his community and 

in the cooperative movement. He was an early and active  



February 13, 1995 

 

125 

supporter of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the National 

Farmers Union, or as it was called then, the 

Saskatchewan Farmers Union, and other local retail 

cooperatives. 

 

 Ove Hansen assumed a leadership role in many 

organizations including serving as the first president of 

the District 12 Canadian Co-operative Implements. In 

1954 he held the position of vice-president of the 

Saskatchewan Farmers Union. He helped also to 

organize the Landis Co-op and served as a director for 

several years. 

 

 Mr. Hansen is recognized as a founding member of the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and served as a 

member of the CCF provincial council. 

 

 In 1944 he was elected to serve as a member of this 

Legislative Assembly for Wilkie. Mr. Hansen's bid for 

re-election was unsuccessful in 1948 but he remained 

interested and active in the economic and political life of 

this country. 

 

 In his retirement Mr. Hansen pursued his quest for 

knowledge and understanding by embarking on 

numerous travels to countries around the world. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so move, seconded by the hon. member from 

Morse constituency. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 

Speaker, to second the motion moved by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Hansen, a former member for the constituency of Wilkie, 

passed away this past summer, and he served this Assembly 

from 1944 to 1948. And as the Premier has pointed out, he did 

that rather well. 

 

His family must feel extremely fortunate that their father, uncle, 

and grandfather enjoyed life to its fullest for almost 90 years. 

Although born in the United States, Mr. Hansen chose to 

remain in Canada. He furthered his education by attending 

university in Edmonton and pursued his lifelong interest in 

farming in Saskatchewan. Mr. Hansen obviously held the 

Prairies close to his heart. Mr. Hansen made many important 

contributions to the Wilkie area, and was an integral part in 

many of the cooperatives in the Wilkie area as well. And for 

that he will be remembered there. 

 

I know that Mr. Hansen will be fondly remembered and greatly 

missed for the many years that he served the public of 

Saskatchewan, and this Assembly acknowledges that today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join  

other members in this House as we pay tribute to the former 

member, Mr. Hans Hansen, who served four years in this 

Assembly as the member for Wilkie. 

 

Mr. Hansen served in this legislature during a time when 

Saskatchewan's history had enormous challenges and 

excitement too faced the people and the government at the time. 

His term covered those years when optimism ran high for our 

province's future because inflationary growth had taken over 

after the devastating decade of Depression and the recessionary 

war years. His community service and public service are 

commendable accomplishments which I wish to acknowledge 

on behalf of the Liberal caucus today. As well, on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I wish to extend my condolences to 

the family and the friends of the late Ove Hansen. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Thunder Creek, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley, seconded by Mr. 

Knezacek. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to get 

back into the debate on the throne speech today. 

 

I don't want to add to the throne speech what I see as something 

missing, and that's any inspiration, so I will sort of cut to the 

chase, quickly go through a few of the areas, and let other 

members speak. 

 

But just to recap, Mr. Speaker, on the financial stability portion 

of the throne speech, I think it's obvious that it was a throne 

speech that's just before a provincial election — very lacklustre. 

And really all they have to brag about, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

that there's going to be some balanced budget legislation and 

the fact that the annual deficit is now going to be taken care of. 

 

And somebody of course deserves a great deal of credit for that. 

And I maintain, as I did the other day, reading right from the 

auditor's report, that it really isn't the government of the day that 

deserves the credit. It's the people of this province that are  



February 13, 1995 

 

126 

going to get all the credit in the end. They deserve the credit. If 

what's happening here is a lead-up to an election, well of course 

I think the people will be the ones that will win the election. 

And I dare say, they're not speaking for those people. And I 

would caution them if they feel that any positive news from the 

budget is going to help them win an election because I just don't 

see it happening. 

 

I think the people will win out at the end of the day — those 

people who you've cut all the programs from. You've threatened 

everything from gravelling their highways. You've closed the 

hospitals, on and on and on, taken away their farm programs. 

Those are the people that will want to be thinking of you when 

they go into the polling booth that day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the areas of jobs and economic renewal, I see 

that there's some mention of the oil and gas sector. And in the 

area of the province that I'm from, oil and gas is a very big 

ticket item for us. In fact when we take a look at last year's, or 

the '94, budget where there was revenues I think of some $20 

million budgeted, those were ballooned up to some $200 

million. And that's quite a windfall for the government. 

 

The concern I have — and I've raised this, I guess, with the 

Premier and different members at different occasions — is the 

fact that some $85 million of this money come from the part of 

the province that I'm from, right in the south-west corner. And I 

have to have a look, Mr. Minister, at the amount of things that 

that particular government has cut back from that area of the 

province, and then yet again take a further $85 million out of 

that corner of the province and not put a dime back in. 

 

I think that's shameful, Mr. Speaker. At a time when the need 

for nursing homes, a need for some highway repair or 

rebuilding or new highways, and they have yet to announce one 

thing. 

 

If they wanted to come out with something very positive, I'll tell 

you, the Shaunavon nursing home is in such terrible need of 

repair — or not repair, actually — to be replaced. And the 

people down there are asking me on a regular basis: if the 

government has access to so much money that really is from 

this area of the province, why on earth couldn't they at least 

give back to that area of the province what they so badly need 

and some of the things that they've taken away? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at this section on jobs 

and economic renewal, there too if the government feels that 

they're going to receive credit from the people of the province, 

it's not going to happen. We've got a thousand displaced health 

care workers in rural Saskatchewan. And I take a look at all the 

hospitals . . . all the health care workers that this particular 

government has taken the jobs away from. Health care workers, 

so many nurses out in rural Saskatchewan that help keep the 

farms viable, they're going to remember you at the polls. And 

that'll come soon enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also there's a number of SaskEnergy offices, 

SaskPower offices . . . In the last session we raised this time  

and time again — the need for the SaskPower, well the utility 

office, to remain in some of these communities. It wasn't for the 

jobs at the time; that wasn't our point. But the fact of the matter 

is the length of time it takes to get service out in I guess what 

they would consider now to be remote areas. It's unforgivable 

when we're talking a couple hours to get service from 

SaskPower. 

 

(1430) 

 

The offices were there. There were jobs in the community. 

These were people that had children that were keeping schools 

going. And you've cancelled all those offices, you've cut out 

those jobs, all for the sake of amalgamating. 

 

The whole picture that this government sees is just to move 

everything into the larger centres. And I think at some point 

they're going to sit back and wish that they had never tried that. 

 

The Minister of Highways was recently out in the community of 

Val Marie, Mr. Speaker, at the request of community leaders in 

that community, and local RMs (rural municipality), because 

they were also going to close highway depots — several of 

them throughout the province. But in the community of Val 

Marie there was a threat of losing their highway depot. 

 

Well the community banded together, they completely filled the 

town hall, had the Minister of Highways and myself there to 

talk or debate the issue. And I will give the Minister of 

Highways credit for at least reversing the decision to close it 

after the people in that community had talked some sense into 

the government. 

 

But it seems like it's never ending, Mr. Speaker. This was the 

same community, this was the same stretch of highway, that the 

now Minister of the Environment, who was Highways minister 

at the time, wanted to gravel that entire area. This is the area 

where they've lost the hospitals and they haven't replaced it with 

ambulatory care. So, Mr. Speaker, that too will come to service. 

 

I note in the throne speech there was mention of tourism, and of 

course we all like to see some positive tourism projects. And 

the one they happened to mention is the T-Rex fossil discovery 

in the Frenchman River valley. And of course that got . . . news 

of the find got around the world and it was pretty positive for 

the area. 

 

But I question the government on one hand, when we have 

something as positive as the T-Rex find — we have people 

coming from Europe to view it — how then do they justify 

closing hospitals and gravelling highways and closing down 

highway depots and utility . . . You're completely shutting down 

rural areas of the province and yet you want to brag about 

somehow promoting some tourism projects down there. Well 

this is not going over well with the people. That again is going 

to come back to cause a lot of grief, I think, for these members. 

 

In the throne speech, we have an area on agriculture  



February 13, 1995 

 

127 

diversification. And one would almost think in a throne speech 

which is going to be the lead-up to a provincial election — and 

especially in a province where over 50 per cent of the farmers 

in Canada are within the provincial boundaries in Saskatchewan 

— that there would be some real positive news coming out, 

some leadership and some real direction as to where this 

government, with its strong majority and a lot of signs of the 

economy picking up and getting healthy, would want to take the 

agriculture industry. 

 

Yet what do we have? So far, we've got a federal Minister of 

Agriculture which had to come and rescue that particular 

government and that particular Minister of Agriculture in 

Saskatchewan because he couldn't get in with the other 

provinces and agree on an ag program. After they used 

retroactive legislation and cancelled farm programs, they had to 

have a federal Agriculture minister come and save them at the 

end of the day with an interim program. 

 

Well some of the members laugh, but that's how the farmers 

view it out there. The Minister of Justice is sitting there 

laughing. But you know, the farmers when you use retroactive 

legislation against them, no different than you've used it against 

the judges and the co-op. Do you think they're going to forgive 

you? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I say they won't. I say 

they won't at all. 

 

And when I look here, we see one of the new Acts coming in, 

agriculture Acts, the agriculture operations Act. And it's to 

protect producers from unwarranted legal actions. If this is the 

only positive news that we have in the throne speech, it's even 

more lacklustre than I had first thought. And for unwarranted 

legal actions . . . I dare say this could be termed the Jack Messer 

Bill before it's all over because the only unwarranted legal 

action that I recall in the last 12 months which would perhaps 

bring about some mention of an Act in the upbringing session 

here was the lord of the flies trying to sue his friends and 

neighbours for some problems that he had with flies on his 

farm. So hopefully there's more to the Act. And I guess at some 

point the minister will have to explain himself for this. 

 

And when we take a look, Mr. Speaker, at what the government 

has done budget-wise in the Department of Agriculture, where 

they've cut back year after year after year and really have done 

nothing to promote any diversification in agriculture . . . there's 

been a lot of talk about it, but no true action. And I don't think 

that the farmers are going to forgive them either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I take a look in the throne speech, I think 

what probably causes everyone the most grief is the part on 

health care. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that this is probably 

the area that this government has faired the worst in. It's where 

their performance has been, well very uncompassionate I guess 

is the word that would come to mind as far as how their 

treatment to rural Saskatchewan would go. 

 

After having closed down all the hospitals that they could in 

communities — I guess some 52 — and putting some citizens 

of those communities an hour to an hour and a half away from  

any kind of emergency or acute care help. In fact I look at the 

community of Ponteix, where after they've closed down the 

hospital, they now have some clinic, a 9 to 5 clinic. And let's be 

honest, people are not going to use these clinics on a 9 to 5 

basis for anything of importance at all. 

 

And what the government did to try and relieve the fear of the 

people is to hang a pay phone on the outside of the hospital — 

bolted it right to the front of the hospital, a SaskTel pay phone. 

And you know, that I think hurt the community worse than any 

action that this government has taken upon itself. When it 

comes to needing a quarter to phone for some kind of health 

care, I mean, that is two-bit health care in the rawest of forms. 

That is going to come back and haunt them. 

 

But what I really find disappointing is the fact that when they 

go and they do these harmful effects to some of the 

communities — they close down their hospitals and their 

SaskPower office and the highway depots — that the members 

never show up to explain to the people why they're doing it. 

They stay out of there. They'll deal with them through the news 

media from Regina. Other than the Minister of Highways, who 

did go out to Val Marie and actually had his mind changed. 

None of the others cared to go out into the rural areas. I dare say 

it's not even the ministers . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They're afraid to go there; they'd have to 

change their minds too. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — That's right. I say it's not just the ministers, 

it's the other back-bench members. How often do they ever get 

around in their constituencies? 

 

And I enjoy listening to some of the replies to the throne speech 

when members say that out in my rural constituency people are 

really accepting all these cut-backs and actually liking it. Well I 

can assure you that we're going to be taking some of those 

Hansard copies and making sure that people out in your area 

read that, because if that's a misnomer I think we'll want you to 

perhaps stand up and correct that at some point. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we see what's happening out in these 

rural areas, I mean even the community of Climax of all places, 

there's a northern tax allowance, some deduction that's allowed 

I think from the 58th parallel and north, and it's an isolation 

pay. Well they receive that in the community of Climax and it 

has to do if you're a citizen that's within so many hours from a 

centre of so many thousand people, you're considered to be 

isolated. Well in Climax, Saskatchewan, they receive that tax 

allowance, Mr. Speaker, and yet they lose their hospital. 

 

We have a police officer that must be stationed there because 

it's a port, a busy port through to the United States. They receive 

tax allowances because of their isolation, but they had to lose 

their hospital. 

 

And I would enjoy having some of these members come out to 

some of those community halls and debate some of what they'd 

see as some of the positive issues in their throne speech. I'd  



February 13, 1995 

 

128 

love for them to come out and discuss in front of the people 

why they did that. Because they've never had to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think they're going to have to soon. 

 

The other day we raised an issue, Mr. Speaker, in the House, on 

Friday I guess it was, in regards to what this government sees as 

a replacement to health care professionals now that they've 

taken those jobs and those professions out of rural 

Saskatchewan and they've replaced them with volunteer effort. 

Nobody's against volunteers, but to have first responders 

replace health care professionals? That's an insult to the people. 

 

Well the current Minister of Health was debating whether or not 

these doctors were actually leaving the province with me, Mr. 

Speaker, but I noticed on Saturday's Leader-Post, it . . . and I'll 

quote: 

 

 Dr. Joe Baretto has some advice for travellers in 

southwest Saskatchewan (and I quote): "Don't have your 

accident around Ponteix." 

 

 There's no . . . ambulance service to come and pick you 

up, and the local doctors are so frustrated with health 

reform they're thinking of quitting, Baretto said. 

 

 "Most of us are sitting on a knife edge at the moment," 

Baretto said in an interview Friday. 

 

 "One of my colleagues said he is amazed at the number 

of people who are leaving that he thought would never 

leave." 

 

This is the kind of testimonials we get from rural residents as to 

how well they're accepting these health care cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

They're not. They're not. They, like myself, question the facts 

and the figures from the Minister of Health over whether or not 

people are really leaving the province, doctors are leaving their 

practices and such. 

 

But the one that really, really makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, is 

the one that is raised by the member from Assiniboia-

Gravelbourg, and I've got several copies from his local paper 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm just going to quote the one: 

 

 “Just keep your fingers crossed that when you have a 

heart attack you're standing next to a volunteer who has 

completed his 40-hour course and will help you for free 

because so many nurses have been fired that you won't 

get any professional care for a long time. Unless, of 

course you live in Regina close to the minister. Talk 

about doing things on the cheap. Merry Christmas Dr. 

Scrooge, and God help us, every one.” 

 

Well that's quite a statement from that member, and I also see 

on another edition of the Tribune, Tuesday January 31, the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is talking about running 

for the NDP nomination in Wood River. And of course on one  

hand he's saying how disappointed he is with the government, 

where the government has went, and the cut-backs to rural care, 

especially rural health care. 

 

Now they've been in power for three years, over three years, and 

it's only now that this member is starting to speak up. I recall 

when I crossed the floor from that group over these same issues, 

over health care issues in particular a year and a half a go, the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was on the front page of 

all the major newspapers in the province condemning me for 

doing that. And, Mr. Member, I'm telling you, you think you're 

going to get away with this? I hope you win that nomination. 

Although I am . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I will. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Your nomination? Well you'd have to talk 

to one of the members. You'd have to talk to the member that 

you had to introduce in here in the House the other day, Mr. 

Allen Engel. I was actually even embarrassed for him. Here's a 

member that sat throughout, oh I think for some 14 years, 

throughout all the '70s. And what we hear is the Premier has 

called him back from Texas. As we all know, Allen's a 

millionaire, and a very well-to-do guy, got called back from 

Texas to take a run at the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

because they're so embarrassed that somebody else would stand 

up and speak out against all these cuts. And I just thought it was 

a real knife in the heart to have to watch this member stand up 

and introduce in the House somebody who's trying to take his 

job away. 

 

I don't think you'll ever have this job again anyway. I wouldn't 

create bad friends with these people about it, if I were you. But 

that's not for you to decide that. 

 

And we take a look at some of these quotes in the Tribune 

where the member says: “I am very impressed by the caliber of 

my caucus colleagues and I must live by the old adage ‘win 

some, lose some.’” 

 

Well I've got to say to the good doctor from Assiniboia-

Gravelbourg, I don't know if you really did win some, lose 

some. What have you lost? Have you taken any cuts? 

 

But I'll tell you what some of the people up in your area have 

done. They've lost their hospitals. They would've lost their 

highway depots because you said nothing about it. It was only 

the people of Val Marie that put up a meeting that we finally 

made some inroads and stopped this foolishness before it could 

happen. You said nothing, Mr. Minister. 

 

Win some, lose some. I can't believe anybody would stand up 

and still support the party with the amount of cuts that the area, 

the south-west corner of the province, has taken, of which he 

too is a member, and still wants to represent them. And talk so 

flippantly — it's like you win some, you lose some. 

 

Well no, it's not. It's not that way to those people that are 70, 

80, 90 years of age that need nursing care out in that member's  



February 13, 1995 

 

129 

riding and aren't receiving it. They'll find out how flippant your 

remarks are and how little you care. 

 

(1445) 

 

Well let me read on here from the Tribune on January 31st. It 

states: 

 

 This time around he feels he has a higher profile not 

only in the riding but across the province and believes 

that will give him more clout in a new government. 

 

Well I don't know, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

feels he's going to have more clout. And I'll have to be honest. 

You know while we're sitting back here taking a look, trying to 

figure out who's going to get into cabinet, and there is no 

cabinet minister south of No. 1 Highway. It was a pretty good 

chance that he was going to go in for that reason alone. 

 

We had a Health minister resign. He's the only doctor in the 

caucus. So I thought, well isn't it obvious that he's going to 

become the Health minister. Well I don't think you're going to 

have any more clout than what you now have. And obviously 

you're not going a long ways at this point. 

 

In Regina Leader-Post, December 19th, we want to find out 

how his own party views his progress and his stand now after 

three years after the fact on health care. It says, "MLA didn't 

speak for others." It's signed by Louise Walker, Walker is 

president of the Wood River NDP constituency. The opening 

line: "I am writing on behalf of the table officers of the Wood 

River NDP Constituency Association to formally disassociate 

our association from the remarks of MLA Lewis Draper." It's a 

direct quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And well Allen Engel's putting him up to this, member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, or you really don't have a lot of 

support in your party. And I question at the end of the day why 

you go against your constituents in favour of a party that isn't 

supporting you either. I mean at some point you've got to stand 

up and kind of square this in your own mind, where it's going 

for you and the people you're supposed to represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I won't go much more into the health care 

because it's obvious it's going to be raised several times in this 

upcoming session. There are so many concerns and so many 

problems that aren't getting dealt with out there. And I assure 

you that the people, even in that member's riding, do have 

somebody speaking out for them. And I'd be more than glad to 

do that on a regular basis. 

 

A few things that are of interest I think in the throne speech that 

I heard the other day on health care was the fact that there's 

some 1,400 workers going to be transferred into the health 

district boards. And this I think needs some clarification too, 

because if what we're talking about is just changing the 

employer and the people out in rural Saskatchewan — the 

nurses, the doctors, and so on  still have jobs, well then that 

can be accepted. 

But if in fact what we're talking about is moving a bunch of 

New Democrat bureaucrats from Regina out and putting them 

on the pay tabs of these health district boards that don't have 

enough money to operate the present system, well we're going 

to have revisit them. You're going to have to answer up to a lot 

of this stuff. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, like I said earlier, I don't want to give 

anything inspiring to the throne speech because it wasn't there 

before, and I don't want to try and add to it. 

 

But I did note that they made mention of the Saskatchewan 90th 

birthday, and you know when I talk to people out in some of 

these rural communities, this I think . . . This big birthday bash 

for a million bucks probably hurts them about as much as 

anything. And we got pamphlets and hand-outs where you can 

get free stuff. Well it says here, send my free balloons to . . . 

you know, addresses for free things for the birthday party, a 

million bucks, a million bucks we're spending. 

 

Well I'm telling you that I don't think that all the hungry kids in 

Saskatchewan were taken care of by a few of your 

announcements that were pretty much meaningless in the last 

couple of years. If hungry kids were real important to you in the 

last few years, I'm sure that we could have found a lot better 

way to spend a million bucks, perhaps feeding some of the 

underprivileged in the province, than giving people balloons 

and stickers and pins and having some birthday party that when 

you look at it . . . Alberta is having their 90th birthday and even 

some Scandinavian country. They're not even celebrating it, Mr. 

Speaker. Only in this province are we trying to, in an election 

year, build some hype and make it seem like there's something 

fun out there. But there's nothing fun about spending a million 

bucks unless it's for very needy things. 

 

And I would have no problem standing up in this House and 

giving the government all the credit in the world if they'd say, 

well we're going to redirect that million dollars and we're going 

to put it towards feeding the hungry. 

 

I'll tell you one thing that it's necessary to do in the very near 

future is replace — replace — the Shaunavon nursing home. 

And I'd have no problem standing up in this House and giving 

all the credit in the world to the government if they would look 

at some of these communities that really are in need of health 

care or senior care. And I'd give them all kinds of credit if they 

would redirect that money. But I would have to hear a 

commitment fairly soon before we get too many balloons and 

posters printed up, I would think. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I'll close. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it's with a great deal of 

pleasure that I rise to thank you for recognizing me and to speak 

in this new session of the twenty-second legislature. 

 

I want to begin by joining other members in welcoming new 

members who serve us here in the Legislative Assembly and 

thanking the members who have served us before for their  



February 13, 1995 

 

130 

continued good service and look forward to our joint efforts in 

making this one of the most exciting sessions in Saskatchewan's 

history. 

 

It is indeed a time to be positive in Saskatchewan and this 

throne speech sets out both a strong challenge to Saskatchewan 

and recognizes the positive achievements of the last several 

years. 

 

I want to congratulate the people of Saskatchewan for helping 

to make 1995 a come-back year. For this is the year in which we 

turn the corner on debt and deficits and begin to bring in a 

balanced budget. 

 

It is also a year in which we are going to take the same 

determination and singleness of purpose and begin to address 

the challenge of jobs. We've set it out in our economic 

development plan that we want to maintain the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada, as we've done to this point. We 

want to continue on the path that we've set, by increasing the 

number of jobs by 7,000 in the last several years, by continuing 

to focus on youth employment, to continue the roughly 1,000 

new jobs per year for youth. 

 

And I know that with the support of the Saskatchewan people 

and businessmen and all of those in Saskatchewan who've 

helped build our economy in the last number of years, that we 

will be as successful with our job strategy with their help as we 

have been in achieving our . . . wrestling the deficit to the 

ground. So again I want to thank Saskatchewan's people and 

look forward to working with them in the next challenge in 

achieving our job targets. 

 

As you've heard, 1994 was a banner year for Saskatchewan. 

Economic growth in all sectors was up. What I'm particularly 

proud of in terms of achievements in Saskatchewan is the 

achievements of our agricultural sector. Saskatchewan farmers 

have pulled off a miracle in the last couple of years because 

they've taken the changed world in which we found ourselves, 

the world introduced by challenges such as trade agreements 

which they were not particularly crazy about, and other 

international developments, and they have taken those 

challenges and changed their practices, not like everybody else, 

but at rates much exceeding those of our neighbouring 

provinces. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers have diversified at a rate double that of 

Alberta farmers and four times the rate of our neighbours to the 

east in Manitoba. I want to take my hat off to Saskatchewan 

farmers for their particular effort and their particular response 

to a new era and a new time with their energy and creativity. 

 

I want to particularly pay attention to not only the farmers in my 

constituency but other people as well, more generally, in our 

constituency. The throne speech pays tribute to the economic 

development in the Rosetown area. And I want to say that that 

tribute is as important to the area south towards Lucky Lake and 

Beechy and Kyle as it is to the north to Biggar. Because in our 

region of the province, like in other regions of  

the province, people have taken the business of economic 

development seriously and taken it on their own shoulders. 

 

I just sat down to jot down a few things about what's been 

going on in our part of the world and recognized that it's not an 

accident that our area of the province showed up in the throne 

speech for its achievements. Because beginning with one of the 

very first REDAs (regional economic development authorities), 

the Entrepreneurs 2000 — this is a rural economic development 

association which has contributed to 70-some new jobs in the 

area in the short time in which it's been in existence — it has 

stimulated economic thinking; it has resulted in a wide variety 

of new activities. 

 

Just let me name some of the things that are going on in our 

corner of the world. Ten miles from my place in a little town 

called Fiske, population 100, is a little manufacturing enterprise 

called D & R Manufacturing. They began a few years ago, 

responding to the new world, building environmental sheds for 

Sask Wheat Pool and United Grain Growers. They began 

building elevators that serve the new diversified markets so that 

you can elevate specialty crops without damaging them. They've 

begun to develop new styles of grain bin floors — a number of 

new initiatives — in a little town of 100, creating 20 to 30 new 

jobs. They're doubling the size of their enterprise this year. 

That's one little example of one little farm-based enterprise in 

one little Saskatchewan community that is a basis for this 

recovery and this turnaround in Saskatchewan. 

 

If I look to the South, we have on Lake Diefenbaker the AgPro 

Fish Farm, a wonderful new idea and a huge new future as a 

diversified venture in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the same vicinity we have a new potato project, the Sask Ida 

potatoes. With minimal help from government and a lot of local 

initiative, they're using irrigation for the purpose for which 

irrigation was intended — to make money, up to $15,000 an 

acre for the potatoes that are grown in that area. If they . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fish and chips. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — And in the same area . . . Not only fish 

and chips, as my friend from Meadow Lake says, but pork and 

beans. Because in that area there are three or four new 

significant pig barns. 

 

Only a few days ago, the Beechy Pork Farm was opened. And 

over the last couple of years several at Birsay and one at 

Macrorie and another one at Outlook, and there's one being 

planned at Plenty. And they're looking at new dried bean 

production in the area; therefore, my friend, the pork and beans. 

 

Right close to home, another direction from D & R 

Manufacturing is the Twin Towers Ski Area. It's a wonderfully 

beautiful scenic spot in The Bad Hills near my home of 

Herschel, near Stranraer, where they put . . . last year they went 

out on their own and they put in snow-making equipment and 

they are now one of the top ski areas in Saskatchewan. 

 



February 13, 1995 

 

131 

Between the quality of the snow and the quality of the 

management and the quality of the hill and the quality of the 

seniors, and beyond that the quality of the people in the area 

who are there to serve the people who visit in the best sense of 

good tourism, that ski hill is off to a wonderful success this year 

as well. 

 

And not very far north of me is the community of Biggar where 

they have their Biggar Malt plant and a number of associated 

developments, and there's an exciting announcement happening 

there this week. And to the south of me, near the Saskatchewan 

River, we have the new development of tourist facilities in 

Saskatchewan Landing Park. 

 

I can say that it's an exciting exercise to be in the legislature 

representing the people of this area who know what it is to take 

a challenge and take it seriously and pursue it with vigour and 

with energy. They are symbolic of the people of Saskatchewan 

who've helped this great turnaround -- helped us achieve this 

great turnaround which is reflected in this budget speech. 

 

There are other areas in which our area has been a leader. 

Before we got into health reform as a government, the Midwest 

Health District had begun to form. The seed of the idea of 

integrating health services was planted several years before we 

came to office. And the people in that area, the local district . . . 

the local hospital boards had gotten together to plan for a 

different kind of future because they realized there were 

advantages in integrated planning. 

 

In the same area, the Prairie Centre Credit Union was formed. It 

began as the Rosetown Credit Union, integrated with Eston and 

then with Kyle and then with others, to recognize that there was 

a unique service needed by rural people from the credit union 

movement. And rather than being urbanized, this group said, 

we're going to form the strongest rural credit union in the world. 

And so the Prairie Centre Credit Union now stands as a 

monument to the vision and the efforts of people in that area. 

 

(1500) 

 

And for the future, there are equally visionary sort of activities 

going on. There's a group of people at Milden who are looking 

at working with the Department of Health in seeing if there's 

not a better way to address eating disorders for the tragic eating 

disorders that particularly young women fall prey to. So I say 

there is . . . a great deal of credit goes to the people of our area, 

not only for their efforts in changing the economy, but their 

efforts in changing the very nature of the service that's delivered 

and improving the quality of rural life in that area. 

 

A fact which has become obvious in the '90s is that jobs and a 

healthy economy depend on a healthy environment. Mr. 

Speaker, it is with pleasure, therefore, that I can say that it was a 

banner year this year not only for the economy, but for the 

environment as well. Not only governments, but encouragingly 

industry, business, stakeholders, and individuals alike realize 

and have begun to act on the realization that we cannot separate  

the environment from the economy or from our community or 

from our spiritual well-being. 

 

Hazardous waste producers, such as Queen City Cleaners here 

in Regina, are voluntarily using environmentally friendly 

products and methods. Mr. Lube has a free used-oil collection 

program for people who change their own oil. Many 

Saskatchewan communities have hazardous household 

collection days, when common chemicals such as solvents, 

cleaners, and paints can be dropped off and properly disposed 

of or reused. 

 

On the way in this morning, I stopped at the Rosetown Co-op to 

tank up my car, and proudly one of the members of the board 

and the manager of the co-op were there, and they showed me 

their newly renovated chemical storage facility. They are 

responding to the changed needs of a changed age. Businesses 

and consumers alike know that good practice and good 

management is better than the difficulties associated with clean-

ups and the risks to health and safety of careless management. 

 

Recovery and recycling businesses inject millions of dollars 

into the provincial economy, provide hundreds of jobs and 

greatly extend the life of landfills by removing thousands of 

tonnes of materials from the waste stream each year. 

 

Businesses such as Ecol Laser products in Saskatoon, and 

Uptime laser products in Regina remanufacture used laser 

printer cartridges. SaskTel, in partnership with SARCAN 

recycling, operates a telephone directory recycling program. 

Our largest recycler, Interprovincial steel mill, on an annual 

basis uses approximately 135,000 tonnes of recyclable steel 

from within the province. 

 

My department is finding that more and more developers are 

considering the impact of their actions on the environment. 

They are coming to SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management), looking for help in identifying 

environmentally friendly and sustainable options, rather than as 

an afterthought or because people in my department require 

environmental impact statements. 

 

These are just a few examples of the fast-growing awareness 

and positive actions that people of Saskatchewan have taken to 

protect the environment and the resources of our wonderful 

province. The opportunities environmental businesses offer will 

continue to expand and diversify our economy and continue to 

be a basis for new jobs for the future. 

 

One of the early steps we took as a government was positioning 

ourselves to fulfil our sustainable development objective by 

restructuring our efforts through a new Department of 

Environment and Resource Management with a new focus. 

Many initiatives and opportunities flow to Saskatchewan people 

from our natural resources. Eco-tourism is expected to be one 

of the major growth areas in the tourism industry. We are well 

positioned to take advantage of this opportunity. Saskatchewan 

has some of the greatest unspoiled areas in the  



February 13, 1995 

 

132 

world, from the prairie regions of the South to the forests of the 

North and everywhere in between. 

 

Yesterday I had the privilege of sitting in on a presentation in 

our little school in Herschel, Saskatchewan, by George Tosh. 

George is a true Saskatchewan citizen; farmed in the Harris area 

all of his professional life, took time to enjoy nature, to take 

pictures, to appreciate the creation which we are privileged to 

be a part of. 

 

Last night he showed a presentation to about 70 people in that 

school, which took away the breath of most of those of us who 

had the privilege of being there. He demonstrated the beauty of 

the simple . . . the simple beauty of the prairie landscape, of the 

hills and the bad hills and the bare hills area in which we live 

and which my farm is located. He demonstrated the beauty of 

the changing seasons, taking pictures in identical spots at 

different seasons, and helped us all appreciate that much of the 

world's finest nature is right under our eyes, if we will only 

open our eyes. I can tell you that this is an example of the kind 

of thing that the world has not enough of and that opens the 

door for eco-tourism activities there and in every other corner 

of our province. 

 

As a province we are also well-positioned to fulfil our mandate 

of environmental protection and sustainable resource 

development because of the contributions of the public, because 

of the partnerships we have formed in the province, and 

because we have harmonized our activities with other 

governments. 

 

One of the best examples of this cooperative planning is the 

regionalized approach to handling waste. In cooperation with 

16 municipalities from the Humboldt-Watson area, we have 

begun to develop a regional waste management strategy. 

Together we are deciding how best to manage our waste. As 

well, the western provinces and two territories are negotiating a 

hazardous protocol agreement to seek cost effective, sensible 

solutions in hazardous waste or waste management. 

 

Today I introduced for first reading a Bill to amend The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act legislation to 

establish a province-wide collection system for used oil, 

containers, and filters. This program will be developed in 

consultation with key stakeholders to ensure that industry 

stewardship and support and to recognize and give opportunity 

to the industries who have encouraged us to carry this program 

forward. 

 

The new used-oil management program will provide for the 

collection of up to 37 million litres of used oil — a valuable, 

non-renewable resource that is currently being lost. It will 

create direct employment in the collection system. It will 

encourage the development of recycling and . . . (inaudible) . . . 

businesses new to Saskatchewan, and most importantly, it will 

reduce the risk that this hazardous substance currently poses in 

our environment through improper disposal. 

 

I want to pay tribute to all of those who laboured cooperatively  

in bringing forward this stewardship model which is the way of 

the future. Virtually every Saskatchewan interest was 

represented at the last meeting when they encouraged me to 

implement their proposal, including representatives from the 

consumers' association and the environmental community. 

 

Ministers of Environment across Canada are working to 

eliminate duplication and overlap in environmental legislation 

and regulations by negotiating a new agreement on an 

environmental management framework agreement. This 

initiative is an important component of the Canada-

Saskatchewan Efficiency of the Federation Agreement which 

was agreed to by our first ministers only a few months ago. 

 

The goal is to ensure a consistently high level of environmental 

protection across the country while at the same time minimizing 

the cost burden on consumers, industry, business, and 

municipalities for regulatory compliance. 

 

Saskatchewan businesses and communities will benefit from a 

more streamlined and predictable environmental management 

and regulatory regime. We will be consulting on the new 

agreement before it is finalized later this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government embarked on a new road of fiscal 

responsibility when it came to office. We also embarked on a 

new road for public involvement and cooperation in the 

development of our policies, regulations, and management 

strategies. Historically governments, industry, and the public 

have viewed the environment as a source of raw materials and 

as a receptacle for waste products. We treated the environment 

as a free economic commodity. As a result, past policies and 

programs often did not recognize the linkages between 

economic activities, environmental conditions, and quality of 

life considerations. 

 

In the past, governments addressed environmental problems 

sectorally without understanding the interrelationship between 

sectors. Our efforts concentrated on measuring and restricting 

pollutants, which only succeeded in minimizing certain specific 

undesirable effects, not considering the health of the whole 

ecosystem. 

 

This old approach, however, is reactive and unilateral. It fails to 

anticipate and prevent environmental damage or to recognize 

the connection between environmental resource protection, a 

healthy economy, and quality of life. 

 

It also fails to develop consensus among stakeholders. Clearly 

we needed new, proactive, flexible, and innovative approaches 

for managing the environment and its resources, as we did for 

managing the fiscal problems that the province had inherited 

from the previous administration. 

 

Saskatchewan is well positioned to meet these challenges. We 

have created a new organization whose guiding principle is 

sustainable development. Its mandate is sustainable 

development. It isn't a narrow focus on a particular element of 

the ecosystem; it's an integration of all elements, including  



February 13, 1995 

 

133 

human activity. It views the ecosystem as one all-important, 

inseparable whole. 

 

We are reinventing the role for government and developing new 

ways of doing business — public involvement, integrated 

approaches to planning and decision making, and partnerships. 

Our focus is on public involvement, client service, ecosystem 

management, consensus decision making, sound planning, and 

sensible regulation. This integrated approach recognizes that it 

is not possible to have a healthy economy or society in the long 

term without a healthy environment achieved by common 

understanding, common belief, and common action. 

 

The government believes that long-term cooperative planning is 

required to truly effect change. In 1992 the Round Table on 

Environment and the Economy completed its Conservation 

Strategy for Sustainable Development in Saskatchewan. 

Building on this excellent strategy, we have developed an 

environmental agenda for the province, Saskatchewan's 

environmental agenda, securing a sustainable future. 

 

This strategy incorporates the round table's recommendations 

and identifies how they fit not only with each other, but also 

with the other major policy initiatives of our government, 

including the ag strategy, our health strategy, and our economic 

development strategy. 

 

The environmental agenda is a comprehensive strategy for 

coordinating and directing the government's initiatives in 

environmental protection and resource management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed with a clean environment 

and rich natural resources. Our government is taking the 

leadership role in ensuring that we pass this blessing on to 

future generations. A sustainable lifestyle founded on the 

principles of sustainable development. 

 

In the coming year, Saskatchewan will continue this leadership 

role. Fishing in Saskatchewan is a small but important industry. 

The commercial fishery provides employment and jobs, 

recreational fishing is a major contributor to Saskatchewan 

parks and tourism activity, and the fledgling fish farming 

industry has great potential for future investment, as I was so 

proud to note about the development in my own area earlier in 

this speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is on the leading edge of provincial 

efforts to establish authority for the management of our own 

important fisheries resources. Saskatchewan Fisheries Act 

passed in 1994 represents the first comprehensive provincial 

fisheries legislation in Canada. Our new fisheries Act, 

developed through widespread stakeholder consultations, will 

come into effect this year as regulations are adopted by cabinet 

and existing federal fisheries regulations are withdrawn or 

amended. 

 

Direct provincial regulation of our fisheries will make our 

future fisheries management more responsive to the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

A significant contributor to Saskatchewan's economic health is 

our forest industry. It is a major initiative which in the South 

often goes unnoticed. Our forests are extremely important to all 

Saskatchewan people, and therefore in this session of the 

legislature, we are proposing a new forest resource management 

Act, and beginning the implementation of the integrated forest 

resource management plan. 

 

Our current forest legislation is almost 30 years old and it 

reflects the thinking of that time so long ago. We have come to 

realize that our economy and lifestyle must be in balance with 

the natural resources sustaining life. The challenge is to apply 

the principle of sustainable development to the management of 

Saskatchewan's forest resource. 

 

During the past three years, the government has held extensive 

public meetings and workshops to ask the people of 

Saskatchewan how their forests could be better managed; and 

out of this process, a common vision has emerged. 

 

Our forests will be maintained in a healthy state and the natural 

variety of life will be conserved. We will balance the need for 

protection with the opportunities for use, and resources will be 

harvested no faster than they can be renewed. Such use will 

contribute to the prosperity of Saskatchewan residents into 

perpetuity. An informed public will take an active role in 

planning. A spirit of cooperation and creativity will prevail as 

we seek to find solutions to our common problems. 

 

This vision represents a fundamental shift in how we view the 

forest and make decisions about its use. Forests must be viewed 

and understood as ecosystems performing a variety of 

interrelated functions. These functions can only be sustained by 

protecting ecosystem integrity and quality. The process for 

making land use decisions must be shared with all parties that 

have a stake in the outcome. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Forestry Association has recognized 

Meadow Lake as the National Forestry Capital of Canada for 

1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — This award reflects our progress as a 

province towards the objectives we've stated and it will help to 

improve the awareness of the importance of this resource 

throughout the province. 

 

Over half of Saskatchewan, about 35.5 million hectares, is 

forested — not much around Morse unfortunately. The 

management of about 97 per cent of this land is a provincial 

responsibility, with federal and private lands making up the rest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our forests contribute to our quality of life in 

many ways. They provide habitat for wildlife. They help to 

regulate water cycling, affecting local climate. Forests take up  



February 13, 1995 

 

134 

carbon dioxide and produce oxygen, helping to mitigate the 

greenhouse effect that we've become so concerned about in the 

last number of years, and they help to prevent soil erosion. 

 

In addition forests provide us with social and cultural benefits, 

whether the special spiritual relationship maintained by 

aboriginal peoples or simply a quiet place to think and reflect. 

 

Forests are critical to Saskatchewan's economy. Approximately 

8,000 jobs depend on the forestry industry, which contributes 

$635 million to the provincial economy annually. 

 

Other forest-based activities such as recreation, fishing, 

trapping, hunting, private wood lots, valued added industry, and 

related equipment manufacturing also provide additional social 

and economic benefits. This year we'll see a number of exciting 

new forest product developments in Saskatchewan. These new 

industries will provide hundreds of new jobs within the 

framework of sustainable forest management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 

the sustainable management of our forest resources. This means 

that we will balance the use of forests for various economic, 

social, and cultural purposes with the need to protect the long-

term health of forest ecosystems. This commitment is reflected 

in eight strategic directions for forest management. 

 

The first and overriding one is stewardship. Stewardship is the 

care and safeguarding of our forest resources. Our forests will 

be managed in such a way as to maintain over time the natural 

quality of the physical environment: air, soil, and water, and the 

natural variety of living species and — needless to say — the 

beauty associated with this wonderful resource. A systematic 

approach will be used to identify forest areas requiring 

protection for various conservation purposes: recreation, 

cultural heritage, rare or endangered species, and biodiversity. 

 

A second principle is sustainability. Timber harvesting will be 

carried out using techniques sensitive to the long-term 

sustainability of the forests. Reforestation will continue to be a 

priority. Harvesting methods, ranging from selective to clear-

cutting. Where clear-cutting is practised, the size and shape of 

harvesting areas will be compatible with renewal requirements 

and ecosystem requirements. 

 

Other uses of forest resources will also be guided by the 

principle of sustainability. Forest resources will be shared 

amongst all users. We've often seen the forests as trees. As the 

common adage goes, you can't see the forest for the trees. The 

fact is that the forest is a whole ecosystem and there are 

multiple living systems within it. 

 

Economic growth and diversification will be encouraged in 

relation to available resources and local support, but not to the 

exclusion or elimination of the other benefits growing from the 

forest. User fees will be set to reflect the value of the resources, 

the benefits received by resource users, and the cost of 

managing and administering the resources. 

 

Another principle is environmental protection. Forest use and 

related activities — harvesting, transporting, manufacturing — 

will be carried out in ways that maintain environmentally 

acceptable standards for air, land, and water quality. Through 

the environmental impact assessment process, environmental 

implications of proposed forest developments will be 

considered fully before approvals are given. Regulations will 

ensure that environmentally acceptable standards are met. 

 

Another principle is public involvement. As I've already said, 

we have reinvented government with respect to the principle 

that the public needs to participate in all decisions of 

government. 

 

The public has the right to participate in forest management. 

We have a need as a government that the public participates in 

forest management. The benefits of an effective public 

involvement process are many. Input from all interested parties 

means better decisions, with consideration of the whole 

resource before decisions are made. Conflicts can be resolved at 

the initial stages before decisions are made, and individuals will 

be more willing to support management activities and to help in 

their implementation when they have been part of designing 

them. 

 

Consistent, quality public involvement opportunities will be 

provided for all Saskatchewan residents, including forest 

dependent communities, stakeholders, and of course our 

aboriginal peoples. 

 

Aboriginal participation  the participation of aboriginal 

peoples and jurisdictions are very important to the work we do. 

Aboriginal peoples have cultural ties to the land. We will 

respect these ties, consulting the people affected as forest 

management activities are planned and implemented. 

 

Co-management with northern people has been a guiding tenet 

of our government. We will continue to encourage active co-

planning and joint involvement of aboriginal peoples and other 

northern peoples in our forest resource industry, promoting 

economic opportunities which are in harmony with their 

traditions and beliefs. Work with aboriginal groups will 

continue in many areas, including forest fire management, 

technical and management training, and business development. 

 

Another principle is the sustainable management on private 

lands. There are 400,000 hectares of privately owned forest 

lands in Saskatchewan, the majority in the agricultural fringe 

area. We will encourage sustainable management of natural 

resources on private lands. Private landowner agreements and 

landowner assistance programs are two ways to accomplish 

this. 

 

Another principle is the improved decision making and 

information management. The ongoing development and 

refinement of scientific knowledge, expertise, and management 

tools are fundamental to achieving our goal of wise forest 

management. We will continue to explore many new ideas and 

techniques, including integrated planning, ecosystem  



February 13, 1995 

 

135 

management, inventory and forestry monitoring, forestry 

research, and public education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, delivery of the forest resource management plan is 

a long-term process. However many actions can and are now 

being implemented to improve our forest resources 

management. Our challenge is to apply the principle of 

sustainable development to the management of Saskatchewan's 

forests, to explore the many opportunities our forests offer us, 

while respecting the whole ecosystem. 

 

The proposed new forest resource management Act will provide 

the legislative framework to help us meet this challenge. New 

forest management licence agreements, the major tool used to 

allocate forest resources, will be negotiated based upon these 

new policy objectives. A new policy planning framework is 

being developed which will incorporate resource management 

and land administration activity with forest management licence 

agreement planning. 

 

A protected area system plan is being completed that will 

identify areas within the forest to be set aside for conservation 

purposes. A forest renewal strategy is being developed to 

ensure that adequate forest regeneration is occurring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the past two years Saskatchewan has been 

developing an ecological land classification system. I am proud 

to have released to the public our new eco-regions map. 

Representatives of other agencies — Environment Canada, 

Agriculture, Agri-Food Canada — were involved with us in the 

development of a new, national, ecological land classification 

system. 

 

Ecological land classification is a means of identifying and 

classifying ecologically distinctive areas of the earth's surface. 

As you, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure know, several years ago in Rio 

we agreed on a biodiversity strategy which suggested we should 

set aside 12 per cent of the earth's surface in representative form 

to make sure that the living systems which have been a part of 

our being continue to be there for the future. 

 

This land classification system is the first step in setting aside 

the areas in Saskatchewan which are important to ecosystem 

maintenance. This type of classification can have numerous 

applications and is well suited to structure information with 

regard to components of the environment. This work in 

Saskatchewan not only contributed to making a stronger 

national program, but also ensured that the provincial system is 

compatible with the national system. 

 

As well as the above agencies, other Saskatchewan agencies 

and departments — the University of Saskatchewan and Regina 

and the Saskatchewan Conservation Data Centre — participated 

in this work. 

 

The ecological land classification project is now complete and a 

standing testimony to the results of good cooperative planning, 

where all resources are pulled together to make for 

Saskatchewan a better program and to make for Saskatchewan a  

provincial poster map outlining Saskatchewan's eco-regions. 

Initiatives are continuing to build on the progress achieved by 

this successful joint venture. The Saskatchewan land 

classification system will provide an invaluable tool for 

systematic state of the environment reporting, developing an 

ecological planning framework, and for long-term ecological 

monitoring. 

 

As previously noted, an ecosystems approach needs to be used 

for true sustainable management of our forest and other 

resources. The eco-regions of Saskatchewan will provide the 

basis for this approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that Environment and 

Resource Management has, since its inception two years ago, 

accepted the challenges of integrating its dual responsibilities of 

resource management with environmental protection. I am 

proud as a member of a new government with this important 

new initiative. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, as a province we have once again 

entered a time of hope and opportunity — the hope and 

opportunity indicated in the Speech from the Throne. This is 

true of our financial picture and our economic outlook, and this 

is true of our environmental future as we enter this session. 

 

I thank you for your work and your attention, and wish 

Saskatchewan people all the best as they continue to work with 

us in achieving the hope that we all have for a successful 

Saskatchewan economy. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to rise in the Assembly 

and speak in the throne speech debate. This is the first 

opportunity I've had to rise to my feet this session. 

 

Some things never change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe this is 

the fourth time we've had a throne speech delivered by this New 

Democratic Party government over here and it's always the 

same old story: a lot of wishful thinking and then when one 

looks at the facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they're never quite up to 

the mark. And we haven't been disappointed this year. 

 

In fact, when one thinks back to 1991 and some of the promises 

made by the now Premier, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, we're reminded of a whole lot of promises that were 

made for this province — promises that I don't think have been 

kept, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and promises that purposely weren't 

kept because it would have interfered with the political agenda 

of that particular political party. 

 

We've had this government come forward and tell the public 

that everything's going to be fine because we have achieved a 

balanced budget in the province of Saskatchewan. And that is 

all well and good, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But one has to ask 

yourself: at what cost did we achieve the balanced budget in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and could we have balanced that  



February 13, 1995 

 

136 

budget in a way that would've made this province continue to 

grow and prosper, instead of falling behind nearly everyone else 

in Canada? 

 

And I hearken back to those words of the now Premier in 1991 

where he stood on platform after platform in this province and 

was on the media all the time, talking about how if he were only 

Premier, this province could be run on $4.5 billion. But that 

was enough. The government simply didn't need any more 

money than $4.5 billion. They would simply open up the books, 

they would change some accountability things, and the rest 

would all fall into place. 

 

And this was all at the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as other 

members of that particular political party which he led, were 

running around telling people that we had to make this province 

ungovernable so that we could have the New Democrats 

elected, and then everything would be fine. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that figure of 4.5 billion on a yearly 

basis, has never, never been approached by this government. In 

fact today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that figure well over $5 

billion. We see three and a half billion more on the provincial 

debt than when this particular government came to office. 

 

(1530) 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in tandem with that, we've seen 

something else which really causes concern today for families 

in this province. We see young people continuing to leave the 

province at an alarming rate  the brightest, the best educated 

 but we see the number of people who require government 

assistance continuing to grow. We see over 30,000 more 

Saskatchewan citizens today on social assistance than we saw 

when the member from Riversdale was sworn into office. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see, if you take the 

government at the best figures that they can possibly wring out 

of the statistics, we still see over a thousand people less 

employed today than we saw in a corresponding time in 1991. 

 

So when you consider all of the promises made, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, all of the promises made, all the accusations that were 

made, all of the proposed clean-up changes that would occur, 

when you stack that up against reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

say that we have a throne speech delivered this year, in 1995, 

which is a throne speech of duplicity. 

 

Because we are going into the fourth year of this government. 

We are coming to a time  and we'll soon see if the Premier 

keeps his promise of elections every four years or if he gets the 

urge to go a little quicker because he can feel it slipping  this 

is the time when you should measure the promises made four 

years ago and stack it up against the reality of today. And there's 

a lot of people around this province doing that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. A lot of them are looking at the reality of today against 

the promises made by this government four years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would have thought this party and 

this government would have had the courage of their 

convictions to make that comparison themselves, but they 

haven't done that. They simply deliver a throne speech that once 

again is full of innocuous presentations. They talk about 

balanced budgets over the four years of a term. They talk about 

new job strategies. They talk about, the Premier talks about, 

30,000 new jobs by the year 2000. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's fairly safe stuff — just like, I 

believe, back in 1991 when he was running around this 

province making those promises that he made. He felt it was 

pretty safe stuff because he didn't intend on living up to any one 

of them at any near date in the future. 

 

You know I sat in the Assembly last week when that speech 

was delivered, and I had to see the smiles on the faces of 

everybody when the Meadow Lake pulp mill came up and about 

Meadow Lake being the forestry capital of Canada in the 

coming year. And I think that's just tremendous for Meadow 

Lake, but for this Premier and this government to claim any sort 

of credit as to why that's occurred is laughable. And I saw the 

smiles and the nods on people all over this Assembly when that 

one came by, because everyone knows and understands who 

had the courage to ask Millar Western to come and be part of 

the forestry industry in this province. 

 

And now the results are that Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan, is 

going to be the forestry capital of Canada for this year. And that 

I think is a positive thing. But for these people to put this in 

their throne speech and take up a bunch of space and time and 

claim it for their own is unmitigated gall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

unmitigated gall. And I looked over at the government benches, 

and they were even sort of hanging their heads and grinning 

when this thing was put in there because they knew that there 

wasn't one sane person in this province would believe a word of 

what they said. 

 

You know I expect next year, if these people haven't called an 

election by then or if we've gone through one . . . will be 

claiming that the fertilizer plant down the highway here will 

make Belle Plaine, Saskatchewan, the fertilizer capital of North 

America. And it very well might because I'm told it is the best, 

most efficient, most productive nitrogen fertilizer plant in North 

America. And they'll be claiming that somehow this was all 

their idea and that we're now the fertilizer capital. 

 

The fertilizer that goes with those kind of remarks, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, has another name attached to it and it's one that we're 

not allowed to use in this Assembly. But it's the kind of 

fertilizer that this government has been throwing out for a long 

time. Because when you look at their record of what they've 

actually created, I can see why they would like to glom onto 

someone else's ideas in order to have something. 

 

I was looking in the paper here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

the Leader-Post and there was an article in there, I believe, by 

Dale Eisler talking to some businessmen in the city of Swift 

Current. And he's very emphatic about what this government  



February 13, 1995 

 

137 

has created. And I think that's the rub. I would just quote the 

headline here, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it says: "PST hurting 

merchants." 

 

Well what's going on in Swift Current and what's going on all 

over this province is the fact that because of taxation, because 

of the use of the Crown corporations to gouge, we see business 

and people fleeing to the province of Alberta in unprecedented 

numbers. And when this individual that's quoted in the paper 

went to see his MLA, he found a locked door and he found no 

explanation of why this was occurring to his business and why 

this was occurring to his community. 

 

And I would have thought the government, if they were at all 

serious about correcting some of those problems, would have 

said in the throne speech, as we're going into this election year, 

we have some definitive answers for the individual quoted in 

the Leader-Post, Mr. Kushner, and we have some definitive 

answers for the 80-some thousand on social assistance, and we 

have some definitive answers for Saskatchewan people about 

why we would project for the third year in a row to create a 

whole bunch of jobs that they probably won't make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier, the now Premier, had been kept at 

his word, you would have seen a different approach. If he had 

indeed run the Government of Saskatchewan on $4.5 billion, he 

would have done what the Premier of Alberta next door is 

actually doing. In other words, he would have cut the spending 

of the Government of Saskatchewan by 10 to 15 per cent. 

 

And the Premier evidently when he's in private with the Premier 

of Alberta likes to brag about the fact that he's not really a New 

Democrat, that he's something else, and that he likes what he 

sees in jurisdictions that are keeping government spending 

under wraps rather than taxing — taxing us to death. 

 

So it's the same old story as we saw in '91, Mr. Speaker. It's say 

one thing and do another. Say one thing and do another, 

depending on the audience that we've got, and the results are 

very obvious. You know it's just unconscionable, Mr. Speaker, 

that you would take Crown corporations like SaskEnergy, and 

SaskTel, SaskPower, and you would just absolutely milk the 

Saskatchewan public for everything that those Crowns could 

possibly get away with, and then say that  look at the great 

job we've done. Folks, we've balanced the budget. We've 

balanced the budget, we've driven people out of the province, 

we've got all sorts on welfare, we have taxation like we've never 

had taxation, and then we wonder why this province is going 

nowhere fast. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that poll that was done on television 

by the Reform Party identifying taxation and the effects that it 

has on the economy, I believe was right on. I do believe that it 

is now the single largest issue facing Canadians and how we 

govern ourselves. 

 

And if this throne speech is the blueprint for how we address 

the question of taxation and cutting the size of government, of 

having government live within the means that we as taxpayers  

provide to it, then this throne speech is as dismal a failure as the 

promises made by the member from Riversdale back in 1991. 

 

Because nowhere, nowhere in this document do we see that 

question of taxation addressed. We have highfalutin sentences 

in here talking about how well agriculture is doing. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as if any one of them — and I don't believe any of 

them do — have the courage to stand up and tell me how net 

farm income was influenced one iota by the New Democratic 

Party government of this province. If anything, these people 

probably kept net farm income from rising even faster because 

of the way that farmers in this province were discriminated 

against compared to Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

But we see it in the throne speech. And there isn't a darn thing 

that this government has got to do with it. The same with the oil 

and gas industry — not a thing that they've got to do with it. 

The same royalty structure is basically in place as they have 

been for the last 12 years, 13 years. And those people are out 

there drilling holes and they are producing lots of royalties in 

natural gas, oil being found in record quantities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the primary question that Saskatchewan 

people ask about taxation and how that taxation question is 

going to be addressed is not answered by how well the oil 

industry or agriculture is doing all on their own because this 

government has nothing to do with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about educational programs as they have done for the 

last three years. And I guess if they were working, the welfare 

numbers would be coming down and the job numbers would 

have been better than they were four years ago. 

 

But that isn't the case. That isn't the case. What we have is 

strategies, consultation, and nothing concrete, Mr. Speaker, for 

the businessman in Swift Current or Kindersley or Lloydminster 

or anywhere else who has to compete with outside forces to 

hang his hat on — to hang his hat on. 

 

And I guess we can only hope, Mr. Speaker, is that when the 

budget rolls around, when the budget rolls around, that there 

will be something concrete in there. There will be. That we 

simply will not be subjected to more of the same, Mr. Speaker, 

and that this government will get on with the primary duty the 

government should have in the 1990s, and that is cutting itself. 

The government has to look at delivering goods and services at 

a lower cost to the taxpayer, and that means government must 

cut back on its size, it must cut back on its expenditure, because 

that is the only way that the question of taxation will be 

addressed. 

 

And maybe in that budget, Mr. Speaker, the government will 

find the courage to do things which taxpayers have been 

demanding for a long time. For instance, on the Crown side, 

that the legislation introduced in this House the last two years 

by the official opposition to put a committee of this House in 

charge of utility rate increases before they happen so that the 

people of this province can be assured that it isn't back-door 

taxation will be adopted. 



February 13, 1995 

 

138 

And you know that would be an easy budget measure to take, 

Mr. Speaker, because there would be no cost to the taxpayer, 

because you already pay the members of this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

But those issues, Mr. Speaker, should be delved into and 

debated in this House. We can't have the Minister of Energy 

running out and hitting us with a 9.5 per cent tax increase 

before Christmas and the next minister responsible coming in 

and chopping it back to 6.5 and not telling us, Mr. Speaker, as 

home-owners and taxpayers, why the difference between 9.5 

and 6.5, what the justification was for the increase in the first 

place, and what the justification was for the decrease in the 

second place, and what is the actual cost to SaskEnergy, of 

natural gas. 

 

(1545) 

 

And unlike the former minister from The Battlefords, who 

claims that we're all too stupid to rationalize out the process, 

Mr. Speaker, I think if members of this Assembly were given 

the opportunity, they would understand it quite easily because 

the purchases of natural gas are long-term contracts, mid-term 

contracts, short-term, and spot. And you know what? There's a 

transmission cost that goes along with it, Mr. Speaker, to put it 

through the pipeline. And I think most members of this House 

would catch on to that process fairly quickly. 

 

And it would be fairly easy to determine, Mr. Speaker, if an 

increase was warranted because there was capital expenditures 

to be made by SaskEnergy or there were problems that they saw 

arising in gas markets that they needed to step forward and 

rectify by adjusting the amount of long-term versus short-term 

that they might buy over the next 12-month period. 

 

And you know something, Mr. Speaker? The Provincial Auditor 

thinks that we're smart enough to talk about that. He said in the 

last couple of years, he thinks that members of the Legislative 

Assembly are smart enough to sort of gauge those questions and 

decide whether there should be those types of rate increases. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, right now they aren't rate increases, 

they're taxation, because we don't know. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Speaker, in this upcoming budget they 

would like to look at a number of the reform initiatives put 

forward in this House last year, put forward again by the 

member from Kindersley, the Leader of the Opposition, because 

they would be cheap, they would be doable, and they would 

bring to this House the type of fiscal accountability, Mr. 

Speaker, that would allow the Premier of this province to finally 

live up to his promise of 1991 — for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to live within a budget of $4.5 billion. 

 

And I think that should be the role of all MLAs here, regardless 

of party, to represent their constituents and to help the member 

from Riversdale keep his promise of 1991 — that the 

Government of Saskatchewan should be able to live within a 

budget of $4.5 billion. 

 

And I can say to the government members that we would do 

everything possible to cooperate, and have done, by bringing in 

an entire legislative package. Not simply standing and 

criticizing, but bringing in an entire legislative package to help 

the Premier keep his promise. And I'm amazed at the reluctance 

and the resistance that we get from government members to 

help their Premier keep his promises to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Evidently the only message I can gather from it, Mr. Speaker, is 

they believe a promise made is not a promise that should be 

kept because in the interests of their political hides they would 

rather tax the people, put them on welfare, drive them out of the 

province, and simply ignore the fact that in other jurisdictions 

in this country that the same balanced budgets are being 

achieved without the rack and ruin displayed by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I say that this is a throne speech of duplicity, I think it 

is very easy for us to understand that it is one of duplicity, and it 

is one of a lack courage. Because I look next door and I see the 

Government of Alberta creating in one year as many jobs as this 

Premier says will be created in this province by the year 2000 

— in one year. Because they had the courage to take on the 

issue of taxation and take on the issue of the size of 

government, they have created 30,000 jobs in that province 

through the private sector, and this Premier says we might 

create 30,000 jobs by the year 2000. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the contrast is there for everyone to see. 

And if the Premier in private can tell the Premier of Alberta that 

he admires what he's doing and he's not a New Democrat 

anyway, why don't we just get on doing what everyone in this 

province would like to see him do, and that is live up to those 

commitments made in 1991 in October, live within that figure 

of 4.5 billion, and get on with creating the wealth and the jobs 

in this province that we know can be created if the government 

of this province will simply get off the taxpayers' back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we'll have to give them until budget day to see if 

there's any more beef in the bun than we've seen so far. I doubt 

it. But so far, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is empty and 

hollow. It's up to the government to keep the Premier's promises 

of 1991. 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Oh thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to take 

part in this throne speech debate although I admit so far the 

debate has been slightly one-sided. But then the member from 

Saltcoats and Bengough-Milestone have a lot of statistics to 

work with and after all we have the good news of what our 

government has been able to accomplish. I want to say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that I'm proud to be part of this government 

because we've worked as a team, guided by our principles and 

values to accomplish what we have. 

 

We've had the courage in the face of adversity to stand together 

and work for the people of Saskatchewan, and that's what they 

expect when they elect us. Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to see you in 

your place again, just as I'm sure you're happy to see me. 

 



February 13, 1995 

 

139 

You will understand that I am an enthusiastic supporter of the 

government and its achievements and sometimes I get a bit 

carried away, but I will try to curb my enthusiasm without 

changing my character -- a tough act, but I'll try. I also want to 

congratulate a couple of my colleagues. 

 

First, to the new Leader of the Opposition, I offer my 

congratulations. You have taken on a tough job, not an 

impossible one. As we know in this business, anything is 

possible. That's why the member from Rosthern has a secret 

stash of leadership pamphlets under his desk. But assuming the 

leadership of the Tory party at this time is a bit like a 

description of a character I read in a mystery novel: "He was 

hanging on to the edge of the planet with suction cups." But I 

do wish the Leader of the Opposition good luck. 

 

I want to join practically all the MLAs in wishing the best to the 

members from Regina Hillsdale and Swift Current. We have all 

admired the skill and professionalism and humanity with which 

they both manage their portfolios and we're going to miss you 

greatly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse, I was proud to hear pay 

tribute to these two retiring ministers by praising their efforts 

while stating, of course, he often disagreed with them. That 

statement was decent, measured and fair, what we should 

expect from all members when one of us steps down. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting though, that in his first 

question period the Leader of the Opposition from Kindersley 

returned to the song of Tory leaders of long ago. I wish they'd 

get on a different tune. Do it like in Alberta, he said. Imitate the 

Klein government, he urged us. Balance the books the way 

Klein is supposedly doing it, he cried. In a phrase, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition, no thank you. 

 

There are a couple of points to make about the suggestion. First, 

let's remind ourselves of the opposition leader's wants, what he 

wants for this province. If he is asking us to go along with what 

Mr. Klein is doing, let me tell you that my constituency borders 

on the Alberta side, and I know what I'm talking about. 

 

First, for our young parents with children just starting, he wants 

to savagely cut the school system, with all control taken away 

from local boards and placed in the hands of government. Not 

only that, it's a school system that is quickly deteriorating into a 

two-tiered school system — something what we do not want in 

Saskatchewan. He wants a pay-as-you-go kindergarten system. 

You can't pay; your kid doesn't get the start every child in 

Canada deserves. 

 

And health care, the member from Kindersley wants, number 

one, a system where job after job is lost. Over 5,000 jobs were 

lost in the first year of Klein care alone. Here's the one no Tory 

ever mentions. The opposition leader wants Saskatchewan 

people to pay $864 a year per family for health care premiums. 

And that's a 20 per cent increase over last year's premium. What 

compassion. He wants — like Klein has suggested — income  

tax on health services. Finally and despicably, he wants a two-

tiered health system — private clinics for the rich, a flea market 

medicine for the rest of the people in Alberta. 

 

We can go on, Mr. Speaker. I could compare auto insurance 

rates and so on. In fact, when the Leader of the Third Party and 

the Leader of the Opposition speak about increased taxes, they 

don't speak about the whole bill and how much it costs to live 

in each of the provinces. Let's take a comparison of how much 

it costs to live, if you're earning $45,000, in Saskatchewan 

versus Alberta versus B.C. versus Ontario versus New 

Brunswick and Nova Scotia. We fare very, very, very well in 

Saskatchewan. It's all right to take one statistic, camp on it, and 

turn it around to your advantage. Ask people who have lived in 

Alberta and B.C. and Manitoba. We fare very favourably. Yes, 

our income tax is high, but other things we do not have. We 

don't have a health premium. Our auto insurance is the lowest 

in Canada. These are the kind of things that you have to 

compare. You just don't take one part of something. You take 

the whole package because that's what it costs a person to live. 

 

I think I've made my points. We could operate like the 

government in Alberta acts, if we were only interested in the 

bottom line. 

 

What we are interested in besides the bottom line is having a 

society that cares, that works together, and through 

cooperatively, builds a society so every citizen in it has equal 

opportunity. 

 

The measure of a society is only as . . . when you measure a 

society, you must measure from the lowest part of your society 

to the highest. I mean it's okay to say 5 per cent of them are 

earning such and such. What about taking the lowest part of the 

society where you live? 

 

In Saskatchewan we decided from the beginning that we would 

restore financial integrity without sacrificing our sense of 

human decency and our responsibility to the less fortunate in 

our society. In fact our Minister of Social Services over there is 

the only minister in Canada who has increased his budget every 

year, and I'm proud of that. 

 

Klein's way is not our way. Saskatchewan is a . . . I mean 

Alberta is a lovely province with many advantages and fine 

people, nice mountains too, but the member from Kindersley 

should not be too hasty in supporting the Klein revolution. He 

should check with some of those people with one-way tickets 

out of Alberta about how rosy it really is under the government 

that he admires so much. 

 

We can agree to disagree on how best to conduct the affairs of 

the province, but the Leader of the Opposition's love of Klein 

reminds us somewhat of what has motivated the Tory and 

Liberal parties here and elsewhere. 

 

The motivation is the desire to divide people and turn person 

against person, class against class, province against province, 

pit city against country, farmer against worker, professional  



February 13, 1995 

 

140 

against service worker, north against south, any group against 

any other group. And I have to say this week I have seen some 

incredible racism cropping up. 

 

And if the Klein government is not creating a two-tiered system 

with its so-called reforms, please tell me what it's creating. And 

we will watch closely the Liberals in Ottawa and see how their 

so-called reforms shape up. 

 

As I said, we will not bring this attitude to Saskatchewan. As I 

said when I was honoured to move the throne speech of two 

years ago, we believe in inclusion, not exclusion. I'm going to 

repeat that again because the hon. member from Maple Creek 

didn't hear that. We believe in inclusion, and not exclusion. 

There is a place for all at our banquet table. Some members 

want to sell box lunches to those with the one-way tickets. I 

don't agree on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Bengough and 

the member from Saltcoats talked very forcibly about the good 

economic news from our province, and we all saw the 

incredible knots the member from Regina North West tied 

herself into while trying to dispute those numbers, though it 

really wasn't her fault. I feel sorry for her but that's what 

happens when you read from a script. Go from your feelings 

rather than from a script. 

 

We also saw the Leader of the Third Party decry the supposed 

loss of jobs in Saskatchewan and then we saw her for the first 

time in her life, go absolutely silent when the real numbers 

came out. 

 

Well I hate to disappoint the opposition by bringing more good 

news, but as I've been saying in my newspaper ads, isn't it about 

time we heard some good news in Saskatchewan? 

 

But here are some numbers, plain and unadorned, Mr. Speaker. 

First, just today, StatsCanada released its latest updated job 

figures for the country. Here they are — I should say last week. 

Fact: 12,000 more people are working this January than last 

January — 450,000 as opposed to three, four thousand and 

thirty eight thousand . . . 438,000. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1600) 

 

Fact: there are 9,000 fewer unemployed people in 

Saskatchewan than a year ago. 

 

Fact: January was the third straight month of strong job growth 

over last year. 

 

Fact: Saskatchewan still has the lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada. And here we are, just got this from my colleague: 

Regina, 6.8 per cent; Calgary, 8.1; Edmonton 9.1. And I can tell 

you I visited some friends in Edmonton over the Christmas 

holiday and many of them are suffering a great deal because of 

the policies of the Klein government. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the question that the opposition keeps 

asking, where are the children? Well I have an answer. They're 

working, and they're working in numbers unprecedented in 

Saskatchewan of course. According to them these couldn't be 

Saskatchewan youth because they've all left. That's what I heard 

the Leader of the Third Party say today. So she said. Must be 

someone else's kids, and I say welcome to Saskatchewan. 

 

At any rate, more numbers, Mr. Speaker. Fact: last January 

there were 67,000 youth working in Saskatchewan; a youth is 

defined as someone between the ages of 16 and 24. This 

January there were 72,000, an increase of 5,000. I'm happy to 

announce that my children were able to come home this year 

from Ontario after being there for five years. They left during 

the Tory rule. 

 

First, there are 3,000 fewer unemployed youth this January. 

Fact: average employment has increased every year of our 

government. Average employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just numbers. Usually I don't like to 

speak using a great deal of numbers because it's boring. But the 

fact remains, when the Leader of the Third Party and her 

colleagues use numbers we have to defend ourselves, and I've 

used these numbers. 

 

But let me tell you, I'm not so much concerned about numbers 

as I'm concerned about the people behind the numbers. Behind 

each number is a person working, probably supporting or 

helping to support a family. Each number is a person receiving 

a wage in Saskatchewan and spending that wage in 

Saskatchewan, thereby pumping the economy and helping to 

create other jobs. Behind each number is a person adding to the 

social, cultural, business climate of Saskatchewan. The key 

behind each number is a human being contributing to the rich 

mosaic that makes up our province. 

 

I say to the Leader of the Third Party, who imitated the 

crocodile so aptly the other day, tell these people these facts 

behind the numbers that they should be afraid. Tell them about 

the climate of fear you feel everywhere you go. Tell them that 

they are not contributing to the society. 

 

I can commit to the people of Cut Knife-Lloydminster that we 

will be going after jobs with the same determination as we did 

go after balancing the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, I'm on a roll with numbers, and I 

want to mention just a few more, some that were quoted the 

other day by my colleague from Meadow Lake. 

 

Much of the increased economic activity in our province comes 

from the gas and oil industry — an industry that I'm very proud 

of — and from this government's cooperation with the industry 

to ensure a fair return for all involved. Remember the old cry — 

my colleagues can attest to that — you elect . . . You know 

what they did last . . . the opposition parties did last election?  



February 13, 1995 

 

141 

They went around to all the oil workers and said, if you elect an 

NDP government they will leave this province in droves. There 

won't be . . . there won't be an oil company left working here. 

That's what they did during the campaign; scared young people 

that I had taught and were working out in the oil patch. And 

many of them still voted for me because they knew me as a 

person and as a teacher. Well now they're going to vote for me 

because oil activity has increased a great deal. And the reason is 

because of the way we structured our royalties on the horizontal 

drilling. I'm very proud of that. 

 

The old cry of the old parties is that the NDP government drive 

out the oil people. Well let's see who's being driven out. 

Somebody is drilling on the run as they leave the province, Mr. 

Speaker, because the fact is the number of oil wells drilled in 

Saskatchewan increased in 1994 — 1,176 in '93, 1,294 in '94. 

Fact: same with gas wells — 1,000 last year, 969 the year 

before. Fact: producing wells for both oil and gas increased. 

Fact: production in both increased. Fact: the value of production 

increased astoundingly. In oil it increased by $229 million, to 

an amazing $1 billion of activity in this province — $796,000. 

Fact: out of that, resource revenue increased by 180 million, to 

$565 million. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but all this good news is a bit rich 

for a good old Saskatchewan person like me. After 10 years of 

Tory times and after listening to the fantasy land of gloom and 

doom the Liberal leader lives in, I don't want to decompress too 

quickly. 

 

Let me just say to the people of Cut Knife-Lloydminster and to 

people in this province, that I make a commitment to work hard 

with my colleagues to continue to balance the budgets, to 

continue to put forward jobs as a major priority, and to 

contribute, to be an accountable, responsible government 

member and part of an accountable, responsible government. 

 

I'm proud to be in this caucus. I want to say thank you to my 

colleagues who have spent hours working. We've all worked 

together. They've been just . . . During these three and a half 

years, I have to say that the people that I have worked with have 

just been tremendous, and I want to say thank you to them. And 

we're going to make the day where at least we're going to see 

the site of the New Jerusalem. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and hon. 

colleagues of the Legislative Assembly. I'm honoured to again 

have the privilege to rise in my place and participate in this 

throne speech debate. 

 

Before I begin I want to join with other colleagues who have 

spoken before me to wish you, Mr. Speaker, the very best in 

your role during this session. From the early tests that you've 

already experienced it appears that your conviction to the 

fairness and management of decorum in this legislature hasn't  

been faded much by the sun of the golf course that you enjoyed 

last summer. 

 

I am however a bit concerned, Mr. Speaker, about your recent 

admission that your ageing process is beginning to affect your 

vision when you acknowledged having difficulty in 

distinguishing gender as was the case of my desk partner from 

Biggar just a couple of days ago. I can appreciate, Mr. Speaker, 

that you might have some difficulty seeing this far because 

when my constituents ask me where I sit in the House, I tell 

them when I reach back, put my hand out behind me from the 

chair that I sit in, I can nearly touch the edge of my 

constituency. So for you to see almost to Yorkton from where 

you sit, Mr. Speaker, is quite understandable. And from time to 

time I think you might have some difficulty deciphering which 

gender you are really seeing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I too want to take the opportunity to 

welcome the new pages to the session. I know that this will be a 

most exciting experience for them that they too will not forget. 

And I want to say to them that it's okay for you to spill the odd 

pitcher of water, because over the past 20 years I know that the 

member from Churchill Downs has tipped enough water glasses 

enroute to and from his chair that it would compare favourably 

to the level of water that was in the newly constructed Rafferty 

Dam. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to pay recognition to Miss Meta 

Woods whom first I had the pleasure of meeting and working 

on Public Accounts and accordingly welcome her to the 

session. I heard the member for Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, 

state in his speech, that fortunately or unfortunately, you, Meta, 

got to know several members through your association with him 

and them at conferences and committee work. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it would be fair to say that your judgements, Meta, should 

be not clouded by what you've observed through those 

experiences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this occasion to congratulate 

my colleagues from Regina Lake Centre and the member from 

Athabasca in their recent appointment to cabinet, and to say to 

them that they will certainly have my support and that of my 

constituents as they make their way in their new portfolios. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to the member from Swift Current, and 

Regina Hillsdale, I want to thank you for your contributions. 

The many accomplishments your government has achieved to 

date is part of your doing and may your future endeavours meet 

with the same success that you got at your ministries and the 

very best to both of you in your new futures. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the member 

from Kindersley in his recent appointment, being chosen the 

Leader of the Opposition, in spite of our different political 

views and our philosophies. And I know the work of an MLA is 

very consuming and demands many sacrifices. To see 

leadership in public life . . . or to seek leadership in public life 

with a political party requires a commitment that most people 

are simply not prepared to make. Thus in extending my  



February 13, 1995 

 

142 

congratulations, I wish to him much success and longevity in 

the chair of the official opposition. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to note that the Leader 

of the Third Party has finally rearranged their chairs, from 

following the leader to ring around the rosy. And, Mr. Speaker, 

as I give thought to this Speech from the Throne and listen to 

other members of this Assembly speak, I note with interest 

references of this throne from the speech being and depicting a 

new day, a time for many firsts in Saskatchewan. 

 

For example, this throne speech states that we will see in this 

session, for the first time in 12 years, a balanced budget and 

balanced budget legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is a major accomplishment by 

anyone's standards. And to establish legislation which fixes for 

the future travesties like the one the people of Saskatchewan 

have endured after 10 years of accumulated deficits, is an 

accomplishment that Saskatchewan people are demanding and, 

Mr. Speaker, are applauding. 

 

In the recent speeches thus far from the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party, they scramble to 

find words which they can use to make the argument about the 

fact that balanced budget legislation is coming simply because 

of their efforts. 

 

Well in the case of the Tories, it is precisely because of their 

inept management that balanced budget legislation is necessary. 

They are responsible for the current debt in most part. So if by 

chance they were to form government in the next 50 years, this 

legislation would be helpful in protecting my children from 

their historic spending habits. 

 

The Liberal leader and her caucus are busy stating, what's the 

big deal about balanced budget legislation? It's already been 

done in several other provinces across Canada. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you listen to what she would do if she 

was in charge of the public purse, of course she would not be 

excited about balanced budget legislation. Because, when you 

do the math on what she's promised to do in Saskatchewan, 

there is no way that she could ever balance a budget in this 

province. 

 

It is clear that we have a party and a leader . . . or they have a 

party and a leader that has no idea, no idea of how to manage a 

provincial treasury. We have emerging here the old cliché about 

the Liberal Party where they're like the NDPs when they're not 

in government, but they're like the Tories when they're in 

government. 

 

At least the Leader of the Opposition and his members have 

finally seen the light of day and have drafted their own position 

on how balanced budget legislation might work in 

Saskatchewan. And I commend the Leader of the Opposition to  

bring forward his ideas and suggest ways to protect 

Saskatchewan people from the throes of wayward governments 

of the future — not so for the Liberal leader and her caucus, but 

not unusual that there again they are absent of thought on major 

pieces of legislation. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to see this piece of legislation 

on our democratic reform timetable in this legislature and will 

be supporting it on the day of the vote. 

 

As a fleeting thought, I recall the speech of the Leader of the 

Opposition and his comments as he expressed too his first 

experience of Saskatchewan becoming the leader . . . a process 

of one member, one vote. Pay your $20. Dial PC (Progressive 

Conservative) leader, and you got the member from Kindersley. 

Well too this was the first to Sask Telecommunications. Our 

government is pleased to learn that our advanced technology in 

telecommunications can also play a part in promoting the 

democratic process. I know that our minister is now satisfied 

that our Saskatchewan telecommunication system can handle 

3,000-member calls simultaneously. 

 

What remains yet to be tested is the simmering rumour, Mr. 

Speaker, that our system may get the opportunity this year or 

early next year to handle maybe some 6,000 or so Liberal calls 

simultaneously wishing to select possibly a new leader. Out 

there in Saskatchewan land, long-standing Liberals who are 

paying $100 a plate to hear . . . from what I hear, Mr. Speaker, 

was just good food . . . are not impressed with the member from 

Greystone's lack of consistency and her flip-flop on many 

issues. They are not happy, Mr. Speaker. Just ask their 

communications staff. Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . I'm not sure. Fair number. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech highlights our government's 

perseverance to make Saskatchewan a home to young people 

where they can receive a good education, find employment, and 

raise their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last several days in this House and 

throughout the media, I hear and read that there are jobs being 

created. The debate, Mr. Speaker, in this House has been, how 

many are there? Are there 2,000? Are there 9,000? Are there 

12,000? But I say, Mr. Speaker, irrespective of what those 

numbers are, the consensus remains in Saskatchewan that there 

are more opportunities and more jobs than there were when we 

came to government in 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody in Saskatchewan knows how difficult it 

has been for our government to try and balance our spending 

and at the same time achieve a growth in our economy and 

sector of our employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal and Conservative leaders say we have 

not done enough to create employment, and they tell us that our 

government spending is too high. Well if you expect 

government to create jobs, as we have done, and reduce  



February 13, 1995 

 

143 

government spending, as our mid-term financial report 

indicates, then it is clear that our Partnership for Renewal 

document is working. And truly Saskatchewan people are 

seeing gradually a plan and, in a systematic way, growth. We 

are seeing the rebuilding of Saskatchewan that we have talked 

about since we were elected in 1991. 

 

The Liberal Party leader says our government has done nothing 

to salvage and create jobs in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

nothing could be further from the truth — leave alone her 

mental confusion over StatsCanada and Revenue Canada 

figures. 

 

I want to cite just two — just two, Mr. Speaker — several 

policy decisions that have sustained and assisted in the growth 

in Saskatchewan over the past year . . . or the past two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, upon election of government in 1991, our Premier 

kept his promise, as this government does, saving 7,000 jobs in 

Saskatchewan in the food service industry by simply doing 

away with the PST on restaurant foods. Seven thousand jobs in 

Saskatchewan we saved, Mr. Speaker, by one policy change. 

We hear we're doing nothing. Mr. Speaker, today in my 

community, which has by per capita one of the highest number 

of food service outlets in Saskatchewan . . . have not forgotten 

our promise. It is because of our government's decision there 

has been significant additional growth in this industry in my 

community alone. 

 

Not only, Mr. Speaker, did that policy salvage jobs in 

Saskatchewan and in Yorkton, it has created new jobs, where 

they are today being reported all over the province. 

 

To my second example, Mr. Speaker, within the past year, this 

government, under the guidance of the minister of Energy and 

Mines, from Battlefords, introduced and implemented a new 

royalty rate policy in Saskatchewan. This new policy has been 

overwhelmingly accepted by the oil and gas developers and 

producers. The outcome is staggering as we see land sales in 

Saskatchewan for oil and gas development reach unprecedented 

levels in the history of this province  never before. 

 

New opportunities and jobs are following as the exploration, 

development and production begins to unfold. Just last week I 

hear on our local broadcasting station that Estevan is 

experiencing difficulty in filling jobs in their community, 

specifically due, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the expansion 

in the oil and gas development, a result of the revenue royalty 

policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just two policy decisions alone by this 

government that have saved and created jobs in this province 

that are real. So for the opposition to state that this government 

has done nothing to preserving and creating jobs is simply not 

true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has always been my position that governments 

will always be involved in some direct way in employing people 

and creating jobs, but as well governments must create  

climates so that the private sector and the cooperatives can 

work in partnership with governments to create jobs. 

 

And I can recall on many occasions the Premier, our Premier, 

stating that Saskatchewan operates best when all three cylinders 

are working, when he talks about the private sector, the 

cooperatives, and government. And that's been the case and 

examples are many throughout work opportunities in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government and this administration is 

practising what it preaches and, accordingly, has created jobs in 

Saskatchewan and, in this fashion, will do more, providing new 

opportunities in the future for young people and unemployed 

people. The proof is in the pudding. There are more 

Saskatchewan people at work today, irrespective of whose 

numbers you use. 

 

As the president of the chamber of commerce, Ms. Sonya 

Prescesky, states during a recent interview last week, which 

shows clearly that there are significant growth in employment in 

Saskatchewan by the revised figures of StatsCan, she says, and I 

quote: the revised job numbers reflect qualified optimism 

within the business community. End of quote. 

 

Optimism, Mr. Speaker, hope and opportunity, because there 

are good things happening in Saskatchewan all over the place. 

Just look around the province and we see Biotech, expansions 

to Flexi-Coil and Bourgault, excitement about agriculture, 

value, and processing. 

 

In my neighbouring community, some work being done along 

the flax fibre project, Canora. Discussions with companies 

around canola-crushing plants coming to Saskatchewan, and a 

$20 billion expansion under way at Prairie Malt, Biggar. And 

the list goes on and on and on. Quiet optimism and growth is 

what the president from chamber of commerce says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what Saskatchewan people are talking 

about. Of course there are pockets in Saskatchewan where 

things might be moving a little slower. But truly, I see 

tremendous growth in east-central Saskatchewan which is the 

home in which my riding is in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have noted in other speeches and highlight again 

that my constituency of Yorkton is the major trading centre, is a 

major trading centre in Saskatchewan, irrespective of whose 

figures you use: StatsCanada's, Revenue Canada's, or the 

opposition map, or Wildlife Canada. 

 

Yorkton is the third largest trading centre in Saskatchewan. In 

the past two years we have seen our housing starts double over 

1991. In the past two years we have seen our building permits, 

by comparison to other Saskatchewan cities excluding Regina 

and Saskatoon, lead the province in new development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1994 both of our agricultural farm industry 

manufacturing plants, Morris Rod-Weeder and Leon's 

manufacturing, have production demands and increased their  



February 13, 1995 

 

144 

workforce to levels that we have not seen in that part of the 

country for more then 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in tourism alone we saw an increase in our 

community of better than 46 per cent over the previous year of 

1994. Just less then a month ago, I was at a chamber of 

commerce luncheon meeting in my community and we had the 

legends of hockey in our city and I had the privilege of meeting 

some of the hockey greats, like Guy Lafleur, Frank Mahovlich, 

and Jean-Guy Talbot, just to name a few. 

 

And they talked about the wonderful spirit in our community 

and the genuine, good old Saskatchewan hospitality that was 

awarded them, a trait that our community is well known for. Of 

course, Mr. Lafleur and Mr. Mahovlich were interested in 

having me play on their team as they toured Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, but I couldn't get a release of contract from Coach K 

as you can well appreciate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He wants you to wear your salary cap. 

 

Mr. Serby: — That's exactly true. Salary cap; as well I was 

under contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why when I talk . . . Mr. Speaker, when I 

also talk to the hotel manager, Mr. Greg Fox, of the Corona 

Motor hotel, just recently, he reinforced that tourism to Yorkton 

in 1994 was unprecedented in the 12 years that he in fact has 

lived in Yorkton and done business there. Steady and quiet 

optimism and growth in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1995 we saw for the first time again the signing 

of an unprecedented agreement of the new Saskatchewan 

Tourism Authority — an agreement which shifts responsibility, 

funding, and personnel, from the government to that of the 

private sector. Mr. Speaker, here again is another example of 

our government and private sector working together in 

partnership. 

 

As I listened to the new chairman of the authority, Mr. Dick 

DeRyk, speak — who, by the way, lives in and operates a 

business in the community of Yorkton — he talked about the 

wonderful opportunities that this partnership will bring; how in 

1995 and onwards there will be a strengthening of approaches 

to expanding the tourism industry. He talked about bold and 

new, innovative approaches in promoting Saskatchewan 

tourism industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in his address he explained how the new Tourism 

Authority would promote new opportunities for stakeholders 

who are within the Tourism Authority and how this would 

translate to more jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, is how our government is 

working to build Saskatchewan in spite of the Liberal leader 

from Greystone saying that we are doing nothing. I say to the 

Liberal leader from Greystone and her two soldiers to talk to 

Mr. DeRyk and the new executive of the Saskatchewan 

Tourism Authority and tell them that they're doing nothing —  

tell them that they're doing nothing. And I can assure you that 

they will arrange for you and your members yet another 

unguided and wilderness tour which is where you appear to be 

spending most of your time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech we talk about how our 

government will place emphasis in a very direct way in getting 

the unemployed and young people into the workforce. In spite 

of the fact that the Leader of the Opposition thinks that Future 

Skills and JobStart are some form of computer games, I suggest 

that we need to be patient with him and to work collectively to 

educate him, because he is new and does not have the 

opportunity to benefit — does not have the opportunity to 

benefit, Mr. Speaker — from the wisdom on this side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the next little while we must be forgiving 

because he really appears to be trying to disassociate himself 

from his predecessor. That certainly was confused because he's 

the guy who thought that Saskatchewan had so many resources 

that not even he could spend it. 

 

The Leader of the Third Party and her members have caught on 

that Future Skills and JobStart are something to do with 

creating jobs and training people all right. But somewhere they 

have lost focus and say we are trying to give these people to the 

federal government. They call it offloading. The fact of the 

matter is the federal Liberals are so busy moving 

responsibilities to the provinces that I'm sure that soon they'll 

have to expand their own immigration policies so that they have 

a population of their own to serve. 

 

(1630) 

 

Future Skills, Mr. Speaker, is new money with the objective to 

provide employees and employers . . . to take advantage of 

immediate opportunities that are being called for. Future Skills 

is about workers getting lasting, lasting skills, and which will be 

trained in the workplace — yet another example of a 

partnership approach with the private sector. Today, as I stated, 

there is an employer outcry for specialized careers in agri-food, 

the transportation industry, and certainly in manufacturing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative is not about recycling people, as the 

Liberals suggest it might be or misunderstand it, passing people 

from one provincial . . . from the provincial jurisdiction to the 

federal jurisdiction and back again to the province. It's not 

about that. 

 

This is about real jobs and communities. This is about 

providing job entry skills to young people to make the transition 

to work a lot easier. This is about school divisions offering 

applied learning leading to high school credits and credits 

toward apprenticeship and advancing standing in post-

secondary trade or technical training. 

 

These new programs will meet the needs of people who are 

unemployed due to the lack of specific skills or outdated 

credentials or are underemployed or are young people at risk  



February 13, 1995 

 

145 

due to the changing labour markets or young people who are 

certainly not university bound. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my community we have a Future Skills 

consultant. And she tells me that this program, in our region 

alone, has already created 75 jobs in the short life that it's had. 

And more and more young people are becoming employed, and 

the employers are taking up the interest in the program which 

will include Indian and Metis people . . . have included Indian 

and Metis people, women in non-traditional fields, and people 

with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, to my friends on the opposition 

benches, this is what this initiative is all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Liberal member from Regina North, who is 

writing her party's educational strategy, I say to you, we don't 

mind you promoting our government's educational policy and 

direction. But before you begin plagiarizing our policies, you 

really need to understand them better. Just as a suggestion to the 

member, you might consider requesting from our leader an 

opportunity to come over here on this side, sit in the old chair 

that was vacated by the member from Shaunavon, and really 

learn more fully about what this reform is about so that you can 

go out and speak intelligently about this reform to people across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because this government is about working together and 

partnership. There is nothing more frustrating, Mr. Speaker, to 

the public than an uninformed opposition. And it really is the 

case when you take a look at the information that was provided 

a couple of days ago in this House by the Liberal leader on the 

policy that she put forward, of her party, on education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech speaks to our government's 

working towards making Saskatchewan health care again the 

leading health service in the world. Throughout the past three 

years, our government has talked about having to make some 

difficult choices. These choices, Mr. Speaker, have created 

much agony and turmoil in my chest and stomach as well, 

because I know that with difficult choices come some very 

tough and often painful decisions. 

 

There is little doubt, Mr. Speaker, in the minds of the majority 

of Saskatchewan people that changes were required and were 

necessary in health care. The issue in question and the debate 

has centred around process. Mr. Speaker, to be perfectly clear to 

this Assembly, I too have raised my own issues to that area and 

we continue to do so and will continue to do so when I am 

unclear with what the outcomes might be for my constituents 

and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come to this job after several years of public 

service, as many years in public service as the longest-sitting 

MLA in this House. Much of my professional life outside of 

politics has centred around community development and 

community services, and it is without question in my mind that 

our government's wellness model is the only approach that 

makes sense to ensure that we have accessible, sustainable, and 

affordable health care services in the future of this province. 

 

Truly community-based services permit communities to provide 

services and resources that are based on health care needs in 

communities. The devolution of funding to district boards and 

responsibility is the concept that is met well and appreciated by 

local communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1995 we see in Saskatchewan yet another first, 

and that being the election of health care boards. What disturbs 

me most, Mr. Speaker, about the debate that's gone out around 

this is that I hear the comments from the opposition benches 

that it's taking too long to reach this undertaking and that we 

should be electing everyone and that we have not . . . and that 

we should not be appointing folks to the board, and that our 

boards are too partisan and will only make decisions that are of 

an NDP base. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that if you were to, or members of 

this Assembly were to, speak to members of my district board 

in Yorkton, they would say this to you and they could prove it 

to you, that their memberships on the district board are not 

because they have any partisans or association to the NDP 

Party, but because their past experience was brought in the 

areas of health reform. Their work in strengthening community 

. . . their work and strength in community organizations and 

long histories and respect of service in their communities. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is how the district board in my constituency 

was elected and that's how I know that most of them were . . . 

that's how some of the members on my district board in 

Yorkton were involved in getting appointed. In fact we had an 

interesting process where some of the folks who sat on the 

steering committee were in fact elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the members of my district board tell 

you that board elections sooner than this fall would have been 

disastrous, because it is really only now, better than a full year 

later, that they have fully got an appreciation for the magnitude 

of their mandate. 

 

Please keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that in the district that my 

folks provide health care services mandate over, we have four 

district home care boards that had to come together. We have 

three municipal hospitals, and the largest regional hospital in 

Saskatchewan with over 700 employees in it. We have four 

nursing homes; three ambulance, three different ambulance 

operations; several special care homes in our area, one 

integrated level 2 and 3 facility; a large regional provincial 

mental health centre; and a large provincial regional community 

health department with a significant urban and rural mix of 

volunteers of various type and form working in that district. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would challenge any member in this Assembly to 

put their name forward to this mammoth undertaking, an 

undertaking of this magnitude as a volunteer  is what these 

board members are — and expect that just better than in one 

year, not only would they have completed the district's 

amalgamation work and put into place the functional and 

operational systems, then, Mr. Speaker, be prepared to transfer 

all of that work over to a new entity of a new board. 



February 13, 1995 

 

146 

Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely, in my opinion, no wisdom in 

those statements by the opposition. What they're asking for is 

absolutely impossible and defy, in my opinion, any logic. There 

are government departments who have been in place for better 

than 50 years who have not achieved the expected standards 

that the opposition is requesting would be achieved in one and a 

half short years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the months ahead, through our legislative 

democratic process, we will see people changing on district 

health care boards. We will see broad-based representation 

from across the communities and there will be continuity. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is true community development, and that's what I 

will be supporting as that time comes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our health care system in Saskatchewan is moving 

forward despite the perceived ignorance of people who should 

know better but choose to fuel the anxiety for pure political 

purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let there be no misconception on how I view this. I 

view the world out there as it applies to health care 

professionals and district operations. There are many anxieties 

in Saskatchewan around health care, and I am evident . . . I am 

informed and I'm on the front line with those folks, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan people and my constituents can be 

assured that my efforts will be to continue to promote and 

sustain a fair and equitable health care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall I had the privilege of being very much 

involved in the 10th annual student leadership conference in 

Yorkton. There were just over 1,000 students from across 

Canada and some from the United States who attended that 

conference, and half again as many teachers and chaperons. In 

our city, Mr. Speaker, this conference talked about — as young 

people gathered — about how change through technology and 

mobility and global relationships are placing demands on young 

people that require broad and extensive discussions, they said, 

by governments and society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these young Canadians asked questions like, what 

types of educational training will I need in the future? They 

asked, where will I get these skills and where will I find the 

train? And they also asked, what might our futures look like in 

this world of high technology that we live in and within a 

multicultural society? 

 

The overarching theme, Mr. Speaker, of their deliberations was 

working together in partnership, is what they talked about. 

Cooperation and a better understanding of each other's 

similarities and differences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the national student leadership conference had its 

beginning in Saskatchewan. In fact it began in Yorkton in 1984. 

Over 10 years the student leadership conference has been 

hosted across the country, coming back to Yorkton for its 10th 

anniversary. 

 

And at the same time last year we had in Yorkton the very first  

national high school student rodeo ever held in Canada, which 

by the way, Mr. Speaker, will be coming back to our 

community this summer because of the tremendous job that our 

people did in hosting the first rodeo last year. And I want to 

commend and congratulate the people of that organizing 

committee for making it the success that it was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, our government played a major 

role in assisting in the '94 conference, as did the government in 

1984. Saskatchewan's future depends on our young people and 

this government is making an investment in them in a major 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my short life of some 25 years in public life, I 

have to tell you that I've never experienced an event that was 

more touching than the student leadership conference. Young 

people and adults, organizers from across the country, laughing 

and singing and hugging one another and crying. Two thousand 

people, with our Premier in the midst, displaying emotions that 

reflected people's pride of being Canadians and how much they 

cared for each other, a feeling that is difficult to describe, Mr. 

Speaker, as tears rolled down my cheeks as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my decision to serve in public life as a politician 

— or public servant, as many people call us — is that I might, 

in a small way, some small way, contribute to the quality of life 

for my children and future generations. That's what the young 

people from across Canada were saying at the student 

leadership conference. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, when I reflect on this throne speech, I see 

a flash of what those people were asking for: hope, opportunity, 

community, and a willingness and preparedness to work 

together. Mr. Speaker, it was to us that they were speaking and 

it is this institution that they look for to set their standards. To 

achieve those objectives that they have set for themselves it will 

be necessary for us in this Assembly and those across this vast 

country to set from time to time our partisan politics aside if we 

have any hope of achieving the kind of plea that young 

Saskatchewan youth or young Canadian youth were asking us to 

do at that conference. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal more that we need to do and I 

have seen us come a long way in a short while, but I know that 

the people of Saskatchewan and as a New Democrat will always 

have as our guiding principles the future of our children. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

address the House and it will be my pleasure to be voting with 

the mover and the seconder the throne speech debate later this 

week. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is  



February 13, 1995 

 

147 

certainly a pleasure for me to rise and speak in support of the 

throne speech which was presented here last week. Before I get 

into my comments, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate 

you yourself for doing a very fine job and very difficult at 

times, but I appreciate your efforts here in the House. 

 

In 1991 when we were campaigning, the biggest issue at hand 

was our debt and people wanted to get a balanced budget. And 

time and again when door knocking, this was a message given. 

And it was our number one challenge and commitment to the 

people when we were elected as government, was to balance the 

books. And here we are three and a half years later and we have 

basically achieved that in our budget speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — When we announce our budget next week we 

will have a balanced budget. It will be the first balanced budget 

in close to 12 to 15 years in Saskatchewan and the first 

balanced budget in recent years across Canada. A very 

significant achievement, and this has only been possible 

because of the people of Saskatchewan who were prepared to 

bite the bullet. 

 

In my particular area we have a large number of seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. About 25 per cent of the population is over 65. And 

these people worked and toiled and scrimped and saved and did 

without things in order to make Saskatchewan a great place to 

live. And they did not . . . it was really troublesome for them to 

see such a huge debt hanging over not only them, but their 

children and grandchildren as well. And so this was very heavy 

on their minds. 

 

And today these people are looking back and really pleased that 

we've made it through a very tough time with high taxes, cut-

backs which affected everybody, young and old alike, urban 

and rural alike as well. So having a balanced budget is certainly 

a major accomplishment and is but one of the many highlights 

of this throne speech. The throne speech is full of optimism and 

looking ahead positively in many areas. 

 

Now that we've balanced the budget our next task will be to get 

our people back to work, and particularly young people, and 

hopefully have a number of young people return to 

Saskatchewan as well. In my particular case I have a boy who 

will be graduating this year and be looking for work, and many 

of us are in the same boat. We want our children to stay at 

home in places like Indian Head and Milestone, and not have to 

go to Calgary or Edmonton. 

 

So job creation is our number one item, our number one ticket, 

as we look ahead for the next few years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there are opportunities here in Saskatchewan. We have a 

vast variety and a wealth of resources and it's up to us to 

develop them responsibly. And looking after the environment, 

at the same time creating jobs. 

 

So jobs will be the number one issue as we look ahead, and in  

fact job creation is already showing strides. And as has recently 

been reported by Statistics Canada, our job opportunities in 

Saskatchewan have increased each year for the last several 

years in many areas. And in particular, the oil and gas area in 

the south-west part of the province, and in the south-east it is 

reported that the companies are not able to get enough people to 

work in the positions available. So this is good news for sure. 

 

Other areas that job creation is becoming more prevalent is 

people . . . ordinary people in Saskatchewan developing 

industries, in particular . . . or an example, I should say, is the 

machinery industry. Saskatchewan is leading the world in zero 

till and minimum till machinery. 

 

I have a neighbour down the road a mile and a half, Mr. Jim 

Halford, who was instrumental in developing a Conserva Pak, a 

no-till seeder. And he is now exporting this machine throughout 

North America and as far away as Australia. And he has also 

got a dozen . . . or more than a dozen employees working right 

in the shop on his farm in rural Saskatchewan, creating jobs for 

people, and at the same time creating industry and bringing 

money back to Saskatchewan. So that's but one example of 

farmers diversifying and leading again the way in agriculture. 

Diversifying not only in the development of machinery, which 

is important for soil conservation, but also diversifying to other 

crops. 

 

We are growing crops today which were unheard of 20 years 

ago: mustard, lentils, and canola, for an example, peas. This 

again is farmers adapting to the climate which they face. And 

basically why grow wheat when nobody wants it? But instead 

let's grow these other things and other crops which there is a 

demand for. And that is a case of farmers helping themselves, 

and the government is also participating and encouraging where 

it is able to in research. So with the added income, we do see a 

net farm income increasing and we are confident that farmers 

will continue to keep pace with the times and lead the world in 

production. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, our seniors are a very important 

component of our society, and we believe that we are working 

with seniors and helping them out where we can. 

 

We have an affordable drug plan which we will be maintaining. 

Unlike many other provinces, we are looking forward to 

expanded home care so that seniors can stay in their homes 

longer. People like to remain in their homes as long as possible, 

and we will be looking forward to working with various 

communities and having community leaders developing 

programs to keep seniors in their homes. And also we do have 

the long-term care beds where needed. Unfortunately in some 

areas we could always use more, but this facility is there again 

to provide as much comfort and support for our seniors in the 

years ahead. 

 

As I mentioned, there is a mood of optimism out there in rural 

Saskatchewan. In door knocking, main-streeting in Indian 

Head-Wolseley constituency, Mr. Speaker, invariably every 

small business, from the corner garage to the corner grocery  



February 13, 1995 

 

148 

store, reported a better year. People were spending more. They 

had better sales, and in other words they were looking forward 

to the future. 

 

And we only need to look at my small constituency to just see 

some of the things which have happened there in the last few 

years. The Paterson grain company, a Canadian owned private 

company, built their first inland terminal at Indian Head a 

couple of years ago and it is very successful — again, creating 

jobs. In Indian Head, we've got a new Co-op store going up. 

The local car automotive dealer called H & L is expanding. And 

the new Indian Head hotel opened up this Christmas, a year 

after a fire devastated it. 

 

Down the road at Wolseley, Abbott Laboratories, formerly 

Canapharm, is now very viable and providing a very good 

business in Wolseley, creating jobs for roughly 70 people and 

new jobs are being added each year. A very successful venture 

in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In the hamlet or small town of Glenavon, population of about 

300, in the last year or so we've had a bakery and a florist shop 

open up. Again, small business is the backbone of the economy 

in Saskatchewan and this is where we need the jobs. 

 

In other communities like Vibank and Odessa, which are within 

an hour's drive of Regina, both communities report new 

housing starts and people moving into the communities. In fact 

Kendal with a population of less than 100 recently had a couple 

from Toronto retire there. So people are moving back to the 

province and moving out into the rural areas, and of course that 

helps our schools and small businesses in these communities as 

well. The town of Windthorst in the south-east corner of my 

riding recently opened a brand-new skating rink facility. 

 

So rural Saskatchewan is alive and well and this is again largely 

due to volunteers. And volunteers in Saskatchewan have been 

known for many years for pulling the communities together, 

whether it's the hockey teams or if somebody is injured or sick 

or having problems, putting on fund-raisers. We really need our 

volunteers to continue pulling our communities together and 

working for the betterment of society. 

 

Also in the last election, Mr. Speaker, one area which many 

people were concerned about was the credibility of elected 

politicians. And that too we have tried to address. There's more 

to be done. But for an example, we have brought in legislation 

to have by-elections within six months after a seat becomes 

vacant. We can no longer take our computers and furniture 

home when we are defeated or retire. And certainly 

accountability has been tightened up, and should be, because 

we do work for the people. We are in the process now of having 

a committee look at our salaries and allowances, to try and put 

things in a better perspective so that people can see what's 

happening. 

 

An issue which is probably one of the most controversial right 

now in rural Saskatchewan is the federal gun control legislation. 

Now let me say, Mr. Speaker, from the outset, that  

this government is not opposed to crime control, which is the 

real issue. We support fully the clamping down on criminals 

who smuggle guns in or use guns illegally and we would wish 

to see stricter fines and enforcement of these fines. 

 

However, we do question the wisdom of asking law-abiding 

citizens to register every gun that they have, at a cost of 

anywhere from 75 to $100 per gun. Myself as a gun owner, I do 

not see where if a gun is registered, it's going to be any safer in 

the hands of a law-abiding citizen. As it is, this province has 

graduated 140,000 students through their hunter safety 

program, including myself 30 years ago and my daughter last 

year, who is now 14. 

 

We need to teach responsible use of firearms, and as a result, 

we have seen our hunting accidents drop from 106 in the 1960s 

down to three last year. So, Mr. Speaker, we do hear the people 

in rural Saskatchewan saying that their guns were acquired 

illegally. They're not breaking the laws and they don't intend to. 

They use their guns for legitimate uses on the farm, to control 

predators and also for hunting, which is a very viable industry 

creating $49 million in the province economy each year. So we 

hear the gun owners and we will continue to support legitimate 

gun owners in trying to make it so that it is not a criminal 

offence to not register a gun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's many other issues which we have dealt 

with in working with people. Underground fuel tanks; we'll be 

looking at used-oil recycling; The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. And the only way that we have achieved these goals is to 

work cooperatively with groups of people and we plan to 

continue to do so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in my closing remarks, I view the budget as a 

good news budget. There is optimism. And we don't need any 

petty politics picking away at this and that. What we need to do 

is pull together. We are a small enough province to begin with; 

we need to work together for the betterment of everybody, rural 

and urban, native and non-native alike. And certainly the 

gaming agreement which was reached last week will do a lot for 

our native people on the reserves. 

 

So it is my pleasure to speak in support of the throne speech, 

Mr. Speaker, and I will certainly be voting in favour of the 

throne speech. And thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


