






















































May 18, 1995 Hansard Morning


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 18, 1995 

 

 
2405 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Chairman, could I have leave to 
introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Chairman, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, 24 students from the Hartley Clark School in 
Spiritwood. They're grade 6 students and they're seated in the 
Speaker's gallery. 
 
With them are two teachers, Doug Robertson and Gil 
Goodfellow, and a chaperon, Laurie Ledinski. They're here in 
Regina. They came yesterday and are in the process of touring a 
number of the sites in Regina, and the Legislative Building is 
one. And I would ask members to invite them here and give 
them a hearty welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask that 
the Minister of Justice please introduce the officials who have 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with 
me today Brent Cotter, who is the deputy minister of the 
department, and Doug Moen, who is the executive director of 
public law and policy. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials, welcome. And I want to thank the minister for having 
taken the time to come and brief me on this Bill. Normally 
when a piece of legislation comes to the Assembly in a 
wind-down mode, we aren't always usually . . . or oppositions 
don't tend to be so gracious in allowing for the speed-up or the 
quick movement of a Bill. 
 
When I first saw the Bill, I would have to admit that a person 
had some questions and asked is it necessary to bring such a 
Bill forward at this time. My understanding is that we're talking 
about two things. One is a reduction in the term for the Chief 
Justice from seven to five years. The other is an allowance that  

would allow judges to continue to apply after age 65 for . . . I 
believe it's five extra years if granted. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, maybe you could just brief us and bring us 
up to date and give us the reasons for these changes at this time 
— who you've talked to and why the Bill is before us this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The subject of a reduction in the term of 
the chief judge and the associate chief judge from seven to five 
years has been the subject of resolutions by the judges' 
association in their annual meeting for some considerable time. 
And we have been petitioned each year with respect to that 
reduction. The argument is that a shorter term will . . . this is 
quite an onerous task and a shorter term will be more bearable 
for the person who does the job. 
 
Secondly, it allows for more of a rotation so that more judges 
can fulfil the position. And it has been a long-standing item on 
the agenda of the association. And if we're going to do it, this is 
the time to do it because we are in the process of considering 
the appointment of a new chief judge. The present occupant of 
that position, Chief Judge Carey, has tendered his resignation 
and it is effective upon the appointment of a successor. 
 
When we appoint a successor, we have to specify of course the 
term. And if this amendment were not in effect, then the 
appointment would be for seven years and you couldn't 
thereafter reduce it. You'd have to wait out the seven years 
before you did anything further. So it's timely in that sense. If 
we're going to do it, we should do it now. 
 
On the retirement question, this has been a source of concern 
for some time. As the member will know, judges in the court 
preceding 1978 were appointed to age 70. And when the 1978 
legislation was enacted, the right of those judges to continue 
until age 70 was not affected. So we have a situation where 
about 40 per cent of our court is going to sit till age 70 as a 
matter of right. 
 
The appointments since 1978 have been to age 65, and there is 
no flexibility in the system at all. They're out the door at 65. 
And there have been instances where judges reaching that age 
want to continue, still have a good deal to contribute, are good 
judges, and the system is the loser for not having some 
flexibility that enables them to carry on. 
 
This matter was specifically raised in the last few months by 
two judges who are approaching retirement age and who want 
to stay on and their petition to us is supported by some senior 
members of the Provincial Court and we took a long look at it; 
we're familiar with the circumstances of the two judges who are 
applying. One of them was not appointed until he was nearing 
his 62nd birthday, so has only served three years and a few 
months. 
 
We don't want to make the judgement as to whether those 
judges should continue. We think that judgement is properly  



May 18, 1995 

 
2406 

made by the chief judge of the court and that is the scheme 
that's set up in the Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think 
from your comments and from the discussion before us and 
having had a few moments to discuss this issue in the last 
couple of days with you, I think certainly that is fair. 
 
I guess the one question I would have — was it fair for you to 
introduce legislation re judges' salaries and then to turn around 
and retroactively change the legislation? And I'm wondering, 
have you had the same type of petition coming in your direction 
as we've received and made a move regarding the Bill before us 
right now, that sets a retirement mode, sets limitations on the 
Chief Justice's term of office, as well as allows members to 
continue to sit in the court until age 70? 
 
Have you come to any decision regarding judges' salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No. The member will recall that there 
were increases provided for in the legislation that we brought to 
the House on the matter that the member mentions. 
 
Those covered the salary situation for judges to March 31 of 
this year. And the question of salary is an open question, and it 
needs resolution. 
 
I don't want to go any further because the judges' lawsuit is out 
there and is being actively pursued. And we are having to deal 
with the issues raised in the lawsuit, and if I say very much 
more in this House, I may compromise that situation, and I 
wouldn't want to do that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'd like to thank my officials for coming 
out this morning. Some of them have just arrived now, but I 
appreciate their effort for coming over and assisting the 
committee. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would extend my 
appreciation to the officials, and we look forward to further 
deliberation later this day in estimates. Thank you very much. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
The Chair: — I would ask that the Minister of Municipal 
Government please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right I 
have John Edwards, director of municipal policy and legislative 
services; and to his right is Jim Anderson, senior policy analyst 
with the Department of Municipal Government. 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984, and to make a Consequential Amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 
 
Clauses 1 to 43 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials for coming in this 
morning and helping us expedite these Bills. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
members of the opposition for their cooperation and I would 
like to thank my officials for being here this morning. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask that 
the Minister of Environment and Resource Management please 
introduce the officials who have joined us here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm pleased to 
introduce, behind me, the assistant deputy minister of 
management services, Bob Blackwell; to my right, the director 
of the commercial branch, Larry Lechner; and behind Larry, the 
waste managements officer, Monica Krahe-Solomon. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, this Bill deals in the main with recycling of used 
oils. That's a very important issue across Saskatchewan, 
particularly in the rural communities because farmers do have a 
significant amount of used oil saved up in a lot of cases. Most 
of them are very conscious of the hazards involved with used 
oils and have been doing their part up till today to maintain 
their used oil in a safe environment, and it's important that this  



May 18, 1995 

 
2407 

oil both be recycled from the view of pollution and also to save 
our resources. 
 
But the question is, is how do you go about doing that? I think, 
Mr. Minister, it's important that, one, that the oil be actually 
re-refined and used again in the system and that local people 
have the opportunity to provide the service necessary for the 
recycling. 
 
The other question deals with how do you transport the 
commodity? And it has to be done in a very safe manner, Mr. 
Minister. And again we need to have the opportunity to have 
local people involved in that gathering and collection. 
 
I believe that the ideas of doing that, Mr. Minister, are good, 
although industry does have some concerns about the idea of a 
defined program that your department will put in place for them 
because that is not specified to date, and it can be rather open-
ended for them. And I believe that rather than putting in a 
mandated program that you put in the regulations in place, to 
say that used oil would be recovered and recycled and then 
allow them to implement the programs to accomplish that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, as the member opposite 
has indicated, the process he most lately in his comments 
describes is in fact the process that we have agreed on through 
broad consultation with industry, and I'm looking forward to the 
results of this new process, which our neighbouring provinces 
are examining, because I believe it's a very good one. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, I would like to thank my officials for 
the work they've done in preparing this Bill up to this point and 
thank the opposition for their diligent attention to duty and their 
cooperative attitude in moving this very good Bill forward. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd just again 
like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in, for 
cooperating, and for providing answers. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask that 
the Deputy Premier please introduce the officials who have 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
indeed want to introduce the officials here with me today. On 
my right is Brian Smith, who is the director of the Public 
Employees Benefit Agency. To my left is Mr. Craig Dotson, 
associate deputy minister of Department of Finance. And 
behind me, immediately behind me, is Ian Brown, who is from 
the Department of Justice. 

(1030) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and officials. This particular issue has been of 
prime interest to both my constituents and people across the 
province for a number of years — not just this past year, this 
past session, but for a significant number of years, partly 
because of questions dealing with the federal government and 
their MP (Member of Parliament) pensions which have yet to be 
dealt with in Ottawa. 
 
It also though has related back to pensions within the province 
of Saskatchewan, in particular people who are on the defined 
benefit pension plan, which is a totally different type of pension 
plan than which most of the MLAs in this Assembly have. In 
particular it's different than any MLA has that has been elected 
since 1979. 
 
This particular pension plan that this Bill deals with, deals with 
providing for the MLAs a percentage of their best four years 
that they have had while in government and providing that for 
them after they retire. It amounts to a significant amount of 
money for approximately seven of the members of this 
Assembly that are currently sitting today, ranging anywhere 
from $600,000 up to 1.8, $1.9 million if each of those members 
were to live to 80 years old. When you compare that to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . one of the members opposite calls 
out 80. Well, 80 years old is not a significantly great age in this 
day and age, Mr. Minister. Very many people live to be 80 years 
old. 
 
In fact if you live past age 1, you have a statistically significant 
opportunity to live to age 100. Now some of the members 
opposite perhaps may not make it that far, but nevertheless 
within the general population there are many, many people who 
do indeed live to be past 80 years old and have the opportunity 
to enjoy their whole lifetime beyond 80 years old. 
 
So when we look at 80 years old as a date line and compare the 
pensions that the defined benefit plan will pay to members 
today as compared to those who are on the funded plan, there 
are some very, very great differences. The public has said that 
when MLAs contribute 9 per cent of their salaries to a pension 
fund and the government then turns around and provides 24.5 
per cent, that there's something wrong. 
 
The public doesn't mind . . . or I shouldn't say doesn't mind, but 
is less concerned or has less apprehension or less hostility 
towards matching funds because they provide matching funds 
to the civil service; they find within private industry that 
pension funds are often matched. But when it's paid out 24.5 
per cent times 9 per cent there is a major difference there and 
the taxpayers have a great deal of difficulty understanding why 
they should be expected to carry this burden — and it is a 
significant burden — why they should be expected to carry this 
burden while they themselves are having difficulty providing 
for their own retirements. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2408 

Because MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) not only 
have the opportunity to work in this Assembly, but they also 
have the opportunities to work outside of this Assembly and 
carry on a business or a law practice or whatever it might be, 
outside of this Assembly. Because . . . the minister shakes his 
head, no, it's not possible. Well there are a significant number 
of people within this Assembly that do something other than be 
an MLA. 
 
Now being an MLA takes a considerable amount of time. But 
people have the opportunity and take advantage of that 
opportunity to carry on with other facets of their life, which in 
turn do provide them with a source of income, which provides 
them with a source of retirement income. 
 
The people of the province look at what the Premier has been 
saying, that because of our fiscal situation we all need to cut 
back, we all need to sacrifice. The Minister of Finance says that 
as she increases up the taxation on families in this province  
$4,800 a year more for families in this province. 
 
At the same time we see the seven MLAs in this Assembly that 
are on the defined pension plan, in particular, in light of the 
recommendations of the McDowell report which will add 
significantly to the pension benefits of those members that are 
in cabinet and the Premier. And the public is simply not 
prepared to accept that as being reasonable and being fair when 
they themselves are being taxed and have a great deal of 
difficulty providing any funding for their own retirement. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, we have a great deal of difficulty in 
accepting that this change to the defined benefit pension plan is 
a worthy change. We believe that the change needs to happen, 
and that part is good. What is saddening though, Mr. Minister, 
is that it took a great deal of pressure from the official 
opposition and from the public to finally get the Premier and 
yourself to come forward and make some change, to make some 
change. 
 
And there's nothing to say, Mr. Minister, that this Bill, if it does 
pass in the Assembly, will receive Royal Assent in time to have 
an impact before the next election, because we're expecting to 
have the next election in the next few days, Mr. Minister, or the 
call in the next few days. 
 
And so it's very important, Mr. Minister, that if this Bill does 
pass, that it be given Royal Assent as quickly as possible so that 
the measures included in here do take effect. Because while you 
are ratcheting it back somewhat — 70 per cent of the best salary 
level — the public still believes that that level remains too high. 
 
When the Premier has the opportunity to collect $122,000 a 
year in pension, the public just shake their head and say, why? 
Why should he receive a pension level upon retirement that's 
greater than his salary while he's working? They say why should 
he receive a pension upon retirement that's greater than what 
most of the people in the public can earn in a year working full 
time? They have a great deal of difficulty accepting that, Mr. 
Minister, a great deal of difficulty. 

And even ratcheting that back, the Premier under your scenario 
would receive, I believe it's approximately $70,000 a year of 
pension salary. That's still a significant amount of money, Mr. 
Minister, still a very significant amount of money. The minister 
shakes his head; perhaps I'm a little low on those figures then, 
and perhaps there's more money involved than that. 
 
But nevertheless, whatever the salary level is, it's still very 
significant and the public has a great deal of difficulty 
understanding why they must be forced to pay this while they 
themselves are being negatively impacted to a great extent by 
the taxation being imposed by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can give us some rationale as to 
why, when you are proposing to make this change, that you 
would select a level of 70 per cent. We've brought forward a 
Bill — your Bill is No. 65; ours is No. 64 — which suggests 
that the appropriate level, a level that would be somewhat more 
acceptable to the general public, would be 50 per cent. That 
would be much more in line with the salary scales of the 
general public, at the upper echelons of the general public. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you justify only — only — bringing it 
back for the Premier, for yourself, and for some of your 
colleagues, only back to 70 per cent of your best salary level? 
 
As the member from Regina North West says, that you have a 
conflict of interest there because we're discussing, Mr. Minister, 
your personal pension, along with that of your Premier and five 
of your colleagues that remain in this Assembly. 
 
How do you justify, Mr. Minister, being involved with it, with 
the conflict of interest, and setting the levels at 70 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 
respond to the member's question. When we looked at . . . we 
recognized the need to reform the pension further to what was 
done in 1979 under an NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. 
 
When we looked at what was the existing comparable 
provisions in the public service for teachers in Saskatchewan, it 
is 70 per cent. So we're being consistent, and I think therefore 
being fair, and putting ourselves in a comparable basis with the 
pension plan in the public service and with teachers and others 
of similar circumstance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could 
deal with the conflict of interest that is involved in this, in your 
particular circumstance. We're talking about your personal 
pension, Mr. Minister. How do you answer dealing with this? 
 
If this was an issue dealing with a business, with a business in 
which you were personally involved, the conflict of interest 
guidelines would suggest, Mr. Minister, that you have to 
remove yourself from this discussion, from the vote on this 
particular issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, because we're not dealing with a business but  



May 18, 1995 

 
2409 

we're dealing with your pension, should not the same rules 
apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I don't agree with 
that. Members of the Legislative Assembly are elected by their 
constituents to act on their behalf. This is what we are doing 
here. If you take what I consider the inaccurate logic of the 
member to its fullest extent, then I think he would have to 
suggest that his representative on the Board of Internal 
Economy, as the Leader of the Liberal Party who is on the 
Board of Internal Economy, cannot sit on the Board of Internal 
Economy, as would be the case with members of this side of the 
House, because they deal with matters involving this Legislative 
Assembly and some of those matters affect them personally. 
 
Quite frankly, we are elected here to make decisions on behalf 
of the public. This isn't the system of government where we rely 
on somebody else to make those decisions. Because we have to, 
in the end, be accountable to our constituents and we have to 
make those decisions on their behalf and explain it to them and 
be judged by them. 
 
I've never hesitated to be judged by my constituents. I've been 
into eight different election campaigns. They've made the 
judgement. I've accepted that judgement, and I'm still prepared 
to do that. Somebody has to take responsibility. We're prepared, 
as a government, to take that responsibility. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It's finally 
you're prepared to accept that responsibility. You dragged your 
feet the whole session on this and brought this in only at the 
very end, Mr. Minister — only at the very end — after having 
been pushed very, very hard by the public and by the official 
opposition to deal with this particular circumstance, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
When we're talking about the Board of Internal Economy, when 
we're talking about this entire Assembly, the decisions that are 
made here are made for, if it's dealing with MLAs in some form 
or another, with the entire body. With this particular piece of 
legislation, we're not talking about the entire body of the 
Assembly, Mr. Minister; we're talking about seven members, of 
which you are one of the seven. 
 
Now there are a significant other number of members, 
ministers, sitting on that side that are not involved in this, Mr. 
Minister, that could have dealt with this particular 
circumstance. But you, sir, do have a conflict of interest here. 
 
If you were coming forward and dealing with an item of 
business related to your personal circumstances and one or two 
other members of the House, you would be in conflict of 
interest in dealing with it. The member from Saskatoon River 
Heights stepped down as a cabinet minister because some of 
her personal affairs were being dealt with by cabinet. She 
stepped aside, which was the honourable thing to do. 
 
In this particular case, you, Mr. Minister, and your particular  

pension along with that of your Premier, the Minister of Justice, 
the member from Regina Churchill Downs, and a couple of 
other members in this Assembly, the Economic Development 
minister, are personally involved in this, directly and personally 
involved. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, under the guidelines of this Assembly, if 
you were involved in business doing that, you would be in 
conflict of interest, according to the conflict of interest 
guidelines that have been set out in this legislation as presented 
by your government. So, Mr. Minister, how can you say that 
you're not in conflict of interest in this particular issue? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'm surprised that the member 
opposite, who's been in this legislature now for several 
sessions, yet does not understand that ultimately the decision on 
any legislation, including the legislation which we are 
considering here today, is a decision of this legislature, not a 
decision of the minister piloting the Bill through the committee 
or some other minister. In the end the responsibility is in the 
hands of the members who sit here and will vote on this 
committee later today. 
 
So I don't see a conflict of interest there. If there's a conflict of 
interest there, then it applies to everybody. And if you extend 
the rule that much, then government would be absolutely 
stagnant and could never do anything. 
 
I make no apologies for bringing this legislation before the 
House. I think it's important reform. We listened to the people. 
We understand the changes that had to be made. We accept the 
fact that there will be some who will disagree with us; that's 
what democracy is all about. But in the end, but one has to 
bring it to this Assembly for this Assembly to dispose of the 
issue, and that's what's being done here today. In the end, 
everybody in this House has to vote for it, not one minister 
standing here by his or herself. It's going to be the decision of 
this House. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed you 
have bowed to the will of the people but most, most reluctantly. 
But when the decisions were made and the Bill was drawn up, 
you, Mr. Minister, were the person sitting at the table doing 
that. And it's not everyone in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, that's 
affected by it. There are seven members in this House that are 
affected by this particular piece of legislation — only seven. 
 
When we deal with agricultural Bills in this Assembly, Mr. 
Minister, it affects a third to a half of the members in this 
Assembly, and every other farmer out there in the province, 
every other farmer. When we deal with issues of the 
environment, it affects every member of society. We're talking 
about a Bill, Mr. Minister, that affects seven people of which 
you are one; seven people in the province of Saskatchewan and 
you're one of them. 
 
And when it came time to make the decision of how far you  



May 18, 1995 

 
2410 

were going to ratchet this back from the total level for yourself, 
Mr. Minister, of $1.7 million if you live to age 80, to some 
number somewhat less than that, we already had a Bill on the 
book that said 50 per cent of your best year. You brought in a 
Bill, because you were personally involved in it, that said 70 per 
cent, Mr. Minister, 70 per cent. So, Mr. Minister, I do believe 
that there is a conflict of interest here between you, the other six 
members involved, and the Assembly in general. 
 
As I said earlier, if this was an item involving seven people 
involved in a business deal that was coming before the 
Assembly for a question, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
would look at this and say this is a conflict of interest. 
 
The member from Regina Rosemont asked for a determination 
on a conflict of interest dealing with members of the Assembly 
that were shareholders in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
because it was a business venture, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Speaker ruled, because it didn't involve just members of the 
Assembly but rather potentially every farmer in the province, 
60,000 farmers or more — 80,000 are members of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool — it was not a conflict of interest in 
this Assembly for the members to vote on that particular Bill. 
But the question was still brought forward. 
 
But we're talking about seven people in this Assembly, seven 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, and you're one of 
them, to deal with this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Minister. At the very least — at the very least  you should 
have absented yourself, along with the other members of 
cabinet who are involved in this, from the cabinet table when 
the decisions were being made, and some other minister should 
have been bringing forward the legislation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I want to point out 
to you and to the members of the committee and to the member 
opposite who raises the issue, that there is a provision in this 
Bill which applies to everybody in this House, including him. Is 
he suggesting therefore that he should not be allowed to vote on 
it? 
 
There is provision in this House, in section 9, that members will 
be able to — as they can in other pension plans — transfer their 
money purchase plan, on retirement, to an RRSP (registered 
retirement savings plan). So if there's a conflict of interest, the 
conflict of interest applies to him. I will be interested in 
watching when we come to the vote on this thing whether he 
stands and votes on this. 
 
And furthermore I'll be interested to see whether he supports it 
or whether he opposes it, because there is a provision that 
applies to every member of this House. That's just the way it is. 
There's almost . . . I mean most legislation, one can say, applies 
to somebody in the legislature, no matter what the legislation is. 
If we began to adopt the approach that's being suggested, then 
the public service would have to make all the decisions and do 
everything — not that I have any disregard for public servants. 
They do an excellent job, and we have the best public service in  

Canada in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But ultimately somebody has to take responsibility and be 
accountable. And that is the elected members who the people of 
this province, in a democratic process, elect to act on their 
behalf and then account for what they do when it comes time 
throughout each year and particularly during an election. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, there is a difference 
between section 9 and section 6 in this Bill. Section 9 deals 
with each and every member of the Assembly, no matter which 
side of the House they sit on, no matter whether they're in 
cabinet or outside of cabinet, no matter how long they have 
been in this Assembly, and no matter when they are to be 
elected. This year, five years down the road, or ten years down 
the road, they're going to be elected . . . affected by that 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
Section 6, though, Mr. Minister, deals only with seven people 
that were elected prior to 1979 — not everybody in the 
Assembly, not everybody that will be elected henceforth to this 
Assembly, but the seven people still remaining in here that were 
elected prior to 1979. And you're still one of them. So, Mr. 
Minister, when you say that we — each and every one of us — 
have a potential conflict of interest in clause 9, you're wrong 
because it doesn't just deal with us. It deals with every MLA 
that could be potentially elected in the future. 
 
Section 6 doesn't deal with anybody that will be elected 
henceforth, Mr. Minister, only with you, with the Premier, the 
member from Regina Churchill Downs, the member from 
Athabasca, the Justice minister, and the Economic 
Development minister, and the member from Arm River. Those 
are the only people involved, Mr. Minister, and that's a conflict 
of interest. 
 
But since you brought up section 9, there is some value in 
section 9 allowing MLAs to have the same opportunities to deal 
with their own funds that the civil service does have. And that 
one does have some benefit, Mr. Minister, unlike section 6. 
 
Also section 10 has some merit, Mr. Minister, because it deals 
with people who leave this Assembly who are eligible for a 
pension and then go on to work for another government body 
— either provincially or federally — and that they can no 
longer receive their pension as well as their salary. They have 
to, I suppose, pick and choose either one of them, but not both. 
That has some value also, Mr. Minister. 
 
So when it comes down to the end of the day though, Mr. 
Minister, the main issues here are the cost to the taxpayer. 
There's no savings to the taxpayer in section 9; neither is there a 
cost to the taxpayer — it's neutral. It just simply gives MLAs 
access to their own funds that they've built up over the years. 
 
In section 10 there is a potential saving to the taxpayer if 
someone goes from this Assembly to become a judge. Then he 
receives his judicial salary, and his pension as an MLA is held 
off. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2411 

But in section no. 6 there is still a significant amount of cost to 
the taxpayer, a significant amount of cost over and above that 
which would have been in place had you and your other six 
colleagues been on the funded pension plan, or had taken the 
funded pension plan, than the one you are currently on. 
 
It's still significantly more money than that which would have 
been in place had you accepted our Bill on this particular issue, 
which would have decreased the salaries down to 50 per cent, 
Mr. Minister. And that's what I believe you should carry on and 
do today, is drop it down to that 50 per cent level. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I have an amendment to clause 6 that I would like to bring 
forward and it deals, as I've stated earlier, with that 70 per cent 
level, which I believe remains too high for all the arguments 
that I've presented earlier. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would move the following motion: 
 
 Amend Clause 6 of the Printed Bill by striking out 

"70%" where it occurs in section 18.1 as being enacted 
therein and substituting "50%". 

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, I'm 
not going to support that amendment because I think that moves 
away from what is the established and recognized practice in 
other pension plans, and what we have done here is make the 
pension plans for MLAs consistent with other pension plans. So 
I think it's an appropriate amendment and I'm going to ask 
members of the House to oppose that amendment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe the 
minister said it was it was an appropriate amendment and I 
think it is indeed — that our amendment is appropriate. 
 
It's not the accepted one, Mr. Chairman, it's the chosen one by 
the member opposite and his six colleagues — the chosen way 
to go, at 70 per cent. It's the preferred way for him, but it's 
certainly not the preferred way for the general public, Mr. 
Chairman, and it's not the way which the official opposition 
would choose to go on this particular matter. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could by leave, introduction of 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to introduce  

to you and to my colleagues in the Assembly, a couple of 
special guests who are with us here today from the French 
Trade Commission. Seated in the west gallery is Pascal 
Lecamp, who is the Deputy Trade Commissioner, and Patricia 
Pouliquen, who is the French Trade Commissioner in Council. 
With them is Gerry Adamson, our trade rep from the 
Department of Economic Development. 
 
And I would like the two individuals to stand and be 
recognized. They are working on trade development between 
France and our province and doing an excellent job. So I want 
to recognize the great work that they are doing at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to join with the Minister of Economic Development in 
recognizing our French guests today. And just to extend to them 
our courtesies and wish them welcome, et bienvenue. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 65 
(continued) 

 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1100) 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 
Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing 

Enactments/Project de loi no. 69 — Loi concernant 
l'interprétation des textes et édictant les règles les régissant 

 
The Chair: — I would ask that the Minister of Justice, please 
introduce the officials who have joined us here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have Ian 
Brown of the Department of Justice with me on this and the 
subsequent Bills on the order paper. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, maybe you could just fill us in as to 
the reason for the Bills that we have coming forward — the 
present one and the ones coming. I believe these are the Bills 
dealing with French interpretation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. These are the first eight of a fairly 
significant number of Bills that will be put before the 
legislature in this and subsequent years. It is pursuant to an 
agreement reached in the late 1980s between the francophone 
community, the Government of Saskatchewan, and the  



May 18, 1995 

 
2412 

Government of Canada, with respect to the translation of some 
provincial statutes. 
 
We have had extensive negotiations with the francophone 
community as to their priorities for translation. And the 
legislation that is before the House this morning reflects those 
priorities. These are the first eight of the priority list. 
 
Mr. Toth: — That was the question I was going to ask, Mr. 
Minister. As we review this, it's my understanding when the 
change was made even back prior to 1991, there were selective 
pieces of legislation that they felt would be appropriate versus 
going through the cost of translating all pieces of legislation. 
And I'm wondering if that is going to continue, that we'll 
specifically target pieces of legislation that have an impact upon 
the francophone community, that there may be some value in 
having the French interpretation included versus trying to go 
through all legislation which really doesn't direct all of their 
community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, the negotiations have produced a 
list of statutes that will be translated as time goes on. They're by 
no means all of the statutes in Saskatchewan, but they are the 
ones that would have relevance to the francophone community. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, it's my understanding then that 
we will continue that process, of just limiting the changes to 
Bills that would be relevant. And I've got your assurances that it 
will continue, not only with this current government but any 
governments to come in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — That's right, Mr. Chairman. The 
member is perfectly right. The agreement is binding on our 
government, as it was on the previous government, and it will 
continue to be binding on the province. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 47 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act Respecting Changes of Name/Projet 
de loi no. 66 — Loi concernant les changements de nom 

 
Clauses 1 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the keeping of Vital 
Statistics/Projet de loi no. 67 — Loi concernant les services 

de l'état civil 
 
Clauses 1 to 63 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Regulations/Projet de loi 
no. 68 — Loi concernant les règlements 

Clauses 1 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Solemnization of 
Marriage/Projet de loi no . 70 — Loi concernant la 

célébration du mariage 
 
Clauses 1 to 54 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1115) 
 
Bill No. 71 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime/Projet de 

loi no. 71 — Loi sur les victimes d'actes criminels 
 
Clauses 1 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting Elementary, Secondary 
and Post-secondary Education in Saskatchewan/Projet de 
loi no. 73 — Loi concernant l'enseignement élémentaire, 

secondaire et postsecondaire en Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
can you give us your personal assurance that there have been no 
changes to this particular Bill other than the translation into 
French? And I'm sure that neither you nor I want to go through 
this Bill clause by clause in this sitting, so can you give us your 
personal assurance that nothing has changed in The Education 
Act other than the translation into French. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I can give the member the assurance 
that no substantive changes have been made to the Act. In order 
to facilitate the translation into French, some of the provisions 
had to be renumbered and the structure of a few provisions had 
to be changed. And it also contains technical drafting changes 
to improve readability and make the language gender neutral. 
But nothing of substance has been changed. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Can you give us an outline, Mr. 
Minister, of what clauses were changed, what sections were 
changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, would the member 
accept a written list of changes in answer to that question? He's 
indicating yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes, Mr. Minister, if you can give us a 
written list and we'll take your assurance that there was nothing 
of substance that was changed in this particular Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 372 inclusive agreed to. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2413 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting Non—profit 
Corporations/Projet de loi no. 74 — Loi concernant les 

sociétés sans but lucratif 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Mr. Minister, can you give us your assurance that there have 
been no changes other than the translation into French of this 
particular Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I can assure the member that the Bill 
does not change the existing law. It contains technical drafting 
changes that improve readability, and it makes use of gender-
neutral language, but there have been no substantive changes to 
the Bill.  Once again, I would be prepared to write to the hon. 
member and list the changes that have been made. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. If you 
would indeed do that because again, like the last Bill, I don't 
think either one of us want to go through this clause by clause. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 285 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Sorry about that, Mr. Chairman. I think it would 
be certainly appropriate to thank the minister and his officials 
who have been with us through the morning to debate these 
Bills as we've gone through them. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to also thank the 
officials for the enormous amount of work that they did in 
bringing these eight Bills forward. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Northern  
Municipalities Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984, and to make a Consequential Amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move Bill No. 65 be now read for a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 

Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing 
Enactments/Project de loi no. 69 — Loi concernant 

l'interprétation des textes et édictant les règles les régissant 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Changes of Name/Projet de 

loi no. 66 — Loi concernant les changements de nom 



May 18, 1995 

 
2414 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the keeping of Vital 
Statistics/Projet de loi no. 67 — Loi concernant les services 

de l'état civil 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Regulations/Projet de loi 
no. 68 — Loi concernant les règlements 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Solemnization of 
Marriage/Projet de loi no. 70 — Loi concernant la 

célébration du mariage 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 71 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime/Projet de 

loi no. 71 — Loi sur les victimes d'actes criminels 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting Elementary, Secondary 
and Post—secondary Education in Saskatchewan/Projet de 

loi no. 73 — Loi concernant l'enseignement élémentaire, 
secondaire et postsecondaire en Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting Non—profit 
Corporations/Projet de loi no. 74 — Loi concernant les 

sociétés sans but lucratif 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1145) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a quick 
question. The other day I'd asked . . . sent over some 
information from a Julian Scrimbitt and had some calls from 
Julian. I'm wondering if you can give . . . or have a response to 
that information I had requested. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I'm 
not able to provide a final answer on it. The department has 
been working on it in consultation with SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). We hope to get it straightened out. But 
we can't give you any final answer today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, how soon can we expect that? As I 
believe the note says, paragraph 3, failure to respond to this 
letter within two weeks of the date herein . . . and I would take 
that two weeks from May 8, which puts us into a position of 
shortly after the long weekend a response has to be given from 
Mr. Scrimbitt 
 
Would it be possible to, even by tomorrow, have a response to 
our office as to an avenue that could be followed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I hope so. We haven't got the material 
from SGI yet, but we're pressing hard. We know the urgency 
and we're trying to accommodate the member and Mr. 
Scrimbitt. And we'll be in touch with the member and with Mr. 
Scrimbitt as may be appropriate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 
direct my attention one more time to the situation at 
Martensville. First question I'd like to ask is what role does a 
mayor play in any urban municipality with regards to the police 
commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, it's very frequently the 
case that the mayor is the Chair of the police commission, the 
local police commission. And that was the case in Martensville. 
The mayor was the Chair of the police commission. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what role would the former mayor 
and police commissioner have had in the Martensville 
investigation, the former mayor who is currently the Liberal 
candidate in the constituency of Rosthern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The board would not normally be  



May 18, 1995 

 
2415 

involved in the investigation. And I think that was the case 
here. The board makes the policy but would not get involved in 
the investigation as such. And I think that was the case here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as you're aware, recently your 
government announced that it would extend some help to the 
town of Martensville in regards to the legal fees and the 
problems they were having with a debt load as a result of the 
Martensville investigation. And I'd like to know what that sum 
of money was, what you've contributed to date to the 
community of Martensville, and what role, if any, the present 
. . . current Liberal candidate, Mr. Rob Friesen, would have had 
in sequestering . . . or requesting this assistance for the 
community of Martensville. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, we have provided 
assistance on two occasions. And Mayor Friesen, as he then 
was, was extremely active in soliciting the first grant of 
$60,000, and of course had been the mayor when the 
obligations were created that led to the second grant of 75,000, 
although he was no longer the mayor at that time. 
 
But I repeat, the debt had been incurred, the obligations 
incurred. So the total assistance granted to Martensville was 
$135,000. Mayor Stone, who is the current mayor, acted as the 
mayor during most of 1993 and was elected by acclamation in 
the fall of 1993. And Mr. Friesen had been the mayor 
immediately prior to him. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, would 
this be an appropriate method of dealing with communities who 
have faced such a legal challenge and the costs that would be 
incurred? Would this be a normal process? 
 
And also I don't recall whether or not you have given us the 
total cost that has been consumed to date through the 
Martensville case . . . or the trial that has taken place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I want to tell the member, Mr. 
Chairman, that this is a very unusual situation, that this is quite 
out of the usual course. That is to say, the assistance that we 
provided, that I just described, of $135,000, is very, very rare. 
 
On the question of the costs of Martensville, I'll deal with it in 
two ways. First of all, I'll deal with it as the incremental costs 
over and above the ordinary costs of running the justice system, 
and the incremental costs were nearly $400,000 including the 
grants. 
 
The systems costs, the regular system costs were about 488,000. 
So if you add those together you get in excess of $880,000 
being the cost of the Martensville situation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, that 
certainly, I think, proves our point of the fact that there should 
be some research into how investigations in this manner are 
conducted; how that one was conducted. 
 
There was a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) item on  

the news, Monday evening, and I wish I'd have had the 
opportunity to be able to view it because just the closing 
comment — I didn't realize at the time they were addressing it; I 
believe they had a law professor from Saskatoon and a couple 
other individuals — but the closing comment that caught my 
ear was from one individual: one has to ask whether or not the 
children are victimized more by the prosecution and by the 
police through the interrogations and the interviews than what 
actually took place. 
 
And I think that's the question that is really out there. And that's 
why I would continue to suggest that if we really want to open 
up, really want to show people that the system works, really 
want to show people that individuals who are entrusted with 
positions of responsibility and authority do not abuse it; if you 
had an inquiry where everything was just thrown out in the 
open to a public . . . to an independent person totally removed 
from anyone who would have been involved from all the 
interviews, it may address a number of those questions. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, I think there's going to be a lot more 
coming out just from what I see, as we saw in the news Monday 
night and other interviews, and I understand there's even a book 
that's being presently just about talked . . . The author called me 
a couple of weeks ago and he hopes to have it in print and out 
on the street in June. 
 
So it seems to me that there will be questions for time and 
eternity regarding what happened, regarding circumstances that 
took place at Martensville. And it would have been only 
appropriate to have a total review, not asking people to go back 
and talk to children and talk to all the individuals involved, just 
having access to every piece of information — all the tapes, all 
the videotapes — and to go through and see whether or not 
justice was handled in an appropriate manner. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's another question I'd like . . . and there's a 
number of questions I'm going to bring to your attention that 
have just been raised with us — questions that have come 
directly. I'm going to keep the individual's name out of it 
because the individual has asked for confidentiality. 
 
But questions that have been posed by individuals from across 
this province in regards to the recent and ongoing investigation 
that a number of MLAs are facing, or former MLAs. And I 
guess one of the biggest . . . first of all, I'd just like to . . . when 
we see headlines like: entering politics, you lose your reputation 
. . . There's a couple of paragraphs I'd just like to read out of 
this: 
 
 Expense account problems are not unusual in the world 

of private business and the problems are usually worked 
out without destroying the reputation of the person 
under suspicion. But not on the public stage of politics. 

 
 Whether the former politicians are convicted or 

acquitted, their names are already ruined by the 
extensive publicity linking them to fraud. Now added to 
the traditional reasons for never considering a career in  



May 18, 1995 

 
2416 

politics, the former PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus is 
being maligned by allegations about peddling expense 
account matters that are several years stale, and people 
wonder why we can't get a higher quality of candidate to 
run for public office. 

 
And I've got another letter here to the editor, just talking about 
the way the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
conducted themselves in interviewing and actually coming into 
the community, into their community, regarding one of the 
former members. And a number of questions being raised as to 
. . . I'm just going to read part of the letter to the editor, "Search 
tactics rapped." 
 
Imagine a group of police officers from the city, some plain 
clothes, some in uniform, complete with a search warrant. They 
drive into a small town where we all know each other and they 
have orders to follow. Driving in with sirens blaring and lights 
flashing is what we've heard, and people are saying, what kind 
of authority do we have here. The first paragraph is: 
 
 These past weeks we have seen and heard of activity 

previously only reported from far-off countries behind 
the Iron Curtain. 

 
And I think a lot of people have a lot of questions. And this 
person basically ends up by saying: 
 
 I feel sorry for honest men and women within our police 

network and policing network who in many cases were 
forced to carry out some of the policies of the RCMP. 

 
With regards to that, Mr. Minister, I'd just like to relate a 
number of questions that were raised, that people want answers 
to in regards to this whole investigation. And I realize it's an 
ongoing thing that may restrict you in responses. But I think 
there's some very upfront and open questions that need to be 
asked, and I'd like to raise them. And possibly until we get a 
chance to address them a little later on, you may have a chance 
to review these questions. 
 
And here are the questions as they were put to us: 
 
Can you demonstrate that all 66 members of the legislature who 
served between 1986 and 1991 were investigated in the same 
rigorous manner? 
 
Who are the people in the shadows making the decisions about 
who to protect or who to prosecute and not to prosecute? 
 
Where are the terms of reference for an investigation into the 
expense accounts of all members of the legislature? If there is 
none, how do you defend an ad hoc process of favouritism or a 
witch-hunt? 
 
Why was Mr. Koskie, the NDP member, allowed to repay his 
communication allowance and charges dropped? Who made 
this decision? 
 

When all the public and press have access to all expense 
information of members of the legislature who do not face 
charges . . . Pardon me. When will the public and press have 
access to all expense information of members of the legislature 
who do not face charges, in order to ensure that there is no 
political favouritism at work? 
 
Can the RCMP and the Justice department demonstrate or 
prove that their investigations were more than a selective 
fishing expedition targeting only certain people? 
 
Name the members of the RCMP and the Justice department in 
the chain of command which resulted in charges being laid. 
 
And, how many hours and dollars were spent by the RCMP, by 
the Justice department, in this process? How many dollars have 
been spent to date in the investigations ongoing? 
 
And I guess at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, one has to ask 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. It now being 12 o'clock, the Committee 
of Finance will rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to a motion of the House dated May 
17, this House stands recessed until 1:30 this afternoon. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 


