






















































May 17, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 17, 1995 

 

 
2359 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome once again to the Premier and his officials. 
 
I thought I might as well start the questioning tonight, because 
as usual the Liberals aren't around, and somebody has to do the 
work in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So I would be prepared to start some 
questioning to the Premier this evening. 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Premier, in question period we asked you 
about your broken campaign promises from the 1991 election. I 
think it's really sad that we've got to this state in this province, 
Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that you vowed to end poverty 
in your first term. 
 
I know that you're contemplating shutting that first term down a 
little bit early, but simple fact is, sir, that we have over 80,000 
people on welfare in this province now — highest number in 
recorded history in this province. Over 80,000 people on social 
assistance. 
 
Mr. Premier, we have over $4,500 per family in tax increases in 
this province. We have $225 million in net tax increases — so 
your Finance Minister tells us the other day — and this in the 
face of all the promises you made about ending poverty, about 
taking the tax load off of Saskatchewan people. You said that 
taxes are the silent killer of jobs in our society. 
 
Today, 1995, May, you still, sir, have fewer jobs in this 
province than you had when you took office back in 1991. So 
when you add it all up it's not a pretty picture. Yes, you do have 
a balanced budget. But you've balanced it on the backs of some 
of the people in our society that can least afford it. 
 
So I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, starting with the promise to end 
poverty in your first term, how do you square the fact that with 
this horrific tax load which you have put on the backs of . . . 
and I remind you sir that your family of Crown corporations 
forces these poor people to pay every utility rate increase. They 
have no choice but to pay and pay and pay for your agenda. 
 
So how do you square the fact that poverty, and according to 
the headlines in the paper the other day, that the hunger 
situation, in Regina is worse than it has ever been. How do you 
square that fact with the campaign promises of '91 and the fact 
that yes, you've balanced a budget but you have done it on the  

backs of those that can least afford it in our society. How do 
you square that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 
member's logic is not in a consistent flow here, but let me just 
try to address his question none the less. 
 
First of all with respect to the social assistance numbers in 
terms of the cost to the provincial government, I think the hon. 
member, to be fair, would and should acknowledge the 
following, that the Liberals in Ottawa initiated an offload which 
in effect transferred onto the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, a 
yearly cost in the approximate order of $20 million more by 
virtue of their position with respect to status Indians and social 
services. 
 
That is a very big chunk of money, as the member from 
Thunder Creek will admit. And this is a change in the rules to 
begin with. Even at that, I want to be absolutely certain here lest 
I mislead the House, but I believe the Minister of Social 
Services was telling me the other day that the numbers of actual 
case-loads in February of 1995, for that period, showed a 
decrease of something over 500 in Saskatchewan as opposed to 
the month previous . . . and a decrease. That we have a job to 
yet do with respect to the question of employment and getting 
people off social service and working is admitted. 
 
We've initiated programs like the children's action plan, the 
child nutrition program, the Children's Advocate program. 
Family income improvements have also been made. The 
Saskatchewan child tax credit reduction has been increased to 
two fifty per child. And we have JobStart, and Future Skills, 
and New Careers, of course, which is something which your 
administration was very active in. 
 
All of these are at work and the poverty issue is going to require 
the concerted effort of governments, and the non-government 
organizations, and community organizations — the chili for 
kids program, as an example. There are many like that, on a 
coordinated effort, to really tackle and to reduce this problem. 
So I believe that we have made progress. We have not 
succeeded. As I said to the Leader of the Opposition, we have 
many goals yet obviously that we need to strive for attainment. 
That is clearly right very near the top of the load. 
 
Now with respect to your other question, which is respect to the 
tax area, the Leader of the Opposition and I went through this 
debate earlier in the day, so I'll just simply repeat very briefly. A 
lot depends on how one computes the figures, but I will say 
categorically that for families, and categorically, that for 
families of 25,000 earning, or 50,000, or 75,000, all of these in 
the province of Saskatchewan see the total cost of living — that 
includes utility rates, includes mortgage and property taxes, 
auto insurance, telephone, home heating, electricity — we are at 
the very best level for people at $75,000. 
 
It was the Leader of the Opposition himself who earlier today 
was pointing out the fact that most people don't make $6,000 a  



May 17, 1995 

 
2360 

month, in his debates with respect to Mr. Dickson Bailey. Well 
up to 75,000, that's a pretty fair break, pretty good break. 
 
I suspect as a Conservative member of the House you wouldn't 
admit that Mr. Klein in Alberta, with a medicare hospitalization 
premium of I think it's $840 a year for a family of four, you 
wouldn't admit that that's a tax. But obviously it's a cost of 
living, whether it's a tax or not, and I think it is a tax. 
 
Put all of those into the pot and you come out with a situation 
where we have (a) the most efficient provincial government . . . 
if not the most, very, very close to the most efficient 
government in Canada. I believe it is the most efficient 
government in Canada on a per capita basis in the provision of 
operating services of the government. And we have a tax load, 
given the huge deficit and debt we inherited, which is also the 
best to $75,000 income in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We haven't eliminated the poverty situation. We need to do 
more work there, there's no doubt about that. But we have the 
programs into place and in the weeks and months ahead we'll 
make better progress I'm quite sure. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Premier, you and I agree on one 
thing, that you've got to have a program. But what I don't find 
from your government is a program that equates into a job. 
Now you can criticize Mr. Klein for the way that he runs his 
province, but the simple fact is that Mr. Klein has got 80,000 
jobs to his credit since taking over as Premier of that province. 
Mr. Klein's been on the job about half the time that you have, 
sir, and he's got 80,000 jobs to the plus. 
 
And I wouldn't start crowing about my health care sector. I 
mean I can remember a time when a family in this province had 
a health care deductible of $125 on their drug plan. That same 
family today could face up to $1,700. That same family today in 
rural Saskatchewan can drive 100, 150 miles before they're 
anywhere near health care facilities, sir, that you closed. So all 
over this province we've got people with increased health costs. 
Now you may not feel that that 100 or 150 miles in between a 
family in rural Saskatchewan and a health care facility is not a 
cost, but I say to you it is. 
 
So you can criticize other jurisdictions, but if you look in your 
own backyard . . . And when one criticizes the federal Liberals 
— and yes, you are proper to do that, sir, because of the havoc 
they wreak on western Canada every time they get into power 
— the simple fact is when it comes to offloading your 
government has been at the top of the list. There isn't an urban 
or rural municipality in this province that has not felt your bite 
and they have had to turn around and offload. You have got 
school taxes up, you've got municipal taxes up, you've got water 
tax, everything is gone up, up, up. 
 
And at the end of the day, at the end of the day, if you had 
created the jobs . . . and I remember you saying, I think we can 
create 30,000 jobs in this province over our four-year term. If 
you had done that, sir, somebody would have given you credit. 
But the simple fact is that you are in a minus position. You are  

in a minus position and you are there because of your tax 
regime, the fact that you allow your family of Crown 
corporations to do what they do to Saskatchewan families. You 
allow your friends in the labour movement to ask for 
unreasonable rules and regulations to drive up the cost of doing 
business in this province, sir, and you can't create the jobs. 
 
And you can turn the Minister of Economic Development loose 
on this province as you've done in the last few months with a 
few million here and a few million there, and get himself 
invited out to every sod-turning he can possibly find where 
there might be a job created by somebody else, sir, but at the 
end of the day, you're minus. 
 
You know, zero over zero is zero. And if you can show me 
some numbers today that says that there are more jobs in this 
province than when you took over as Premier, then show them 
to me. I'd love to see them. But they aren't there, sir. The 
welfare is there. The taxes are there. And the jobs flee this 
province because of your tax mentality. Tax, tax, tax. 
 
Mr. Premier, tell us what you're going to do in your second 
term. Why should we grant you this budget? If you have not 
kept a single promise from the first term, why should we give 
you a second term and a budget to go into another term? 
 
Tell us what you're going to do to create those jobs. What are 
you going to change with the family of Crown corporations? 
What are you going to change in labour legislation? What are 
you going to do to get the people off the welfare rolls in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the members of 
the committee will know of course that what we're under study 
and consideration here this evening are the estimates for the 
'95-96 expenditures, and not some presumed election campaign. 
And the member phrases questions in the arguments about what 
we should do in the next term of office. 
 
At the appropriate time, when there's an election called, we will 
outline to the people of Saskatchewan what our four-year plan 
is. Although we have indicated in this budget, '95-96, the 
four-year plan to debt reduction, to tax reduction, and to the 
augmentation of education and health services, roughly in 
one-third proportions. That's the plan. That's our plan. And 
we've set that out. 
 
I want to clarify something here. It's not my job nor do I intend 
to criticize another province or another premier, another 
government of that province. That government, I assume, and 
the legislature knows best what's for that province, and I don't 
intend to criticize. But I think it is important to note that when 
you talk about health budgets, '95-96 budgets, in Alberta the 
budget saw for '95-96 a decrease of about $276 million or 7.2 
per cent. In Saskatchewan there was a slight increase of 3.4 per 
cent. I might add, very hurriedly, however, are still  totals that 
are being spent  are less than they were in '91, unlike the 
claims by the Liberal Party. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2361 

But on a per capita spending, I think you should make note of 
this. In Saskatchewan per capita spending on health is 1,535 
and in Alberta it's 1,306, and we do not have any health care 
premiums. It's $768 annually for families in Alberta and 384 for 
individuals annually in Alberta. And the premium's to increase 
on July 1, 1995 by 6.3 and there are scheduled further increases 
of over 10 per cent over the next two years. Now that's the 
situation in Alberta. 
 
Jobs  30,000  the partnership paper which was formulated 
in consultation with the business community. That indicates a 
target by the year 2000. And we think we're on the target for the 
year 2000. 
 
Now I think the employment statistics that need to be kept in 
mind are as follows. We have, at the end of April, '95, 448,000 
people employed in Saskatchewan. That's up 6,000 from April 
of 1994 — 442,000. And the unemployed has decreased from 
43,000 to 36,000, and our unemployment rate is at 7.4 per cent, 
the lowest in the country. And lest anybody says it's a 
population loss, our population also has grown in the last 
several months. 
 
Again, the question that has to be always asked is, are we 
satisfied with that? The answer is, no we're not. Can more be 
done? The answer is, it has to be done. 
 
We do have, we think, a competent, sensitive tax regime, 
coupled with the targeted, focused partnership for jobs 
program, which together, given a little bit of luck, and a lot of 
hard work the Saskatchewan people are capable of, I think will 
lead to continued solid growth in job creation and improvement 
of the economic and fiscal climate of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We could not have rectified the situation which we inherited 
three years and some months ago, overnight. I think the hon. 
member in fairness would admit that that is the case. But that 
we have made large strides toward turning things around, 
seeing the dawning of a new day, as I describe it, I think is also 
equally a fair statement to make. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — But you see, Premier, what I'm asking you for 
and you don't seem to grasp, is when I said a plan, it's 
something based on more than . . . I mean there isn't a whole lot 
of magic or a great deal of initiative to simply put up taxes. It 
doesn't take a genius, sir, to unleash on a population of people, 
a whole host of taxes — especially when they are captive. I 
mean most of your natural monopolies that you have in the 
Crowns don't have any competition so they can raise utility 
rates and they can tax through the back door and everybody has 
no choice. So there's not a great deal of magic to that. 
 
And what we're saying to you is that if you are going to achieve 
the things that you say that you want to, then you're going to 
have to find ways to make this province both more competitive 
and encourage local people — as you claim to do — to invest  

their money without getting the taxpayer involved. And yet we 
don't see any of those initiatives from your government. 
 
You say all of the right things but the evidence is clear and I'll 
give you an example. The Finance minister and I have talked 
about this a couple of times. You allow in this city, with one of 
the worst poverty situations in its history, according to the 
people that deal with the downtown core and other areas, you 
allow your Minister of Economic Development to go off in 
downtown Regina as we speak, and sink over $20 million into a 
casino — into a casino. 
 
And I asked the Finance minister about it. Did she go through 
Treasury Board with it? Was there a proposal because he's 
being able to operate out of the revenue flow with the liquor 
and gaming corporation? And I get no answers. 
 
She won't tell me if it went through Treasury Board. Well it sort 
of did. Well who did you . . . what's the analysis on it? Well it's 
privately built. And when we get something going down the 
road, we'll pay off the contractor. And we don't know. But 
there's huge amounts of money being spent in the downtown 
core of a city that has a poverty and a welfare problem. And yet 
that money is just allowed to be spent, and away it goes. 
 
And I don't consider that a plan, sir. That doesn't make sense to 
me. People don't get a vote. You simply say to the Economic 
Development minister, go form yourself a casino corporation. 
Go downtown Regina. Hook up with a developer and start 
spending millions of dollars. Well I only point that out to you, 
sir, because that doesn't seem consistent with any kind of a plan 
that would generate the type of economic activity . . . And 
you've said yourself, you don't like this gambling thing 
personally; you're only doing it for external reasons. 
 
But my goodness, what kind of a regime is it that doesn't even 
take a plan like that through Treasury Board? That is not the 
kind of regime that the people of this province want dealing 
with their tax system. 
 
So again I say to you, is that the kind of example that you want 
to put out to Saskatchewan people as part of your plan of easing 
the economic burden? I mean for goodness sakes, all due 
respect, this province has had the lowest unemployment rate, 
sir, either lowest or second lowest for the last 15 years, back 
into the Blakeney administration, consistently near the bottom. 
And unemployment, that's never been our problem. Our 
problem today is poverty, welfare, and a tax regime that 
discourages job creation, when next door Alberta is growing 
like guns. 
 
So, sir, I say to you, is that the kind of plan that you want to 
bring into the province of Saskatchewan, something based on a 
free-wheeling minister in downtown Regina spending over $20 
million on a casino? Is that the kind of plan you talk about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member, I 
understand his interpretation of the facts. He wants to make a 
point. But he's not being fair because he knows full well that it  



May 17, 1995 

 
2362 

was the plan of the government, which we introduced in the 
early months of 1992, which got us to a balanced budget this 
year. It was a plan which we announced the reorganization of 
government, the tax reductions . . . sorry, the tax increases 
where necessary, of government, and the elimination of 
government expenditures. That's the plan. 
 
And we have a plan for the future. This was set out by the 
Minister of Finance in this year's budget, which is subject to our 
debate. And in general terms the member will know that we 
have a plan which says that now that we're in balance, every 
surplus dollar will be divided roughly into one-thirds. 
 
One-third for debt reduction. We hope by the end of March 31, 
1999 to knock off $1.2 billion on the debt. That's in the 
financial documents. One-third is for continued tax relief, but 
we're going to try to focus it, going to make sure that it's the 
best tax relief for manufacturing and processing. That's why 
Cargill came to Saskatchewan. And thirdly, the one-third, the 
last one-third, is for the quality of life, for education and for 
health care. 
 
Now there's the plan set out, and we think that with the 
estimates that are set out there, since we have been accurate on 
the estimates in the preceding four years, we'll be accurate for 
the estimates in the future four years. But we can get the kind of 
activity which is desired by the members of this province and 
by the members of this House. 
 
I would simply close by saying that in the interests of time, I 
don't think it would benefit much for me to go through all of the 
various announcements which have taken place: Cargill at 
Clavet; the Sears call centre; the CIBC (Canadian Imperial 
Bank of Commerce) call centre; Riddles Inc. at Mossbank; 
Limagrain Canada Seeds; Royal Bank call centre; Langbank 
Seed Hawk Inc.; Melville, Babcock & Wilcox, 30 new jobs; 
Carrot River saw mill, modernization; Vonda High-Line 
Manufacturing. 
 
You don't need to take my word for it. I mean these are actual 
announcements; some stemmed from developments during the 
former administration’s period in office. The financial papers, I 
think, are quite clear about it. Oil production flows, Twinpak 
likes Regina atmosphere, prospects good, all eyes on Swift 
Current area, call centre confirmed. 
 
And I could continue on. Why? Because it's a plan. And the 
plan is the plan dealt with in the Partnership for Renewal paper 
which we have set out. We have set targets. I think we've met 
most of them, if not all of them. Certainly we've met most of 
them, and we continue to work to achieve them. 
 
So I strongly disagree with you. I think we have the credible 
plan. I do not think that the opposition parties do. 
 
Let me just speak about yours for a moment. You say you're 
going to find $250 million roughly in finding efficiencies in 
government. And for the purposes of this discussion, let me just 
say right now we can fire all the MLAs (Member of the  

Legislative Assembly) — just have no legislature, including the 
cabinet although even the Conservatives and the Liberals say 
there'll be half the cabinet — fire all the Premier's staff, take 
away all the pensions, from even the retired MLAs let alone the 
future MLAs, take all of that away, and you'll still have to look 
for $220 million roughly speaking. 
 
And I tell you where you're going to have to find it. You're 
going to find it the only place you're going to go to find it, and 
that is after health care and after education. And in your case, as 
in the Liberal case, you're going to have to find a debt reduction 
plan which will see the debt reduced in 25 years according to 
your operation. That'll be $500 million more on top of what I've 
just told you about a year in order to apply for debt application. 
 
And if you think you can do that without absolutely destroying 
the poverty fight, the fight against poverty, without destroying 
social programs, without destroying the health care system and 
the education system, then I think you've got another think 
coming. 
 
Look, we have made our mistakes in the health care renewal. 
It's things that we're going to rectify. Obviously that's the case. 
We've embarked on something which is brand-new. But believe 
me — and I think the people of Saskatchewan know this — that 
for all of our problems and difficulties, at least it was based on 
the philosophy of good health care. And they know at the end 
of the day — even with the errors that have been made — what 
we have done comes from a party that invented medicare, 
protects it, and will have it protected. And that is the plan  
partnership to the year 2000, the one-thirds, and the successes 
which I've already told you about. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Premier, I appreciate your fear of the 
Texas audit style of health care reform proposed by the 
Liberals. But you are sadly mistaken if you point at this party as 
being people who short-change medicare; maybe a little 
over-exuberant in rural areas with providing first class health 
care. 
 
And I agree with you, sir. There's the odd facility out there that 
probably on rethinking should have been dedicated to finding 
places for our senior citizens rather than trying to combine 
acute care with it. I'll give you that much. But as far as trying to 
maintain quality health care in this province during the 1980s, 
the only criticism I ever heard from you or any of your party 
was, you're not spending enough. And goodness knows you're 
on record thousands of times, right up through the '91 
campaign, talking about the need to spend more money on 
health and education. And the fact today is, the fact today is, 
that your health budget's no different. But there's a whole bunch 
of people out there who feel disenfranchised by the party — as 
you say — that invented medicare. The inheritors of Tommy 
Douglas's legacy have disenfranchised their medical rights in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's sad because I believe, Premier, you could have 
achieved everything that you'd talked about in your last 
statement without taxing the people of this province into the  



May 17, 1995 

 
2363 

ground. And that's simply by creating, by creating, a climate, 
Premier, by creating a climate that allowed people to invest and 
grow. 
 
And I know you'll come back and give me this song and dance 
about the cooperative whatever. But the simple fact is, sir, that 
you can't do what you've done with your Trade Union Act and 
what you've done with union-only preference tendering. I mean 
how many Melfort pipelines can you stand to have around this 
province spewing water out of leaks all over the province? You 
can't have it, sir. You can't have it. 
 
It's those kind of things and the 9 per cent sales tax that are 
harming your goals. The very things that you just said to the 
Legislative Assembly that you want, that you'd rather have than 
a casino in downtown Regina with tens of millions of dollars 
spent on it. I know you would rather have the other. 
 
So I say to you, how do you square it? How do you take Tommy 
Douglas's legacy and say to rural Saskatchewan, I'm sorry but 
we can't provide you; you're now a second-class citizen in 
health care. Had to have your minister announce . . . you know 
what she gave us today in rural Saskatchewan, Premier? She 
gave us 9-1-1. She said if you're sick and you're in trouble, 
phone 9-1-1. You might be 150 miles from a hospital but you 
got 9-1-1 courtesy of the NDP (New Democratic Party) and the 
gambling dollars. Yes, that's what gambling has given rural 
Saskatchewan, sir, is 9-1-1. Well if that's Tommy Douglas's 
legacy, you can't be very proud — 9-1-1 based on gambling 
dollars — because I don't have health care in rural 
Saskatchewan any more. 
 
And I believe you could have achieved it without taxing the 
daylights out of us and driving out business. So how do you 
square that legacy, sir? How do you square it — 9-1-1 built 
with gambling dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have no 
difficulty in submitting to the House and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that our renewal is a logical, consistent, next 
development of health care in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
And I have no doubt whatsoever in my mind that it falls within 
the tradition and within the dreams of those who pioneered 
medicare in 1962 and earlier and those who even thought about 
it in 1944 — absolutely none whatsoever. 
 
You know today we are maintaining more acute care and 
nursing home beds in use than most of the provinces — 20 per 
cent above the national average even after the renewal system. 
You fasten in on 9-1-1. What about first responders? What 
about $20 million for home care? All of these programs are 
going to be working their way into the system and felt. We have 
more physicians practising in Saskatchewan today than we've 
had last year as well. 
 
We are working a philosophy which seeks to prevent illness, 
seeks to prevent accident, keep us healthier and happier at home 
longer and away for the institutions which we know is very 
costly and very often is in a circumstance where the medical  

profession is doing the best that it can, but after all it's just 
made up of human beings. This is a philosophy which is a 
natural, logical next step. 
 
And that's why other provinces are looking at us, I would say, 
with full support. Other provinces are saying you've got a 
variety of models of health care renewal. I'll just come back to 
Alberta as an example, compared to Saskatchewan. Think what 
the federal Liberals are proposing. Here they're proposing block 
transfers and a 30 per cent cut to the provinces with no 
underlying philosophy behind this whatsoever. None, none, 
none whatsoever. 
 
(1930) 
 
So if I was to be able to converse with people with whom I 
worked and respected at the time that medicare was set up in 
1962, I have no doubt that they would endorse exactly what 
we're doing. I acknowledge it's not been easy. It's not been easy 
on the health care-givers. It's not been easy on some of the 
communities. It's not been easy on some of the patients. And for 
whatever it's worth, goodness knows, it's not been easy on us 
either. But it is the foundation of saving the health care system 
for this country that we've put into place here. That is what is 
essentially at issue and behind it. 
 
And I say to you, sir, that at the end of the day people will say 
in the province of Saskatchewan: well maybe this didn't quite 
work; maybe that didn't quite work; but we know the history in 
this province, and the history is a history of Conservatives and 
Liberals — not all of them, but at least the organized political 
apparatus — opposing consistently. 
 
You fought us in medicare in '62 and the same speeches were 
made; I was there. In '62 the same speeches were: you're 
destroying the best and finest health care system going. And 
Ross Thatcher was at the door of this legislature, kicking on the 
legislative door, demanding that we stop the progress. And this 
is the same line. 
 
And when you say, well how would you have done it, then you 
get the general answer that sort of says: well we would have 
done it somehow a little bit differently; we might have done 
this, we might have done that. 
 
The truth of the matter is, that if either one of the Liberals or 
Conservatives are elected, or some combination thereof, given 
the fact that you're both on the same track to find 250 million 
bucks, extract that last pound of flesh from the health care and 
education system, the truth of the matter is we will have 
Texas-style — although you eschew it and I applaud you for 
eschewing it, we don't need Texas-style solutions here, we need 
Saskatchewan-style solutions here . . . the result will be none 
the less a very, very fractured system. So to me I have no 
problems in squaring that whatsoever because it's a logical step. 
 
One word on gambling. This is not something which is my 
favourite endeavour to support. I repeat this again. But the hon. 
member knows, and I don't suspect that he'll admit it tonight,  



May 17, 1995 

 
2364 

anybody who would honestly look at this will say, it will be 
here in Saskatchewan. The question therefore then becomes a 
question of accountability, control, disbursement of funds, and 
providing health and support programs for those who are most 
in need in this particular endeavour. To be blunt about that, I 
think more people are prepared to put their faith in the NDP 
than they are in the Liberals or the Conservatives thereto. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'd be happy, Premier, to put it on the 
record. Gambling  and I don't have the deep feeling against it 
that you evidently do, and you always tell people. I say, to each 
their own. But I do tell you this. I believe it's absolutely 
fundamental in our society today, that people have the right of 
self-determination. And I believe that there should be a vote. I 
know you read polls — you do it on a weekly basis these days, 
okay — as I do, as I do in my responsibility. And I know what 
people in the communities of this province feel about it. 
 
And all I think you and I as politicians owe them, is not our 
personal views on whether gambling is good, bad, or 
indifferent; all we owe them, sir, is the right to vote. It's not 
difficult, you know. You have a ballot box, and people mark 
their ballot, and they say yes or no. And you and I as public 
servants, as the people who implement the wishes of the people 
that send us here, then would have to live with the result. And 
whether we like it or not, I believe that that's the way the system 
should work — that you and I would honour the results of the 
community. 
 
It's not difficult. Our personal wishes don't enter into it. And the 
greed, the greed, sir, of government is taken away. If the vote 
says yes, then you do it with the community; if the vote is no, 
then you don't do it. Nobody asks any more. 
 
And I would say to you, interesting how history . . . I don't 
remember there being any Tories in this House in 1962, in the 
medicare debate. I don't think there were any. I think there was 
just Grits and CCFers (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation). But at the time there were no Tories here. You and 
I both know that the major cost of government is in salary. It's 
wages. 
 
And yes, you might have to get to a point in this province, to 
eliminate some of the poverty and the hunger and the welfare 
rolls, by saying to people like you and me, it's time to take a 5 
per cent salary cut, or a 10 per cent salary cut. And you know 
what, we're going to expect everybody else to do the same. 
That's a tough pill to swallow, but you know at the end of the 
day, when you add up all of those other folks out there, it might 
make a lot of sense. And that's where the cost of government is, 
sir. It's not in infrastructure, it's mostly wages and salary, and 
buying this and buying that. And you full well know it — you 
know it. 
 
So that's not unrealistic to talk about today in our society when 
we face a large deficit and we face big fiscal questions. 
 
So I say to you, once again, why do you dismiss, why do you 
dismiss things like lowering the sales tax, things like a roll-back  

of wages, things like lowest tendering policy — things that 
would allow people in this province opportunities to build on 
the natural strengths of cooperation that you always talk about? 
 
And we wouldn't have to then have our only link to health care 
through 9-1-1 funded by gambling. It's not the kind of society, 
Mr. Premier, that I really relish living in, where my basic 
supports in life have to be funded by gambling dollars that 
you've taken from the poor of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I'll try to be brief in 
the response, although the question is a very important one. I 
think there are three or four issues buried in the question. 
 
Let me say off the bat, on the issue of plebiscite, here the hon. 
member and I have, I'll say a disagreement. I will not cast it in 
100 per cent opposition terms, but certainly there is enough of a 
fundamental disagreement here. 
 
I'm not an advocate of plebiscitarian democracy. In California, 
in the United States, talking about the United States, all you 
have to do . . . or many of the states of the United States, you 
have to see what they've done there. They have voted 
themselves into a state of anarchy and strait-jacketing. 
 
Governments in the parliamentary, representative democracy 
sense are elected to make trade-offs of very difficult decisions. 
These are not easy. The member from Estevan has served for 
nine years and he knows how tough it is. And you know this, 
being a member of his cabinet. 
 
You cannot go to the electorate on partial major issues because 
you have to go to them on all of the major issues. And as much 
information as they may have, the capacity to make those kinds 
of trade-offs is limited. So we need to consult, we need to 
listen, we need to be open-minded about it, but we can't shuck 
our responsibilities. We can't say, well you've elected me as 
Premier — at least our government as the government of the 
day — but we're going to toss it back to you; you tell us what to 
do. 
 
I don't think people want that. I think people elected us and they 
say, look, you had a platform, we're going to judge you on what 
you've done or what you've not done, how you make those 
trade-offs. So I make that point about plebiscite. 
 
And may I make one other point as well, that the idea of local 
option votes, anybody who has an ounce of history . . . you're 
not suggesting this, I know, but the Liberals have been on-again 
off-again suggesting this. Anybody who would be advocating 
local option votes knows absolutely nothing of the history of 
the local liquor option votes. So you have a local option vote 
shutting down the pubs in Rosthern, but you go 10 miles down 
the road, and there's a pub at Warman, for example. Or you 
name the community — Sturgis or Preeceville. That is a 
prescription for chaos. 
 
Now the second point that you talked about is why do I oppose 
lowering the PST? I do not oppose lowering the PST if we can  



May 17, 1995 

 
2365 

afford it. I'm not going to promise to lower the PST in order to 
try to get re-elected in '95 or '96 if I can't afford it. Your 
numbers don't work out. Your numbers don't work out. You 
can't find the $250 million, let alone the $500 million on the 
debt reduction. That's a conundrum that you have. 
 
The 5 per cent across the piece you say is salaries. The truth of 
the matter is that salaries are a component of it within 
government. But your savings of the magnitude of 250 million 
are programs. Yes, there are people on salaries, but programs 
. . . I could give you a list — and I will at some appropriate time 
— of the kinds of programs which would be targeted by a 
Conservative-Liberal, Liberal-Conservative agenda if you're on 
the treasury benches in order to find that 5 per cent. 
 
It's voodoo economics, with the greatest of respect. We have to 
lower taxes. We've got to make sure it's part of a strategic, 
well-thought-out lowering of taxes to promote economic 
development; that they're just, and that they're fair. That's what 
we have to do. 
 
We cannot simply say across the piece we're going to lower it. 
Believe me, I'd like to do that, but I'm not going to do that 
because it's not telling the people the truth. I'm going to work 
with groups and with this government to lower them as they 
become possible to be lowered, including the PST — including 
anything else that we can lower at the same time. 
 
That is the position that we take. And I feel that the situation is 
a logical one. It's a thoughtful one. It's steady as it goes. It's a 
steady, firm hand on the tiller, on the rudder. You've got a 
course. You've got a plan. You've succeeded in the past four 
years, and you're going to succeed in the next four years. 
 
That's what we're offering the people — a plan that's working. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, just one more 
question because I see the Liberal leader is here now, and by 
previous agreement, it was agreed that she would have some 
time with you. So I am going to . . . 
 
Sir, that statement almost hinges on the bizarre. In 1991 before 
you ever had a chance to look at the economics of this province 
from the Premier's chair, you promised to take off taxes. 
According to your Finance minister, about $110 million worth 
of provincial sales tax, you were prepared to knock off for 
people in the middle of an election campaign when the price of 
wheat was half of what it is today, when the price of oil was 
less than what it is today; the price of uranium, the price of 
potash, every major commodity in this province, sir, was less, in 
some cases half of what it is today, and the revenue that you 
derived from that. And yet in the middle of that election 
campaign you said, hell no, there's no problem taking off taxes, 
$110 million worth. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I'll just remind the member to be cautious 
about the language that he's using. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — My humble apologies, Mr. Chairman, I just  

got a little carried away with myself. 
 
So here we are three and a half years later and people in the 
province are saying that 2 per cent that you put on us is very 
burdensome. In '91 you didn't hesitate to take off 110 million 
when you never even had a chance, in your own words, to look 
at the books. That didn't bother you. 
 
And today when you've got whole sectors of your economy far 
stronger than they were then, sir, now it's bothersome to you. It 
was a great boon to people in 1991 not to have to pay that 110 
million. And today with 225 million piled on them by you, sir, 
you now say, oh, I can't do it. How could you do it then and you 
can't do it now? Just answer that before you talk to our Liberal 
friend. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say first 
of all there are two reasons for the decision that we took in 
1991 and the campaign position that we took in 1991 with 
respect to the harmonization or doing away with the 
harmonization of the provincial sales tax and the GST (goods 
and services tax). 
 
Well first of all you will recall . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
no, well hold it. First of all you will recall, I don't have the 
clippings here with me but we can produce them for you by 
tomorrow, you will recall that many business people  and our 
own analysis is the best we could do in opposition, and I think 
it turned out to be an accurate analysis — indicated that that 
harmonization tax would have an impact of approximately 
7,500 jobs, negative impact. Because what it would do is it 
would tax a whole series of activities and services, or 
commodities and services, heretofore not taxed. 
 
For example, restaurant owners. I mean go talk to the restaurant 
people and tell them that you want to harmonize the restaurant 
food GST with the PST. Speak to them . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, but that is the first argument, it was going 
to have an negative impact on jobs. But I want to say this as I 
sit down with respect to your exchange; you said the others 
want to get into this for the moment. 
 
The second point is, I remind you that there was a letter which I 
received from the then minister of Finance, Mr. Lorne 
Hepworth, where I asked him what was the deficit for '90-91. 
No, I did. And I can table you that letter. And he says . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well the letter . . . you probably 
wrote it or looked at it. He said, I assure you the deficit is 250 
million. 
 
And we took our campaign decisions based on that projection. 
Don't get me wrong — 250 million is nothing to sneeze at. 
That's a lot of money. But when Mr. Gass came to the job of 
opening up the books and doing an independent review, and we 
found that it wasn't 250, but 900 million — almost a billion — 
that's a different situation. 
 
If that number had been released before the election, well you 
know you might not have your 10 members or so that you came  



May 17, 1995 

 
2366 

back with. That's why you didn't release it; and that's why we 
didn't know. And so all of us had to fashion our responses 
based on the numbers that were there. It seemed manageable. 
And as it so turned out, it has been manageable. 
 
I'll close by saying, we want to reduce the PST (provincial sales 
tax). We want to reduce taxes. But we want to be able to do it 
not for election time, we want to be able to do it for a long time. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
welcome this opportunity, and I welcome the Premier's officials 
here tonight. 
 
If this were the real world, Mr. Chair, here in the legislature, 
then estimates would really be about estimates, and the Premier 
and I would engage in a matter-of-fact discussion about how 
the budget items in Executive Council are allocated. I could ask 
questions and he could give me answers, and we would move 
on to things that really have an impact on people's lives. 
 
The fact is that most people in the everyday world don't know, 
nor do they care, what Executive Council is. They don't know 
what it does. And by and large, they wouldn't miss most of it if 
it were gone. All they know is that their taxes are too high, and 
they're having difficulty in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
departments with names they don't understand, like the 
Provincial Secretary, spend their hard-earned dollars on many 
services that nobody can really even identify. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now the Premier has been at this for what — something like 25 
years, so he pretty much has all of this memorized and down 
pat. And to the best of my recollection of estimates in previous 
years, this is the time when he can indeed get very animated. He 
has at times shaked his fingers at me. He has pounded his desk, 
and I'm sure with all people watching in the province they 
observe with awe. Or in fact, at times he has lowered his voice 
prior to any condescending comments, and he begins with, with 
all due respect, but it really is just a show like so much of what 
goes on here. And I'm concerned that this is not about getting 
real answers from the Premier because I've watched him. The 
Premier waits for that one word in a question that lets him 
launch into a tirade about the federal Liberal government or the 
previous administration. Always looking for the escape valve 
and now we've actually seen this resorted to, doing it in 
advertising. 
 
But I'm here to talk about the people. What about the people? 
What about people who are hearing that there may be an 
election soon, people who are thinking back to 1991 and 
wondering what kind of a government this has really been in 
1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, and now the year 1995. I really do 
think about the people who entrusted us to come here to 
represent them — and that's all of us collectively here — to 
tackle the problems that they face. And I ask myself, what is it 
that they would like to see and what matters to them? 
 
And I ask myself those questions and I'm faced with a choice.  

And I can uphold the tradition as has gone on in last year's 
estimates or the one prior to that, and I too could choose to 
pound my desk or point fingers or do whatever, or we can all 
choose to represent the people of Saskatchewan in the manner 
that we choose. 
 
Now I have made my choice and I'm sure the Premier made his 
choice as well no doubt, so let me begin by talking about 
choices. One of the things that people tell me that they expect 
from a Premier is an understanding of basic Saskatchewan 
values — fair play, honesty, doing the right things for the right 
reasons. And it all comes down to principles. And that's what 
this is really all about, Mr. Chair; it's about principle, and 
principle, I hope, will be the focus of our exchange this 
evening. 
 
People may not understand about Executive Council estimates 
but they most certainly know about whether people in 
leadership roles are making decisions based on a set of beliefs 
and principles. And people certainly expect their Premier to 
demonstrate by his actions that he understands what the citizens 
of this province are facing. And people all across this province 
are telling me that they feel that he really is not in touch with 
them, that he's not in touch with what is happening to their 
families, and he's not in touch with what is happening to their 
communities. 
 
It seems as though his government has become desensitized and 
there's a certain defensiveness that has left people feeling 
unsettled. Now just the other day, the mayor of a northern town 
indicated that they no longer were willing to have VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) in their community. And the Minister of 
Economic Development, he scoffed at them and said that it was 
a joke. 
 
I think those are significant issues with people because they 
begin to feel that government and the cabinet and those who are 
to represent them are out of touch and unwilling to listen. So 
when the Premier was asked in February this year about his 
moral values with respect to casinos, he said, and I quote, "The 
notion that you can earn money without work is a false ethic." 
 
Now what I want to do before leading into my first question is 
to examine that statement as it relates to the issue of principles. 
If the Premier believes that money without work is a false ethic, 
then I presume that he thinks as well that people should work 
for what they get. Now most people believe that the purpose of 
a pension is to provide for people after they retire to maintain 
the income that they had, or close to it, when they were working 
so they don't have to have such a dramatic decrease in lifestyle 
in their elder years. 
 
Now let's just go back a moment to this idea of false ethic put 
forward by the Premier. Let's say a person was in a situation 
where they stood to gain, gain substantially, because the rules 
had changed and suddenly that person would end up getting far 
more money to retire than they earned when they were working. 
Now I think most people would see this as unreasonable and 
most people would consider it unfair. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2367 

So, Mr. Premier, when your pension took a leap from $78,000 
per year to far in excess of even $120,000 per year, as possible, 
sir, you had the perfect opportunity to demonstrate your 
commitment to principle. And there would have been absolutely 
no issue whatsoever even raised in this legislature or outside of 
this legislature about pensions. But instead, what you did was to 
defend yourself. And I in fact have a copy of an article in the 
Calgary paper and you are quoted as saying as follows. And the 
caption at the top, the heading, is: Romanow defends pension 
plan. The first paragraph states: 
 
 Premier Roy Romanow says the pension plan for 

Saskatchewan politicians is fair and opposition critics 
are grasping at straws. 

 
Suddenly you were unable to see that what was going to be able 
to go into your pockets from the public purse at pension time 
was a false ethic. Even though weeks before you were quick to 
admonish the people of Saskatchewan for buying a lottery ticket 
or supporting fund-raising projects because money without 
work was a false ethic. People really have no idea what would 
motivate your decision. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, your decision . . . your pension, I believe, 
was a decision of principle. You had an opportunity to show 
people that what you've been saying and what you were saying 
even just a few weeks ago about everyone being in this 
together, a chance to show people that you really meant it and a 
chance to say, yes, I understand. You had all those 
opportunities and you chose not to do it. 
 
And you didn't simply have hours to do this. You didn't only 
have days to make this decision. You actually had weeks to 
come forward and say, I acknowledge that this is an unfair 
situation, and in fact I'm going to lead by example. I'm going to 
set the stage for all of this. I'm going to be the person to take the 
cut, even talk about it in this legislature. And you chose to do 
none of those things. 
 
My question to you, sir, this evening, is why? Why did you not 
take the opportunity to do the right thing on the basis of 
principle when you had the chance? Why did you only act and 
appear to act on principle when the issue was raised in this 
legislature, raised in the press, and raised on coffee row? Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting that 
the Liberal leader's principles and her definition of what mine 
should be, somehow magically don't apply to her. When the 
rules provided her with a 37 per cent increase on her caucus 
grant, she took it. When the rules allowed for a big increase in 
her salary, she took it. I might add, she took it at the courtesy of 
the member from Shaunavon who jumped from this side of the 
House to her side of the House, something that you indicated 
that a principled leader would never permit without at least 
having a by-election and people in that riding deciding whether 
the switch was approved. 
 
Why is it that it is unprincipled in one case and yet so 
principled in another case? I mean if the rules should be  

changed to show leadership, would you tell me why it is that 
you haven't shown your leadership? 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Premier, you're going to have to do far 
better than that because this morning in the Board of Internal 
Economy I agreed to a 9.6 per cent decrease for the Leader of 
the Third Party. The Leader of the Opposition agreed to a 5 per 
cent decrease. And you, sir, along with the Deputy Premier and 
others, agreed to zero. So I find this most interesting. 
 
And I would caution you, sir, as well, before you start talking 
about people crossing the floor, to start talking with some of the 
people on your front benches before the people of 
Saskatchewan discover how it is some people get into your 
cabinet. 
 
I have full confidence, in fact, in the member from Shaunavon, 
not only in the fact that he handily took his nomination 
meeting; he is going to handily be re-elected to this legislature 
as the member for Wood River. 
 
Now it is indeed interesting. Everybody has alluded to this in 
this House and I really do appreciate, finally, the opportunity to 
respond to this accusation about my salary. You attack me for 
accepting pay for the duties that I perform. And that is not only 
a tiresome kind of argument; it is absolutely illogical. 
 
First of all, provisions for pay for the Leader of the Third Party 
are in The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 
which you know, sir, and they are a requirement of official 
party status. Those provisions were there long, long before I 
was ever elected as a member and before my caucus ever 
attained official party status in this House. And for you to 
insinuate that I have somehow gotten some special deal by 
accepting payment for the duties that I perform is downright 
misleading, and you know it. 
 
Now you have served in this House for decades ad nauseum. 
And I can't find anywhere . . . and we actually looked, we 
looked for any amendments whatsoever ever suggested by you 
to amend these provisions. And you never did it once. 
 
If for one moment I were to accept your analogy, then every 
member of the Executive Council on the front benches with you 
received a 75 per cent pay increase the moment they accepted 
their portfolios. With the exception of course of the Deputy 
Premier, whose increase was 85 per cent when he accepted the 
duties of looking after the Great Seal. And then there's the 
Leader of the Opposition who, by your analogy, took a 79 per 
cent increase on his election to that position last November. 
 
(2000) 
 
So please, let's focus on facts rather than your old boys' 
back-room character attacks, because as much as it might be 
amusing in here, when people look at the actual facts it just 
doesn't measure up. 
 
Now it is baffling. I've come to the conclusion that as usual in  



May 17, 1995 

 
2368 

this House, you let the Deputy Premier speak each and every 
time on the issue of pensions. In his absence, periodically the 
Minister of Economic Development took it on. Not once did 
you accept responsibility. Not once did you go before the 
people of this province and say, I will set the example; I will 
accept responsibility. Now that we have this added information 
of these unconscionable pensions, I will show the people 
through my leadership that I will take this in hand and reduce 
my pension. 
 
I've concluded by your non-answer this evening that you're 
going to do precisely what you've done for the last several 
weeks, and that is say nothing on this issue. I'll give you one 
more chance. Why didn't you? Why didn't you accept 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, this is what I 
find very interesting. The Leader of the Liberal . . . the Liberal 
leader says, we met in the Board of Internal Economy and I 
took — what was it? — an 8 per cent cut or whatever. And so 
did the leader of the . . . well welcome to the real world. Three 
years ago we took a 5 per cent cut. It's about time that you 
caught up. 
 
Then her argument is on pensions. Then her argument on 
pensions is this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . excuse me just 
for a moment. Then her argument on pensions and her pay is as 
follows. You know full well it was in the statute that I had to 
get paid as a third party leader; this is what I inherited by the 
statute. 
 
Well you know something? When I got elected in 1971 it was 
in the statute, the formula pension plan. That's what I inherited. 
You know when I inherited the Premier's pension bonus? 
Thanks to your Liberal leader, Ross Thatcher, I inherited that. 
 
It's okay because you inherited for you not to give it back. But 
because I inherited it — seven of us, everybody else in the 
Chamber on money purchase — we should give it back to show 
leadership. You accuse me of showing no leadership. Why don't 
you show some leadership? Why don't you show some 
leadership? 
 
You can't say because it's not in the statute that you can't 
provide leadership. You can provide the leadership just as we 
did because we're changing the statute. So stand up today and 
say, change the statute and take back all of that money. Don't 
hide behind the rules, because I could have hidden behind the 
rules, and we didn't. Don't hide behind the member from 
Shaunavon who skipped with not a minute's notice to me. That's 
who you accepted without a minute's notice to me, without a 
minute's notice. And then you say to us somehow about 
principles . . .  
 
And look, just on principles and pension, I presume that you'll 
get up and you'll be equally vigorous in your condemnation of 
what the Liberal Party is doing in Ottawa about their pensions. I 
assume that you will get up and you will tell us how you feel 
about the Prime Minister's pension. Will you? Because I intend  

to tell the people of Saskatchewan how you feel about that. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I'm actually on record for doing that 
and I'm not here to discuss the federal Liberal Party as much as 
you would very much like to deflect from your record, sir. 
 
It's most interesting that you mention Ross Thatcher. Do you 
want to know what the salaries of the premiers were in those 
day? They definitely weren't where you're at. We're talking 
about salaries of about $6,500 a year. And no one ever had the 
expectation that things were going to change as they did over 
time. 
 
We're talking about your leadership. We're talking about you 
being the Premier of Saskatchewan. We're talking about you 
understanding what people are going through out there when 
you raise utility rates eight times since you've been elected, 
when you raise taxes every time you turn around, when you are 
the person, sir, who has never had to look anybody in the eye in 
your family as a child and say, I'm sorry, we cannot afford this 
any more. You've never had to experience that. 
 
That's what people are experiencing all the time in this 
province. They're having to make choices. They're having to 
make very, very difficult kinds of choices, and because of 
things over which they do not have any control. 
 
This was an item over which you had control. I didn't have 
control over your pensions. Put me in a position like you are 
and I will demonstrate by example. I in fact never took an 
increase from the day I became Leader of the Third Party. I 
froze at that level just like other people in this legislature did. 
 
And I find it very, very interesting that your only defence is an 
offence. Why don't you simply stand up and accept 
responsibility? That what you could have done  would have 
been the right thing. You could have stood up and said, I won't 
take this; I will reduce my own pension. I won't be forced into 
it; I won't be a man of principle only when I'm forced to be one. 
 
And I think that it's really of great, great disappointment to 
people in this province, who face the difficulties they face, that 
the leadership of this province did not lead. Now quite 
obviously this issue is not going to be addressed by you yet 
again. 
 
It's very baffling that someone with as many assistants and 
helpers and communications people could be really so out of 
touch with what people in Saskatchewan feel about your 
pension plan. And I know that when we're talking about 
Executive Council, this is an office, in other words your 
Premier's office, that according to the budget estimates, and I 
quote: 
 
 . . . provides organization, record keeping and 

communications coordination services to the Premier 
and the Government. It also provides support to the 
Premier in his roles as Head of Government, Chair of 
Cabinet, Chair of Planning and Priorities Committee  



May 17, 1995 

 
2369 

 and Head of the political party with the mandate to 
govern. 

 
Now I know that Executive Council is a large department, Mr. 
Premier. You have 88 people in Executive Council. All of them 
have very important-sounding titles like director of the 
Premier's correspondence unit and assistant director of the 
Premier's correspondence unit. And the Premier's 
correspondence writer, and the manager of the correspondence 
unit, and of course a contingent of secretaries all of them 
earning substantial salaries by private sector standards, and 
many, many people appointed. 
 
But the question that really arises is whether you have so many 
people answering your mail and returning your calls that you 
really have become insulated from what is happening out there. 
We're talking about your office, the Premier's political office. 
And it's a group of people that the Premier relies on for political 
advice and operates the political side of government. And for 
this political support for you, Mr. Premier, 88 staff are required, 
and the people of Saskatchewan pay $7.136 million year. That's 
a lot of bucks. That's a lot of money for political advice and 
letter writing. 
 
So let me ask you this straight up, sir. When we are spending 
that much money, the people of Saskatchewan, on political 
staff, you have to wonder why. Why is it that your needs as the 
Premier of Saskatchewan are 88 staff in your office, when in 
fact if you look to two provinces on either side of us, they have 
substantially fewer people working in their Premiers’ offices. 
Why is it that you need that many staff when we're looking at 
Premiers’ offices elsewhere that measure up to about half in 
each office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I'm very pleased that 
this is a debate on principle and not personalities, as carried out 
by the Leader of the Liberal Party. But that being the case, I will 
spare a little discussion about what kind of choices me and my 
family had to face as compared to the kind of choices she and 
her family had to face, but that's another issue and our various 
backgrounds. 
 
And I don't think I need a lecture also about the pay that Ross 
Thatcher had. When I was elected MLA, for the interest of the 
member opposite, the pay for an MLA was $6,000. And you 
know, if you wanted to go to your Texas-style solution and 
eliminate all of the MLAs, you'd save $7.1 million, and that's 
great. Now you're only 243 million short of what you're going 
to do, which means of course a wholescale attack on health care 
and education. I'll leave that aside for another debate. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, here's an example of where the Liberal 
leader is so fundamentally at variance with the basic facts on 
size. We took the time to take a look at the Executive Council 
in Ottawa, the staff; and also in Alberta, because it was the 
Liberal leader who said that the staff of the Premier's office in 
Saskatchewan was even bigger than the Prime Minister's staff. I 
have — in case she denies it — I have the newspaper quotation 
right here, Yorkton This Week & Enterprise, April 15, 1995.  

She was on the pension argument and then she's on the business 
of the political staff. 
 
Now we're talking principle here, aren't we, Leader of the Third 
Party, and you will know that of the 88 people that are . . . you 
attribute to my office, that there are two functions. One is a 
proper function — both are proper but one is proper in the 
sense of being the traditional, legitimate civil service functions, 
those of policy and planning and advising, which every 
provincial premier in this province has always carried out. And 
another is equally proper but that is in effect what would one 
call more, in your words, the political staff. 
 
You know what the Prime Minister of Canada has? The Prime 
Minister of Canada has 657 people working in his shop. Well 
the hon. member shakes her head. I will give her the exact 
breakdown and with the functions. 
 
Office of the Prime Minister, 78; Privy Council — preparation, 
distribution of documents and reports for cabinet and cabinet 
committee, much like our Planning and Priorities, 310 people; 
administration — to which I have administration — you know 
how much in Ottawa? 212 people. Now there's something 
called ministers’ offices. It's described as the administration of 
the offices discharging duties assigned by the Prime Minister. 
Somehow the Prime Minister has to have 57 people looking 
after them. That's a total of 657 people. You know what the cost 
is to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that you Liberals are 
imposing to Canada? — 75.4 million. 
 
Now you take a look at our structures and our, not exact 
parallelisms to be sure, but the essential parallelisms pertain 
thereto. 
 
I wish the Leader of the Liberal Party would get up and say she 
made a mistake when she said that the Premier's office in 
Saskatchewan has a larger staff, all 88 of them encompassing 
all of those functions, compared to the Prime Minister. 
 
Now comes the question of the Alberta administration which is 
also an interesting discovery. Here were have in the ministry of 
the Executive Council, the total budget in Alberta on a gross 
expenditure of 23.6 million involving many of the same kinds 
of administration  Office of the Premier, general 
administration functions. That's what it is in Alberta. 
 
When I took over as Premier, I reduced the numbers of people 
in the Executive Council and the dollar sums less . . . by a 
million dollars a year we're spending, and less on bodies we're 
spending than under the former administration in 1991. That is 
the facts. 
 
And I tell you, I don't know if I have them here tonight, but we 
would table the Alberta estimates and table the Government of 
Canada estimates. Here they are. Here's the Alberta estimates 
for sure and the page number. I'll table it madam . . . Mr. Chair, 
I'm sorry. Government estimates '95-96, Alberta, I have them 
here, and I'm referring to page 151. And I'm tabling them as part 
of these estimates, and I would only hope that the Leader  



May 17, 1995 

 
2370 

of the Liberal Party, before she asks the question, sets out the 
factual basis upon which one can answer correctly. 
 
(2015) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well, Mr. Chair, I'm really just absolutely 
so pleased that the Premier spent the majority of his time 
talking about the Prime Minister of Canada with the 29 million 
people over whom he must govern compared to of course the 
Premier of Saskatchewan who has to oversee one million with 
88 people as his staff. 
 
Getting around to these 88 people, the ordinary people of this 
province have truly had to tighten their belts, and the Premier 
cannot say no to the raises to his political staff, I understand, 
who's average wage is what? — $49,000 annually. The Premier 
dipped into the public purse and came across with a wage 
increase of 4 per cent for the folks in Executive Council. 
 
I think that, sir, this angers the people of Saskatchewan when 
they find out that the budget for personnel went up this year 
because the people in your office received an average of over 
$1,300 increase in their salary when other people in the 
province did not have that kind of luxury. I don't think that's in 
keeping with the rest of the world. And we can't afford to 
support you with a staff of 88 people making salaries that 
average $49,000 a year. 
 
And this is really what we're talking about in terms of choices 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It's also what I'm talking about 
in terms of setting an example. I raise this because people 
understand what is going on. And they understand what it 
means when a Premier seems to think that this is his money — 
that you can use it freely for whatever you think is in your 
interest. And I think that people are very disillusioned about the 
choices that are being made. 
 
Mr. Premier, the choice to have this staff stands against other 
possible uses for that money if we're talking about $49,000 
average salary and we're talking about 4 per cent increase, we're 
talking about the numbers involved. The $2 million a year extra 
that we would pay in Saskatchewan for the Premier's office 
compared to other places could in fact put in place 45 full-time 
nursing positions. 
 
And that is the problem with this administration. We have more 
administration in this province than people can afford. And in 
the case of the Executive Council, we have more political 
administration than we can afford. 
 
There are three areas within your department, the Premier's 
department, from which salaries are paid: administration, 
communications coordination in cabinet, and policy and 
planning secretariats. I would like you, please, to identify how 
many of the 88 position equivalents are in each of these three 
divisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Madam Chairman, I will give the 
Liberal leader the breakdown and provide the breakdown. I  

want to say to the Liberal leader that the argument about the 
49,000 average is an argument which wilfully or perhaps 
unknowingly tries to in effect indicate that the pay rates that we 
will have to pay for a person with a certain set of qualifications 
from the university or public administration rates, and therefore 
in competition with other governments and private service, of 
necessity elevating the level of pay in some areas . . . What she 
has done is homogenized it and somehow tried to make it into 
some sort of large, average figure. 
 
Ministerial assistants, these are people who act in ministers' 
offices, their average rate is — I'm now searching for the 
memory of this to make sure — is at about 37,000. But what 
you try to do is to mix, if I say so, apples and oranges and try to 
get the higher figure. 
 
But your specific question is what happens. Well administration 
has nine full-time equivalents, and I will spare you the duties as 
to what they . . . unless you want me . . . but I think those are 
obvious . . . at a cost of $612,000. 
 
The cabinet secretariat has five at a cost of 300,000. I'm using 
this on a yearly basis. The deputy minister's office, Mr. 
Bogdasavich, who has worked for the federal civil service and 
is a career civil servant, nine full-time equivalents and 606,000. 
I'm rounding these out. 
 
The planning and policy secretariat has 12 people. That's 
781,000 a year. Communications and coordination unit, there's 
13 people at 770,000. The office of media services and media 
relations is five at 399,000. And the office of the chief of staff, 
which is the other divided function, is 13 full-time equivalents 
at about 898,000. And the correspondence unit is nine people at 
302,000 . . . people. Research and media review, 276,000 at six 
full-time equivalents. And there are four cabinet positions in 
Saskatoon at a cost of 233,000. 
 
Now that's the breakdown; it works out to 7.8. Now that's a very 
lean administration. More than 50 per cent of this is in policy 
planning, cabinet, secretariat work. Please don't characterize it 
as some sort of political hackery. 
 
The other portion is not political hackery either, but at least you 
could argue that these are people in the business of 
communications and monitoring communications. This is not a 
large number. This number is the lowest number. 
 
And I repeat again. Referring to your earlier admonition that we 
should continue this discussion along the lines of principles, I 
think it would be a principled matter for you to tell the 
legislature that you were wrong when you spoke to the Yorkton 
newspaper in saying that my office had more people than the 
Prime Minister's office has and more people than the Alberta 
Premier's office has. I've given you the stats; I've given you the 
books. And if you would do that, I think you would help speed 
things along a little bit. But none the less there's the breakdown. 
 
And I'll tell you something else, you can use your Texas-style 
audits too. You were . . . I'll make this point. You could fire all  



May 17, 1995 

 
2371 

the MLAs. You can take away all the pensions, take it away. 
Take them all away, those that are getting them and those that 
are going to get them. You can throw in all the people in the 
Premier's office, throw them all in. You don't need any 
Texas-style auditors to do that, even grant you that, I'll give you 
that. And your 5 per cent target will be something like 4.89 per 
cent short, which leaves . . . and you can throw in, if you want, 
advertising, and throw in the polling, which the numbers I went 
through with the Conservative members a few moments ago, 
throw all that in, you'll still have 200 million short. 
 
And I would urge you, in the context of principled debate, to 
tell the nurses what that means. You can fire everybody in my 
office. I'll tell you $200 million will tell the nurses in the health 
care system and the teachers what that means because you're not 
going to increase taxes either you say. That means a whole scale 
attack on them. 
 
And by the way, you haven't said a word about what you're 
going to do with the debt. How much money you're going to 
hive off extra from the 250 million to apply to the debt. It 
doesn't fix. It doesn't mix. It doesn't match. It's voodoo 
economics. And I think it's not a principled thing to let the 
people believe that somehow by doing away with all the MLAs 
you can get more nurses. You know better than that. And you 
know better than that because you yourself advocated in 1991 
massive rural hospital closure. But over and above all of that, I 
think those are the facts and I don't see how you can dispute 
them. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well, Mr. Premier, you know far better 
than to talk about Texas-style audits. I don't think the Provincial 
Auditor would be into Texas-style audits. I think that he would 
be into auditing. And I think that private sector auditors in the 
province of Saskatchewan are into Saskatchewan auditing. 
 
And I think it most interesting that what you did today was to 
table what I already have a copy of, and that's the 1995-96 
government estimates from the Province of Alberta. Page 151 
indicates that the Office of the Premier and general 
administration totals 46 people. 
 
Mr. Premier, I don't quite understand what it is that makes you 
so afraid of audits. Yet I find it most interesting when I look at 
what happened when audits were done in the state of Texas to 
examine all different parts of government as wide . . . what are 
you so afraid of to have things done in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
They've done health and human services issues here, went 
through all of these different kinds of things to find out what 
there were strengths and what there were weaknesses in, and in 
the end of their audit, sir, recommended that 331 full-time 
equivalent people be hired. And they did that, and saved $4 
billion in the process. 
 
I don't know what it is you are so afraid of in having your 
government examined for, in fact, making the people of this 
province pay the piper by having higher taxes, higher utility  

rates, pay every single licence fee in more money than they've 
ever had in the past. And what you've done is to say: well we 
can't really do anything about doing government better; heaven 
forbid if we have any audits. 
 
Now I notice, Mr. Premier, that in the six subvotes in your 
department there have been no overall change in the level of 
expenditures. And what is different is the allocation of those 
funds between salaries and operating expenses. The dollars that 
have been taken out of operating have been used to increase the 
three categories of salaries in your department. Could you 
explain please what cuts were made in administration operating 
expenses in order to increase the salaries in that subvote by 2.7 
per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The answer specifically to the 
question is that the money was saved by freezing the positions 
vacant and holding back on travel and those kinds of expenses. 
And so therefore there's been no increase in the Premier's 
allocation this year over last year. 
 
The second point I want to make is your comment about 
Alberta. And this is where I really wish the Liberal leader 
would just cease and desist on this selective recitation of the 
facts. 
 
Look, here is page 151, Executive Council. There are five 
headings under the ministry of the Executive Council; Office of 
the Premier and general administration, that's the number you 
cite — 46 — and you stop there. But why don't you tell the 
people that there's item no. 2, northern development. Okay, let's 
say that doesn't apply to political hackery, but it's still in 
Executive Council. Item 3, personnel administration, 131.4 
bodies. Take public affairs, 163 bodies. Science and research, 8 
bodies or full-time equivalent employment of 364.4. It's right 
here on page 151. 
 
And that's what . . . if you're comparing apples to apples, 
compare the Executive Council to the Executive Council. Why 
just to this particular one number? Please, this does not 
enlighten the debate or help us to the resolution of this issue 
one way or the other. 
 
Now you talk about what is it that I am worried about with 
respect to audits. Absolutely nothing. We opened up the Don 
Gass books, audits. The Provincial Auditor has said that the 
books are now in the best shape that they've ever been in the 
history of Saskatchewan. 
 
I tell you what the Texas-style solution does, however, is two 
things. First of all, I do not believe that the Liberal Party in 
Saskatchewan, when it announced in its platform for this 
forthcoming election . . . had the foggiest idea of what the 
Texas-style review was all about, because there are people from 
The New York Times . . . I'll give you one right here. Mr. Tom 
Craddick, Republican leader in the Texas House of 
Representatives, says this about the Texas audit. Quote: 
“There's a lot of smoke and mirrors, shifts, robbing Peter to pay 
Paul; some of John's things were excellent ideas, but the great  



May 17, 1995 

 
2372 

amount was not true savings.” 
 
Take a look at The New York Times. You know what The New 
York Times says? The New York Times in a quotation was very, 
very simple. One year the largest item in Mr. Sharp's package 
— he's the person in charge of the Texas-style audit which you 
want to employ in Saskatchewan — was an accounting shift 
that managed to save, in quotation marks: 
 
 . . . Texas taxpayers $1 billion (how?) by transferring 

certain medicaid costs to the federal taxpayers. 
Hundreds of millions of dollars in what Mr. Sharp 
trumpeted as cost cutting have come from revenue from 
a new state lottery (Note those words. You're the one 
who's trumpeting Texas-style audit, and they've got a 
new state lottery there) or from reductions in pension 
payments that some public employees say will have to 
be made up later on. 

 
I've given you Mr. Craddick. 
 
I'll give you one other quotation here from an article in The 
Houston Chronicle. 
 
 When the Lieutenant Governor incorporated $2.2 billion 

in cuts into the states budget The Houston Chronicle 
referred to them in an editorial as "smoke and money" 
bookkeeping tricks. The Chronicle and other critics said 
that many of the savings were only (part of the) . . . 
temporary illusion of cost-cutting . . . by pushing 
expenditures into a later spending biennium and 
accelerating (the) . . . tax collections. 

 
(2030) 
 
In fact The New York Times, the date September 12, 1995, said 
they did this exactly by waiting right till the very last day of the 
year in not making a certain registry in the accounting and then 
putting it to the next year and saying look at the money we 
saved in this particular year. 
 
I don't think that you and your advisers had the foggiest idea 
what the heck it was that you were recommending because this 
is what the people say in this context. And I tell you, this is the 
Treasurer in Texas, State Treasurer Kay Bailey Hutchison, 
Republican: 
 
 Said American taxpayers should closely study the Texas 

performance review before buying off on the national 
one. She charged that the Texas plan contains "more 
accounting tricks and money-shuffling gimmicks" than 
cuts of government waste. 

 
. . . was the quotation that she said there. 
 
But the one that I like the best is in an article which I commend 
to the Leader of the Liberal Party. It's an article called "The Big 
Audit", June 1993 by Mr. Dave McNeely and this is what John 
Sharp who's the head of the Texas audit, said to the President of  

the United States. He said: 
 
 It must do away with useless expenses and unproductive 

jobs. 
 
I'll stop there to say I agree with that. 
 
Get this though: 
 
 There must be a body count, specific number of 

programs eliminated and teeth on the sidewalk. Jobs 
have to go, programs have to go . . . 

 
That's your Texas-style audit. 
 
Now I'm going to give you, for the purposes of your Texas-style 
audit, fire us all. Even you say you're going to have a cabinet of 
10 if you should make it, so you can't have all gone. Even you 
said you've got to have some premier's office. But let's say 
they're all gone; take all the pensions off; take all of the 
communications, the polling; it's all gone by a Texas-style audit. 
You still have to find $220 million to make that 5 per cent. 
 
You know where you're going to find it? Because the only 
places where governments spend is health care, education; 
you're not going to default on your interest payments of $880 
million a year. You won't do that because it will shut down this 
province faster than that, so you have to make your interest 
payments. You might attack social services — I think you will. 
You might attack municipal government; but I tell you where 
your money is going to be. Your money will be attacking health 
care: first responders, nurses, doctors, the health care system, 
look — teachers. 
 
We have made our mistakes as we've proceeded along the way 
in health care renewal, there's no doubt about it. But we've done 
it in accordance with a plan and a philosophy designed to 
protect health care and medicare. And if we could do some 
things over again we would have done it over again, and we're 
going to work to repair those things. 
 
But I tell you, anybody in this political environment that gets up 
and says they're going to find $250 million, and use as symbolic 
things like the ones I've identified to find the money, is not 
levelling with the people of Saskatchewan. The truth is that the 
people of Saskatchewan will get it in the neck in education, and 
health care, and social services like they never got it; or in the 
words of Mr. Sharp: teeth on the street, body counts on the 
street. 
 
I'm for efficiency. We have the lowest per capita operating 
expenses in Canada. The investment dealers of Canada say so. 
They say second lowest. 
 
We say we're the leanest government right now. We're leaner 
than Alberta and leaner than Manitoba. They're doing a good 
job. And if the numbers should say that they're slightly higher 
or better or we're higher, it's not true. It doesn't matter. Even in  



May 17, 1995 

 
2373 

that range, we're doing a good job. We've got the leanest 
government now. 
 
You're going to extract from all these people, by Texas-style 
approach, $200 million. I say that's a matter of scariness. We 
don't have a thing to learn from Texas. We do not have a thing 
to learn about their health care system. We do not have a thing 
to learn about how they have the efficiency test to their health 
care. 
 
I want to give you one other quotation. I know you're not 
defending the Liberal Party in Ottawa very much these days, so 
you say. But I want to give you one quotation. And this is a man 
with whom I've had my political differences, but I've got to tell 
you, if we differ, we differ, I like to think, on principle and 
policy. 
 
May 13, 1995, right here. This is in the national news of The 
Globe and Mail. You may have seen it. The headline says: 
"Martin ridicules key promise by Tories: Conservatives can't cut 
taxes by $4-billion while balancing (the) budget, federal 
Finance Minister says." 
 
I want you to consider carefully what your Liberal Party says. 
This is what Mr. Martin says, quote: 
 
 "The fact is that seven of the 10 Canadian provinces 

have now announced a clear plan for balanced budgets 
. . . and not one of them has been able to do it, not one, 
including the government of Alberta, has been able to 
do it on the basis of large-scale tax decreases," he said. 

 
Quote: 
 
 "You can't have a massive, across-the-board tax 

decrease at the same time that you're talking about 
deficit reduction unless . . . (you're prepared to do so by 
totally abandoning your social responsibilities). 

 
And this is a quote that I think you should pay particular 
attention to, if I may say so: 
 
 "Liberals do not believe that government is something 

that you occupy in order to abolish," Mr. Martin said. 
 
I'm going to read that to you again: 
 
 "Liberals do not believe that government is something 

that you occupy in order to abolish . . . What we believe 
is that government is something that enables people to 
fulfill their ultimate aspirations." 

 
That's what the Liberals say, everywhere but apparently in 
Saskatchewan, where you're in a mad race with the 
Conservatives to out-Conservative the Conservatives, to 
out-Klein the Kleins, to out-Texas-style the Texans, to find 
these kinds of social responsibilities that Mr. Paul Martin talks 
about, and he says it can't be done. Don't take my word for it; 
take Mr. Martin's word for it. Where do you stand? With Mr.  

Martin or with the Texas-style audits on health care and 
education? 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well my, my, my, you must be terribly 
desperate, Mr. Premier. I think some of the people who wrote 
those articles are probably the ones making your commercials 
these days. 
 
You sure didn't want any audits of health districts, sir, did you? 
And we will make sure that the Provincial Auditor approves of 
the process. If you have no faith and trust in the Provincial 
Auditor in Saskatchewan, that's your problem. We have implicit 
faith in Mr. Strelioff. 
 
We have no interest in Texas-style anything but we do 
definitely have a grave concern about the cost of government in 
the province of Saskatchewan for 1 million people. They can't 
afford the size of government that you provide, and we don't 
like your choices. We don't like them one bit. 
 
We have watched as different people in different places, be they 
business or otherwise, have been inclusive in being able to 
ensure that there's greater productivity and efficiency. There's 
no reason why one can't do that in government. And the only 
reason perhaps you can't comprehend it, sir, is you've been here 
so long that you believe everything has to be done the same old 
way. And so that's exactly the same way you approached health 
care reform. 
 
You're darned right in 1991 I ran on health care reform. And 
what did we say we should do? We should have pilot projects 
and there should be one in the North and one in the isolated 
South, and there should be urban/rural split and there should be 
one urban area, and there should be some ways of being able to 
evaluate what impact there is actually going to be. 
 
And I find it most interesting . . . in fact we had a member stand 
up in this House and say that she was going to read exactly 
what was out of our platform document. I read the three 
paragraphs you had in the 1991 election on health care reform. 
We were underwhelmed. The people of this province had no 
idea what it was you were going to be doing to decimate health 
care in this province, and I'll tell you they would most 
appreciate if there had been somebody who had taken the time 
to come up with an actual plan of action before they went 
forward, implemented changes and had absolutely nothing in 
place to be there for people when they needed it. 
 
Now the fact is there is a lot of smoke and mirrors, and a lot of 
smoke and mirrors was referred to in those articles, and they're 
the stuff, sir, of your government. Crowns that don't even report 
full activities. 
 
And we are going to lay out our full plan, and we have a 
comprehensive strategy for the province. And when we do that, 
that's when you can judge. 
 
Until then, let's just continue to talk about you and your 83,000 
people in the province of Saskatchewan on welfare. Let's talk  



May 17, 1995 

 
2374 

about the 84,000 people who have left. Let's talk about 6,800 
young people in 1991 on welfare who are now in the 11,000 
number. Let's talk about some of those things and the choices 
that you've made and how all of your comments about how 
you're going to eliminate poverty . . . It hasn't happened. Maybe 
there are different choices you could be making. Maybe you 
could be more efficient and effective in order for money to be 
available to be placed in other places. 
 
And if we're talking about choices, I think it's a very good thing 
to talk about taxes and your size of government. You're fond of 
reminding us that the cost of government services per capita in 
Saskatchewan is about the same as in Alberta. You've made that 
claim. What you don't say is that this takes into account only 
direct government services. It doesn't take into account the large 
and growing number of Crown corporations that perform many, 
many functions usually undertaken by government. And the 
new Crown corporation responsible for building highways, for 
example, will no longer show up in government figures for the 
cost of government. 
 
And you know full well, sir, that when talking about the cost of 
government, one should include many of the Crown 
corporations as well. It is the way that government in 
Saskatchewan works, and you're always talking about the great 
pride you have in the family of Crown corporations. When you 
include the Crown corporations, we see the real picture. It is 
one where Saskatchewan public sector is out of proportion to its 
neighbouring provinces. 
 
The other point that you must know, sir, but you don't say, is 
that it is not the cost of government per capita that determines 
what we can afford, but the cost of government relative to the 
GDP (gross domestic product). And on that matter as well, this 
government does not measure up. In Saskatchewan, our 
government spending, not including Crown corporations, makes 
up 30 per cent of GDP. And in Alberta, that's 21 per cent. And 
every other province west of Quebec is less than ours as well. 
That means too much is coming out of every dollar paid by the 
taxpayers in this province before it can ever be put through the 
economy in any kind of way. 
 
In simple terms, it means in this province 30 cents of every 
dollar produced in the economy goes to government, and that 
means less money circulating, not only through the consumer 
economy, but the investment economy as well. So despite your 
claims to the contrary, government in this province is too big 
for 1 million people. And no matter what you say, the people 
know that it's too big because they, Mr. Premier, are the ones 
who have to pay for it. And they pay for it. How? In high taxes. 
And they pay for it in utility rates, eight hikes of them since 
you've come to power. And they pay for it by having insecure 
jobs, and they pay for it by having an insecure economic future. 
And some of them have paid for it by turning around and 
leaving the province. 
 
Now your tax record is clear. You come up with all different 
kinds of statistics, as the Minister of Finance does, to state this 
is the wondrous state of affairs in the province of  

Saskatchewan, and boy do we have it good. Our taxation is just 
swell compared to the rest of the nation. 
 
Well let me tell you, the people don't feel that way one little bit. 
And some of these people travel elsewhere, and they know the 
differences when they're in other provinces. They definitely 
know when they've come back home, given what they have to 
pay here. 
 
We do pay in this province the highest overall provincial taxes 
in Canada except for Newfoundland, and that comes from 
Finance Canada. Saskatchewan people do pay more for gasoline 
than almost anywhere else in the country, and we have the 
highest gas tax anywhere west of Quebec. And that's a fact. We 
are also burdened by the highest provincial sales tax west of the 
Atlantic provinces. And yes, that comes from the Alberta 
treasury. And we, by the way, we can welcome big business to 
Saskatchewan because they're sure going to be happy to come 
here. We have the highest tax rate on large corporations in the 
entire country of Canada. 
 
Since 1991 — and you should have these numbers — the NDP 
government has added an additional $1.7 billion in taxes, in 
revenues, in fees, in utility fees . . . would push that figure over 
2 billion. And that comes from the Saskatchewan budget. 
 
So my question to you, sir, how can you expect the people in 
Saskatchewan to be able to compete? How do you expect them 
to be able to have any disposable income to be able to put 
through our economy, so our businesses can grow here? And 
it's only in that way that jobs continue to be created. So you 
speak to the people of Saskatchewan tonight because they most 
certainly have been talking to me about the feeling that they 
have of being very disadvantaged by the taxes they pay here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, it's hard to know 
where to start with this comment or question, but I'll try my best 
to parse it off into a point-by-point response if I can. 
 
I must start, Mr. Chairman, by saying that — what was the 
figure, 1.7 billion? — it's grown already in a half an hour, faster 
than my pension has grown . . . by the Liberal leader. And I 
suspect before it's all over again, it'll be astronomical. 
 
I would just simply say to the members of the committee, please 
don't take the Liberal calculators or researchers' facts in this 
regard because they have a — how should I put it — a slight 
history of being inaccurate on a few things. 
 
(2045) 
 
Let's talk about some of the big issues. One, big government. I'd 
like the Liberal leader to pay attention to this please, and to 
mark it down. We spend $4,200 a year per capita on 
government programs. Every single government in Canada, 
including Alberta, spends more  Investment Dealers 
Association. Every Liberal government spends more, every 
Conservative government spends more. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2375 

We have 9.1 provincial employees per thousand citizens. 
Alberta has 9.9, almost 10 per cent more. New Brunswick has 
13.8 provincial employees per thousand citizens, a 51 per cent 
fatter government. 
 
That is the record and these are Department of Finance figures. 
They're Investment Dealers Association figures from a variety 
of areas they come at this. Please understand that that translates 
to one thing and one thing only — a lean and efficient 
government which you are committed to somehow magically 
making even supposedly leaner. 
 
I say that it would surprise most people in Saskatchewan to find 
that even applying the techniques of other provincial premiers 
to the west or otherwise, that your party could find the more 
efficiencies. Certainly not by what they do in office. This is a 
government, this one that I'm talking about, which has cut and 
cut, occasioned by the fiscal mess that we inherited only about 
three and a half, three and three-quarters years ago, of necessity. 
 
The second point you make is accountability. Again a wild 
statement of error. Here's what the Provincial Auditor — the 
Provincial Auditor, not me — March 31, 1992 . . . quote: 
 
 The government moved from providing what the 

Financial Management Review Commission viewed as 
the weakest and least useful financial statements in 
Canada to providing one of the most useful financial 
statements issued by a senior government in Canada. 

 
Do you deny that he wrote that? You cannot. He wrote that. 
 
Spring of 1995, what did the report of the Provincial Auditor 
say? Because you said the Crown corporations . . . you talked 
about this highways transportation corporation. The Bill was 
not even passed, I don't believe, by the House. It's not even in 
operation yet. How in the world could you make this statement? 
It's not even been made law. But you use that as an example. 
 
What does the Provincial Auditor say: 
 
 Intersessional tabling of annual reports is now required 

by the Crown corporations under The Crown 
Corporations Act, 1993. Order in council approval and 
tabling of an explanatory report are now required when 
Crown corporations acquire shares in or create a body 
corporate to further their purposes. 

 
And I could go on about accountability. So it is simply factually 
wrong. Those are the words of the Provincial Auditor. Do you 
deny that he said those words? Do you deny them? 
 
Now this question of taxation levels. We went through this with 
the Liberal Party. I say the people of Saskatchewan, up to 
$75,000 income  and I'll use the phrase, cost of living, and I'll 
tell you why I will in a moment  have the cheapest cost of 
living in Canada in this province up to 75,000. I'll tell you why I 
use the word, cost of living. 

I suspect that you would not agree that in Alberta where they 
charge a health care premium of about $800 for four, you 
would not say that's a tax. You would not say that a privately 
owned utility which has a rate increase, you would say that's not 
a tax, that's going to end up as a dividend in somebody's pocket 
at the end of the day. But because it's done by a Crown 
corporation in Saskatchewan, it is a tax. 
 
So let's take a word which encompasses the cost of living, the 
cost of doing business. And I will tell you that at the level of 
25,000 and individual families at 50 and 75,000, all see the 
lowest cost of living when you put all of the essentials which 
are part of this into the mix. 
 
These are not my words. Those are the words of those who do 
the independent audits and the examinations. And what you 
people do conveniently, you the Liberals and you the 
Conservatives, is you ignore $800 a year premium; it's not a tax. 
Am I to conclude out of all of that that if you put an $800 
premium on families that you could say it was not a tax increase 
because you don't consider it a tax increase? It is absolute, utter 
nonsense on this question of the tax level. 
 
Now I want to make one other point if I can, two other points. 
Make one actually, in the interest of time. 
 
The Liberal Leader says, you doggone right I campaigned in 
1991 on closing rural hospitals. She admitted it today in 
estimates that she campaigned in 1991 on closing down rural 
hospitals. But she said the way I would have done it is I would 
have done it by a pilot project somewhere. 
 
Mind you, on the other hand she says, even after the reform  
another error  we spend more on health care today than we 
did in '91-92, which is false. Now how you square that circle, I 
don't know, because if you'd only had a pilot project, for sure 
you would have had more than we are spending on health care 
today because it would have been existing all throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. And yet on the other hand you say 
we implemented the program and we still are charging more, 
which is false. It's not fact. You know it. 
 
Here's a piece of literature from a gentleman, I presume, Garry 
Johnson, Liberal candidate, Regina Lakeview: My pledge to the 
constituents of Regina Lakeview is to work hard to, amongst 
other things, "continue with health reform, encouraging input 
from those directly and indirectly affected." He is pledging to 
continue health reform. He is pledging to continue what we're 
doing. This Liberal candidate is pledging to continue. 
 
Do you similarly today pledge to continue health reform or are 
you discounting and discarding Mr. Garry Johnson? And if you 
pledge to continue with health care, tell me how you’re going to 
do it once your Texas-style auditors get at it and get at it big 
time. Once the Texas-style auditors start going through all those 
nursing positions and they start saying, in the words of Mr. 
Martin, Mr. Paul Martin, the Liberal leader, you've lost the 
compassion side of things. Boy, oh boy, I'd like to see these 
people at it. I'd like to see these people at it. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2376 

So what is the position of the provincial Liberal Party? Are you 
going to continue health care reform or are you going to follow 
the member back there, who sits behind you, the member from 
Shaunavon, who says, it's all over, no more health care reform, 
it's all bad? Which is it? We are having a principle discussion of 
course today and no doubt you'll tell me which it is. Which is 
it? 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I don't even know which topic you're 
on, Mr. Premier. I've come to the conclusion here that what you 
want to do is have a conversation about health care reform and I 
would think that the very last area that you would want a 
discussion on would be health care reform. There isn't one 
person I've met in Saskatchewan who did not agree with the 
need for reform. They just don't like your reform, Mr. Premier. 
 
And one of the things that Mr. Johnson has said that you, sir, 
have not done is that he is going to be inclusive of people. Do 
you think that Jim Melenchuk, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, the person 
who stepped down as the president of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association on April 30 of this year, two nights later 
nominated as our candidate in Saskatoon, do you think that he 
is going to take a reduction in salary to be an MLA and be out 
of practice for four years, just because he thinks that things are 
going swell in health care? 
 
Do you think that Harry McLean in Arm River, who was the 
immediate past Chair of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations, is running for our party because he just 
figures everything is going so swell in health care? 
 
Do you think Dennis Barnett, the previous mayor of St. 
Walburg for 13 years, one of the people who had led the Rural 
Health Coalition, that this is an individual who thinks that your 
health care reform just works so swell that we might as well just 
leave it as it is? 
 
Let me tell you, sir, I was in Melfort this week, and I would 
suggest if you want a real education about your health care 
reform, you go and talk to the people who have had to put up 
with eight of their doctors leaving that community. 
 
You talk to Dr. Wiebe, an individual who was born, raised, and 
educated, and trained as a medical doctor in this province. You 
ask him why he's leaving and going to Indiana. And this is a 
man who went out and worked for the Mennonite Central 
Committee, just like other people who were there who had gone 
out to different parts of this world working for World Vision. 
 
These aren't people who wanted to make more money so they've 
gone off to Alabama like Dr. Crowe or Indiana like Dr. Wiebe. 
These are people who were shut out of the process and 
absolutely are appalled that they took one of the best places in 
terms of servicing health care in this province and wouldn't 
even talk to people. You wouldn't even include them in the 
conversation. 
 
And what do we have? We have a Department of Health and a 
Minister of Health who still won't accept responsibility for  

what's going on. It's the district health boards, heaven forbid. 
You've done what you're best at. You've created more 
mini-governments all across Saskatchewan, more 
administration, more bureaucracy. You have taken the care out 
of health care. 
 
And if you want to talk about the people who actually are 
genuinely concerned about human beings and are determined to 
put the humanness back in health care, it's the Liberal Party, or 
we wouldn't have the kind of people running for us . . . You 
think you're so swell at what you've done. Maybe you should go 
and simply talk to people, like actually talk to someone. 
 
Talk to the 92-year-old man in Saskatoon on oxygen every day, 
who's by himself and is afraid and needs help. And he's told 
through a wellness assessment, hey, it's okay, you can live on 
your own. 
 
Talk to the woman who's 90 years old in Swift Current, whose 
husband died 43 years ago and she's lived every day of her life 
by herself. And now she knows she can't be on her own 
anymore and she's told, hey, you're perfectly all right; two visits 
from home care every day and your life should just be dandy. 
 
You don't know what's going on. You are totally and 
completely out of touch with what is happening to people. 
Every single day I get phone calls. 
 
I'm going to suggest something to you, Mr. Premier. You stop 
having people . . . you stop having them in your office 
answering all your phone calls and reading all your mail and 
answering all of it for you, and just maybe once in one week 
you might get some touch of reality here. 
 
Now if we're talking about what Mr. Johnson's going to do, Mr. 
Johnson is going to be someone who includes people in what 
happens in their health care. And that's a heck of a lot more 
than what you've been doing. Now we were, I thought, before 
you raised health care, I thought we were talking, sir, about 
taxes. We were talking about taxes. 
 
And you actually raised inaccuracies as well, which I find most 
interesting given that your Minister of Health talks about a $15 
million deficit with the health boards. But my goodness, what 
happens when the Provincial Auditor takes a look? It's 30 
million. And everybody has to stay posted, until the election's 
over, on June 30 when we can find out what the deficits are for 
this year. And we're all waiting with baited breath, because boy, 
we sure believe people in your government when it comes to 
health care. 
 
(2100) 
 
Speaking of the new taxes in the province, speaking of the 
changing face of communities, here's another item in your 
budget that should not be overlooked  and I know that the 
official opposition raised this a bit  and that's gaming 
revenues. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2377 

Now this budget really only talks about the $90 million that you 
rake in from VLTs this year. There's no overall figure at all for 
all the money that you actually take in through gaming. And I 
wonder if you have any idea what that total is. Do you have any 
idea what it is when you add in money that you redirected from 
Sask Sport into general revenues? I'm sure it certainly changes 
that number. Can you come up with one, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, before I speak to the 
other issue, the last issue that the member raises, I want to talk a 
little bit about health care. 
 
The Liberal leader thinks the memory of the people of 
Saskatchewan is so short that they will have forgotten who it is 
that fought medicare tooth and nail in this province — the 
Liberal Party. The Liberal leader thinks that the issue is too 
complex, that they don't understand a 30 per cent reduction 
coming from the federal Liberal government in Ottawa to health 
care, that you are threatening medicare. And you think you can 
say, put the care back into health care. 
 
I tell you, putting the Conservatives or the Liberals in charge of 
looking after medicare is like putting Colonel Sanders in charge 
of the chicken coop. It will never happen . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, it's not original, but it is truth. It will never 
happen. 
 
Well the hon. member talks about Dr. James Melenchuk. Here's 
Dr. James Melenchuk. Here's what the good doctor wrote in the 
Medical Post . . . family practice, I'm sorry, January 3, 1994. I 
want the Liberal leader to pay attention to this. 
 
“For starters, . . . This is Dr. Melenchuk; the good doctor writes 
this, quote: 
 
 For starters, most of the newly formed rural health care 

districts (keep in mind this is over a year ago he wrote) 
. . . (For starters most of the newly formed rural health 
care districts) have at least 12,000 people each. This is 
2,000 too many per district. 

 
According to Dr. James Melenchuk, family physician and 
vice-president, Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
What's the next paragraph say? 
 
 Not only is the number of people in each district too 

great, but the actual number of districts, 30, is also too 
high. 

 
I'll just read this again. The good doctor says, 12,000 people per 
district is too high. It's no good. Presumably one would say, 
more districts. And in the very next paragraph he says, but 30 is 
too high. 
 
Well I tell you one thing, whatever it was that decided the good 
doctor to run so quickly from his association of SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association), I sure hope it wasn't any 
promise of a cabinet position. And if it was a promise of a  

cabinet position, let me give you a little piece of advice. Don't 
put him in as minister of Finance, because the numbers would 
really play a little bit down the line. 
 
Then the member opposite talks about Melfort. Well the 
situation in Melfort is serious, there's no doubt about it, but not 
as the member paints it out to be the case. Since December of 
1994, three doctors have left Melfort. There have been two that 
have arrived in February. The clinic in Melfort now has 10, 7 of 
which have, so far as we know, no plans of leaving. The 
recruitment committee has leads on other physicians to fill 
vacancies that occur over the course of the year. 
 
Now province-wide here's what happened. In December of 
1993 there were a total of practitioners and specialists in 
Saskatchewan totalling 1,177 — 1,177. December of 1994 
they're up to 1,207. Now I am hopeful that the district health 
board in the Melfort area, local folks, with the assistance of the 
ministry of Health, will do all that we can to accommodate the 
concerns in the Melfort area. And no one likes to see this kind 
of a dispute. 
 
But the member ought not to draw the excessively long bow as 
she has been doing, I say. And I hope she doesn't get angry for 
me saying this, with respect, tonight as she has in almost every 
issue  she draws this great big long bow relying on Dr. 
Melenchuk's mathematics to indicate that the whole system is 
going to collapse. 
 
Well I don't think that it is. But I think the other side of it is 
what she still refuses to adopt or reject. Do you support Mr. 
Garry Johnson, Liberal candidate's, statement that he will 
continue with health reform, encouraging input from those 
directly and indirectly affected? Because I'll tell you that's 
exactly what our position is, has been — health reform with 
direct and indirect people affected. 
 
Now I don't hear the member from Shaunavon, your colleague 
saying this. Mmh, mmh. Ponteix, that area, he's been out there 
riling the people up. He's not saying that. He's saying something 
entirely different. 
 
And I tell you, I will  time doesn't permit tonight  I will 
bring you literature from Liberal candidates across 
Saskatchewan which vary from Saskatchewan from point to 
point on this issue. Look, that we have made our fair share of 
mistakes in this regard, I acknowledge. I acknowledge it to the 
Leader of the Conservative Party, I do to you, I do to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
This has not been easy. It's not been easy on the health care 
workers. It's not been easy on the patients affected. It's not been 
easy on the doctors. It may not matter at all to you  it's not 
even been easy on us. It's been very difficult, but it was 
necessary to do. People know it and it was necessary to do to 
protect, to save, health care. And it was the right, next logical 
step to do. And anybody who has looked at it thoughtfully has 
said so, and we are going to deal with this issue in this regard. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2378 

No, I think Texas-style audits on health care aren't going to put 
the care back into health care, far from it. When you start 
looking . . . if there should be that kind of an opportunity 
operated to you, as is the case, you will be putting not the care 
back into health care, but the scare back into health care — the 
scare back into health care. That's what the Liberals will be 
putting into this campaign, the scare back into health care. 
 
Now you say a word about taxes. And I say to you as I said in 
the last answer about the figures up to 25, 50, and 75,000; we're 
at the lowest rates of taxes. I admitted that I changed the word 
to cost of living, and I've indicated that, because you people on 
the opposite side wouldn't take a medicare premium as a tax. So 
okay it's a cost of living; you must surely grant us that to be fair 
in this principled discussion which we're having here tonight 
and not personal discussion, you must surely understand that 
those numbers indicate that we are the lowest in all of Canada, 
absolutely the lowest in all of Canada. 
 
And while we're just on it, on the question with respect to tax 
cuts, I'd like to know how it is — and we've got lots to say 
about this too — how it is for the first two and a half years of 
your tenure here, you advocated over $300 million new 
expenditures and programs. We'll give you the details on these 
too, by the way. Well I'd like to know. I mean do you deny you 
made them? We'll table them, and we'll put them on the radio 
and the television and newspapers. Do you deny that you made 
them . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I have no idea to which you're referring, 
sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You have no idea. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. Table it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well they'll be tabled. Our estimates 
will be back up tomorrow at 2:30, and they'll be tabled, and tell 
us whether you made them or not made them. 
 
That's going to be interesting. Offer you 300 million, cut back 
government by 300 million. Well we don't know if you're going 
to continue reform or not. We think the good doctor says that 
he's going to either increase the districts or lower the increase; 
I'm not sure what the good doctor is going to do up there, and 
this person was going to take a salary reduction. If I were you, I 
would advise the good doctor not to worry about taking a salary 
reduction because somehow I have a feeling he'll never have to 
face that possibility. So don't let him worry about that. 
 
No, I think that the Liberal Leader has been so consistently, 
factually erroneous in tonight's discussion whether it's the Prime 
Minister's office or the pensions in the federal Liberal Party or 
whether it's Alberta or the tax numbers or the per capita 
expenditures of government, not only tonight but consistently 
throughout the entire piece, that people obviously sort of say, 
what in the world is going on here? What in the world is going 
on here? 
 

Well I tell you, this is no surprise. Liberals can sit on the fence 
and keep their ear to the ground; that's their politics. And I tell 
you, only Liberals can do that anatomically and get away with 
it, but not at election time. You won't be able to get away with it 
at election time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

Item 1 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I enjoyed some of 
tonight's debate, especially since a great deal of it was on health 
care and in fact the Premier liked to get into it. And I actually 
hope he sticks around and perhaps will get back into it a little 
bit with us here this evening, because you know, Mr. Chair, 
what's happening is that we're soon to wrap up the first term of 
the government with the member from Riversdale as Premier. 
 
And when we take a look back at this first term — not just the 
last year or two, or any particular year of it, but the full term — 
and we take a look at what in fact in this first term, perhaps the 
only term of his administration . . . what we see as the biggest 
failure in fact is the area of health care, health care reform, in 
the style that he has brought it forward. 
 
(2115) 
 
And what we see, Mr. Chairman, is in fact a closure of 52 rural 
hospitals. I know they talk about a lot of conversions but I 
know that when you drive out to Vanguard, or if you drive out 
to Kincaid, or community after community after community, 
nobody sees this as conversion. They see telephones, SaskTel 
telephones bolted to the side of their hospitals. That's what they 
see. They see in fact that they have no more services because 
this particular government has stripped them of those services. 
 
We see a drug plan which has went from a small premium, or 
deductible, up to $1,700 a year. That's no drug plan, Mr. 
Premier; that's no drug plan at all. But you know what's most 
confusing to the people is when health care reform was first 
going to be brought in, when the Premier was first talking about 
it, he was doing it for financial reasons. He made it quite clear 
to the people of the province that we had to have health care 
reform . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well to use the words of your leader, 
why are you so afraid about efficiency? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well you're the one, Mr. Premier, that said 
you had to bring in health care reform because the cost was 
right out of control. 
 
And yet we take a look at the numbers, the Premier's own 
numbers. He was saying they're going to have savings of $20 
million over three years. That's how you were first selling  



May 17, 1995 

 
2379 

health care reform to the people of the province. You're saying 
we're broke and we're going to have this amount of savings. 
That $20 million over three years amounted to something less 
than half of one per cent of the total budget. And the people 
knew that you weren't correct. 
 
But you know, when we take a look at some of the recent news 
articles . . . and I had one from the Leader Post, Saturday, April 
8. And the Health minister is making comments that in fact 
there's savings of $400 million or higher if it were not for health 
care reform. And it makes one wonder which one of you is 
correct — the Premier or the Minister of Health. Is it $20 
million over three years or is it $400 million this year? 
 
You've never made that very clear to the people. Why are you 
doing it? Are you doing it because the system was unaffordable, 
or did in fact you think there's a better way to deliver health 
care. Because you know, in the latter case when you take a 
drive out of the two major centres, especially out in rural 
Saskatchewan and you tell these people no, money didn't play a 
part in it; we just felt that we needed to shut down your health 
care because it was better for you . . .  
 
How could it be better? How could it be better and safer to not 
have health care? How could it be better to have your seniors be 
afraid for a couple of years that they weren't going to have a 
place to stay? Because you've made that announcement. You've 
increased their charges dramatically and then threatened to take 
their beds away, telling them the best thing they can do is live 
out in the community. 
 
Well it's your health care reform that's going to be the topic of 
this election. You were right before, Mr. Premier. But when we 
see these kind of numbers, yours is $20 million over three 
years; the Health minister, $400 million or more in one year, it 
makes one wonder. 
 
Because you know, I happened to be going through some of my 
old files today and I found a speech. In fact it was from the then 
leader of the opposition, October 29, 1990. And it was you, Mr. 
Premier, giving a health care . . . while giving a speech to the 
Prince Albert Co-operative noon luncheon club on October 18, 
1990. 
 
And this is what people find so confusing because now, now 
when you're in control, when you're in control of the numbers 
or supposedly you are, there's such variances between the 
Health minister and yourself. 
 
But what did you say back then just before the election? And 
I'm going to quote from a speech that you gave, speeches that 
you were giving around the province to try and get elected. 
Well it did get you elected, but what were you telling the 
people? Health care costs. And this is direct quote right out of 
your speech, Mr. Premier. 
 
It says: 
 
 Let me now turn to the question of costs. Many people  

 are questioning the ability of any government to 
implement new health care initiatives on the argument 
that health care costs are spiralling out of control. I 
reject this argument as being without fact, and moreover 
on the grounds that it is the political excuse used by 
those who wish to subvert the five fundamental 
principles of health care and direct us towards a 
market-driven system. 

 
That's your own speech, Mr. Premier, before you became the 
Premier. These are things that you were saying to the people in 
rural Saskatchewan to get yourself elected, knowing full well 
that after you're elected you were going to devastate them. 
That's what you've done. 
 
On the next page it states: 
 
 In the Globe and Mail on October 15, Dr. Mark Baltzan, 

a distinguished Saskatoon physician, wrote that under 
our system, quality of care has increased while costs 
have been adequately contained. On quality, he says that 
in scarcely more than a decade, the annual chance of 
dying from illness or accident has fallen nearly 25 per 
cent. 

 
On costs, he writes that: 
 
 Forty years ago, the average yearly increase was 12 per 

cent. Now it is 3.8 per cent. (He goes on to say that) 
Even with the technological change and the ageing 
population, two factors not foreseen by the Hall 
Commission, actual health care costs are less than the 
projections laid out in the Hall report. 

 
He concludes . . . I wish the Premier would stay and listen 
because it is right from his speech. He has got to own up to 
some of this at some point. He concludes: 
 
 All this shreds the claim that the cost is too high. Cost 

and quality are better than we would have dared to 
predict. There is no need for radical restructuring. Its 
supporting arguments are reduced to rhetoric. Perhaps 
there are a few bad apples, the odd rotten tree. Replant 
them. Don't burn the orchard. 

 
And what have you done, Mr. Premier? Well I tell you, in rural 
Saskatchewan you've more than burnt the orchard. You've burnt 
it good. 
 
From your own speech, you're rejecting that this was . . . costs 
were spiralling out of control. Yet you get into power, and 
you're saying that we had to have this kind of a health care 
reform to save less than half of one per cent of the total budget 
in a year . . . or over three years. And the Health minister is 
saying 400 million. You wonder why people don't believe what 
you people are saying any longer? Well it's quite clear why they 
don't believe you. 
 
We also . . . let me quote more out of this speech here. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2380 

 While a clear overall strategy for health is the 
responsibility of the province acting in the interest of all 
our citizens, all of them, it is at the local level where the 
interaction between the provider and the consumer takes 
place. Therefore our long-term aim must be to have a 
system that is community based, community driven, and 
community controlled. 

 
But if you were to think back to when you first brought in 
health care reform and in fact right up to present day, you go 
out into some of those rural areas and you ask them if they feel 
that they have any control. None whatsoever. No control 
whatsoever. You've taken the control of health care out of their 
hands. 
 
Now you can make the argument that there were, whatever you 
use, 400 boards and they were costly. Most of those people 
were volunteering their time. You have now turned that around 
to where I think board chairmen get 5,000 or $10,000 a year 
retainer alone, whatever it is, $155 a day. But somehow you're 
trying to make it out that it's cheaper. 
 
The fact of the matter is when you made these changes to health 
care reform you did a lot of things, Mr. Premier . . . Mr. 
Minister. You did a lot of things to ensure that the people 
couldn't save their system, that you knew full well you were 
going to tear it down. That's why you made changes to the 
taxation in the way you did. 
 
You had to make sure that there was only a flat 2 mills that 
could be charged by municipal governments for health care to 
ensure that places such as south-west Saskatchewan, with a lot 
of pipelines and oil fields, large community pastures, federal 
pastures in which you got grants in lieu of taxes, railroads, 
elevator companies . . . You gave up on millions and millions of 
dollars of tax. And you and I both know you did. We've 
discussed this before. You did that for ideological reasons. 
 
You had to make sure that when you started this ball rolling you 
couldn't back down. You had to make sure that these 
communities could not save their hospitals. I say, shame on you 
for doing that because you brought in, you brought in rules, you 
brought in criteria, Mr. Minister, and you were part of that. You 
brought criteria in which ensured that these communities 
couldn't exist. 
 
Now we looked at other parts of this speech here and I know 
the government of the day doesn't want to own up to some of 
the stuff they said before the election. In the part where it's . . . 
in the conclusion in the speech . . . I won't read the whole thing 
because I don't think even anyone opposite really believes much 
what's in this speech. You're a completely changed group, I 
guess. 
 
Let me read a couple of the points. One is, the improvement of 
health care services to rural Saskatchewan in order to reduce 
inequities in the system. Well I'm telling you, the Premier used 
Ponteix as an example awhile ago. Mr. Minister, in fact it was 
recent, not too many days ago, that you called into question a  

document that I had sent to my constituents. And to combat 
that, because you refused to come out into my constituency and 
debate me . . . right now I'll offer that to you. If you would like 
to come out to a place like Ponteix and have a debate on health 
care to hear from these people if they feel that they have been 
treated equally, as you promised, October 18, 1990, at the P.A. 
(Prince Albert) Co-operative luncheon club, you should come 
out and debate me there, Mr. Minister, or send the Premier out. 
Because those people don't feel like they were treated equally at 
all. Not at all. 
 
Another point is, a review and improvement of the prescription 
drug plan. You've taken the drug plan and you've brought it up 
to a $1,700 a year drug plan. It's virtually telling the people of 
the province we're not there to help you. We're not going to be 
part of helping you with prescription drugs. 
 
The establishment of a school-based dental program. And I 
recall when members opposite were continuously attacking the 
former government for making changes to the school-based 
dental program. 
 
But what have you done? You've had no intention of bringing it 
back. In fact what the former government did — the 
Conservative government did — in many cases you actually 
made it far worse. You made it far worse. 
 
Some of those communities that had new integrated facilities, 
instead of taking a good look at what . . . If you didn't feel they 
deserved a hospital, really instead of taking a look and seeing 
what perhaps would have been better for the community, how 
to utilize their facilities, the new facilities, you wanted to close 
them down. You wanted to shut them right down. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I think I'm soon going to have to give you a 
chance to respond. I see you're bouncing in your seat a good 
deal. I'm not sure if you want to get up and respond, or get up 
and run, but hopefully it's to respond. 
 
But you know, I take a look at some of the other articles that 
you, Mr. Minister, have come out with. In fact a letter that you 
sent to myself on November 10, 1994 because there were so 
many concerns from the seniors in the community, and 
surrounding community, of Shaunavon in regards to their senior 
care. And they had a series of meetings at which the hall was 
completely filled with seniors. You weren't there of course. You 
didn't send a representative. I was there to answer to these 
people. You sent a letter was the best you could do. 
 
At that time you promised them that you were going to present 
a strategy shortly. Have you done that? Have you presented a 
strategy? Other than every time you've gotten into a bit of 
trouble, you say, well we'll throw $10 million towards acute 
care in rural Saskatchewan or we'll throw 10 million into 
something else. 
 
The fact of the matter is, nobody knows where the money goes. 
We can't really put our finger on where you're spending any 
money. We see the announcements but nothing ever comes of  



May 17, 1995 

 
2381 

it. And you know, when we look at these last — not last year — 
I think I've only grabbed these articles from the last months, 
where in fact changes, changes that your government has made 
. . . health board elections put off until fall. This one's February 
8, 1995. In fact this, Mr. Minister, is something that your 
government should be ashamed of. 
 
In fact in this speech, where it talks about giving some sort of 
community control, that the Premier gave in Prince Albert, and 
then he goes on to talk about the vision that's going to come 
from having community-driven, community-controlled health 
care. Well what does this mean? This means you didn't want 
them to have any control. 
 
You have appointed people — appointed people — and when 
you thought that it really wasn't going to go over too well, you 
cancelled the elections. You put on some sort of a dog and pony 
show to slow-walk the process, just to ensure that there would 
be no health board elections until after your own election 
because you wanted to make sure that you weren't going to have 
to answer for something that was as embarrassing as . . . You 
know you'll take a look at other, so many other, letters to our 
caucus, or to myself, or newspaper articles. 
 
(2130) 
 
Here's another one, in fact, when you're in a great deal of 
trouble over acute care services out in the rural areas. Your 
response was to throw a few hundred thousand dollars into a 
first responder program. Well I know your response will be, you 
know, I shouldn't attack volunteers. We're not attacking 
volunteers. We're saying use volunteers for the purpose that 
they are best to be used for. You can't take the doctors and the 
nurses out of rural Saskatchewan and say they can be entirely 
replaced with first responder programs. It isn't working. Doctors 
. . . it's not me that's criticizing it alone. I'm telling you that 
people out in rural Saskatchewan are telling the opposition 
parties that it's not working. You have health care professionals 
that say it's not working, it's not safe. A member of your own 
caucus in fact is not in favour with some of these first responder 
programs and such. 
 
That, in fact, is why you ensured, your government, your 
caucus, or cabinet, or premier, ensured that that member did not 
get the nomination in the Wood River constituency. But you 
couldn't beat him out of the following one. Because he's not in 
line, he's not in line with your type of thinking. He felt that you 
had went . . . he felt that you had went far, far beyond what was 
reasonable. And this is a doctor from rural Saskatchewan, a 
member of your caucus that doesn't support it. 
 
We looked through so many other letters. Here's one in the 
Gravelbourg Tribune, January 24, '95. Palmer residents angered 
by health care cuts. It goes on to talk about the terrible, terrible 
treatment of one of their seniors in that community. 
 
Here we have a chamber of commerce letter from the Norquay 
and district where it gives not one or two, several examples of 
where health care, or your style of health care, health care  

reform, is failing the people. I won't go through it. I think you 
know what the letter is; it's been sent to you, Mr. Minister. If 
you want to respond later, feel free. We can get into each or any 
one of these cases. I don't mind talking about any one of these 
cases because I think each case individually is an example of 
the entire provincial problem that you've created. 
 
Health care reform attack. This one is by Randy Burton of The 
LeaderStar Services, and here we have Dr. Joe Barretto has 
some advice for travellers in south-west Saskatchewan, and he 
quotes: don't have your accident around Ponteix. And he goes 
on to talk about doctors being so disappointed with the situation 
that they're faced with thinking of leaving the province. 
 
How can you say, Mr. Minister, that it's better? It's not better. 
You can't fool the people. You can't fool them into believing 
that, first of all, your financial arguments didn't work as to why 
you got into health care reform, or else, either that, or you and 
the Premier should actually go and sit down and hash this thing 
out and find out whose figures you're going to use. 
 
Because I think both of you are quite a ways out. Well perhaps 
you're not, Mr. Minister. Because I think perhaps it was the 
Premier who made a terrible mistake, if he's talking $20 million 
savings over three years. 
 
But yet you look at a thousand health care workers that have 
been displaced by your reforms, so perhaps you're far closer. 
You perhaps have saved the 400 million. I don't know how you 
do your bookkeeping, because when we take a look at the 
budget estimates from '91-92 to present budget, in fact you're 
spending, I think, $12 million more on health care than before 
health care reform. But if you say there's a $400 million saving, 
I guess we'll have to accept your figures. 
 
But you know, I think what the people of the rural 
Saskatchewan especially, Mr. Minister, would really like to 
know, since they had to give up not just a few of their services, 
but almost all of their services . . . in fact in some communities 
they gave up everything. 
 
The Premier wanted to use the community of Ponteix as an 
example awhile ago. I'll use the community of Ponteix. You're 
going to shut down the long-term nursing care. You closed their 
hospital. You took out their SaskPower office, the SaskEnergy 
office. And I think the bus is gone. And you wonder why the 
people are angry. I think it's real clear. They're really 
disappointed with the way they've been treated by your 
government. 
 
So perhaps once I sit down, Mr. Minister, you will make it clear 
which one of you are correct on the figures and really tell us 
where the savings have been. Because I think your savings have 
been firing of nurses, firing of doctors, firing of the service 
providers, the people that are out there. I don't mean first 
responders; I mean the trained medical people, personnel, that 
are out there delivering the service. Now I know that you've by 
and large replaced these people with administrators. We are 
now administratively heavy. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2382 

We take a look at some of these district boards, and I know I've 
raised this time and time again in the legislature . . . in fact 
Swift Current was one example where you spent I think it's up 
to 1.2 or $1.3 million to renovate office space. And this is after, 
for the district board, within the district board, you fire nurses. 
 
You see this is why people are angry. Because you've taken 
away the front-line workers in health care, the people that 
actually provide the service, and you thought it was best to have 
large oak tables and boards that have thousands of dollars in 
retainers, high per diems. That's why people are disappointed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I once studied, at St. 
Andrew's College in Saskatoon, a class that was described as 
homiletics. It's a class in preaching. My colleague here from 
Saskatoon knows the phrase. And our professor at that time 
made it very clear to us that the head can only understand what 
the seat can withstand, and it was best to keep one's comments 
relatively brief. 
 
Well I think we've been here now for 20 to 25 minutes listening 
to the member from Shaunavon ramble and ramble and ramble. 
Very difficult. Very difficult to pick out a single question in all 
that the member said. Now if there's an abuse of the system, it's 
the abuse of the member. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the member is still talking from his seat, as he 
regularly does. Now I will endeavour to address some of the 
questions in this long ramble that we just heard. And then I 
think I have a few questions for the member. 
 
Now he talks about the financing of health care. I've explained 
this to him before. It's been explained in this House any number 
of times, Mr. Chair. I'll do it again for the member's benefit. 
And mark these words. Had no change been made in the 
expenditures of health care in the province of Saskatchewan, if 
all of the programs would have continued unchanged and all of 
the expenditures, all of the continued growth had remained 
unchanged, then the budget for the Department of Health in this 
budget year would be $400 million more than it was when we 
came to office. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, could I ask for a little order from the member 
opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now we've got the 
member from Moosomin joining the Liberal caucus. 
 
Now I hope that the member understands that when we speak of 
the conversion of rural hospitals, the conversion of those 
facilities in 50 or so communities to provide other services in 
those communities, the cost saving from that move was 
something in the neighbourhood of $40-plus million. It was our 
commitment from the beginning, Mr. Chair, that 20 of those 
million dollars would be returned into new services. 
 
On that basis, there has a been a $20 million cost saving. But of 
course, Mr. Chair, as you well know and members well know, 
that is not the only activity that we have been involved in, in 
health reform. And so I will underline for the member, had no  

change been made, expenditures of the Department of Health in 
this budget year would be $400 million more today than they 
were when we came to office. Now I hope he can understand 
that. 
 
Now I have a question for him. Being delivered around Regina 
these days, the commitments being made by his colleague, the 
Liberal candidate in the Regina Lakeview constituency, Garry 
Johnson . . . Now Garry Johnson is saying to the people of 
Regina Lakeview, elect me — and elect the Liberal Party, I 
would assume he's saying — that we are going to and I quote: 
"continue with health reform, encouraging input from those 
directly and indirectly affected." 
 
Now all I've ever heard from the member from Shaunavon is 
that everything that's happened is wrong and that we'd stop it, 
and we'd reverse it. Well now who's telling the position of the 
Liberal Party? Is it the member from Shaunavon, or is it the 
candidate here in Regina, or is it some commitments being 
made by other Liberal candidates around the province? 
 
Tonight, Mr. Chair, in the course of the member's remarks, I 
heard some very interesting comment. He would suggest, by his 
remarks tonight, that in fact it was an error on the part of this 
government to reduce the health care mill rate or that portion 
thereof. I would assume therefore he's making the argument that 
more of the health care costs should be put on the property tax 
base. That was the argument that he was making here tonight. 
 
I want him to confirm. Is that the position of the Liberal Party, 
that more of health care funding should go on the property tax 
base? Will he confirm in the House tonight that it is the Liberal 
Party policy to take 5 per cent of expenditures of government 
out of the provincial budget to lower the expense of the 
provincial budget by 5 per cent? Is that his policy? 
 
Because if that's his policy, Mr. Chair, he should know — and 
I'll just share it with him — that that represents 75 to $80 
million from the expenditures of the Department of Health. 
That's what it will cost, 75 to $80 million expenditures in the 
Department of Health if it's their policy to reduce the 
expenditures of government by 5 per cent. I ask him therefore, 
Mr. Chair, would he please make public tonight in the 
legislature where in the Department of Health he intends to take 
75 to $80 million, because that's what he needs to explain to the 
people of our province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, as has been stated 
earlier in the House, I'm the one asking the questions and we're 
trying to get you to give some answers. So I think we'll carry on 
with that tradition, where in fact you start to answer some 
questions and perhaps things will move along a little quicker. 
 
And you know full well I didn't advocate putting on more 
property tax. I made it quite clear as to why your government 
made the changes to property tax . . . or health care on property 
tax. So that in fact you could wreak havoc on rural 
Saskatchewan, knowing full well it tied their hands for making 
any sort of response. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2383 

Since 1991 you've been referring to the wellness model. And in 
your '91 platform document it spoke of creating a Provincial 
Health Council. I notice here this evening, looking at this 
speech that the Premier gave to the Prince Albert Co-operative 
noon luncheon club, 1990, that in fact there's a couple of pages 
speaking on the Saskatchewan Health Council. And I'll just 
quote a little bit of it: 
 
 We suggest the creation of a Saskatchewan health 

council to develop a new health strategy; the health 
council comprising of senior cabinet ministers, 
individuals, communities, providers of health care. It 
would be chaired by the Premier, and report directly to 
cabinet, and issue, at the very minimum, an annual 
report. It will chart a comprehensive, long-term strategic 
plan. 

 
(2145) 
 
Now that would be unique, if you actually started off with a 
plan. You didn't. But you're promising to do a plan here in this 
speech, to promote health and well-being of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
So one has to ask the question, Mr. Minister, whatever 
happened to the provincial health care council? Why was it 
never formed? Why was the Premier . . . why did he not chair, I 
don't know, whatever it was? 
 
You know, this health care supposedly means so much to you 
and your government. Well the people don't believe that any 
longer. But in fact how could they when really you're not 
committed to anything other than closing hospitals. 
 
If you promised them a health care council, that we actually 
take a look at the problems or how things should be reformed, 
and truly as it was in the speech, involve people, involve health 
care providers and community leaders and, you know, on and 
on and on, chaired by the Premier, why didn't you do it? Why in 
fact have you not done it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, one of the things that I am 
proud of and this government is proud of is in fact the 
establishment of the Provincial Health Council. Mr. Chair, the 
Provincial Health Council was actually put in place in late 1992 
or early 1993, I'm not sure of the exact date. This Provincial 
Health Council, as many will know in our province, given the 
wide travels that the council has undertaken, brings together 
community leaders, health care providers. 
 
A decision was made, Mr. Chair, that we would not involve 
elected officials on the Provincial Health Council, and in that 
way to remove it from either the accusation or the threat of any 
political partisanship, but to bring together qualified people 
from all walks of life, including health care providers in our 
province. And we've asked that council . . . and they have done 
much work already and will do much more on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and that's bringing together thoughts 
about long-term and the important public health policies. 

I would hope that the member has received the reports of the 
Provincial Health Council. If he has not, we certainly will make 
them available to him. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess you better 
make some of these things available to the public at large 
because, you know, other than your little health care newspaper 
that you're sending around the province . . . supposedly you're 
doing this because I sent out a few constituents an MLA report, 
so you blanket the province at a cost of, I think it was almost 
$100,000. And you tell me . . . if that wasn't an election paper, 
I've never seen one. 
 
You know you've got some other problems that have come up 
and I think you're going to need to respond to them also. And 
that is telling the people what guidance or what direction that 
you've given district boards about what are acceptable ratios for 
nurses to patient. 
 
In fact do you have ratios or have you changed any ratios for the 
nurses for acute care patients? Because, you know, some of the 
problems that are raised often  the fact that people are not 
staying in the hospitals as long as they want to stay in. I guess 
there's a . . . I don't know the procedures that allow for same-
day releases of patients and such, but what we're hearing is that 
there's now a higher level of acute care, people more in need of 
acute care or a higher level, in the hospitals in the major 
centres. 
 
But in fact — and you can clarify this, Mr. Minister — are the 
ratios of nurses to patient higher or lower than before you 
started with some of these reforms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member asks an 
appropriate question, and it essentially is the question, how do 
we maintain the standards of care province-wide. And in some 
ways that has not changed and in some ways it has changed. 
 
The standards of care, essentially province-wide, are those 
standards which will be defined by The Hospital Standards Act 
and The Public Health Act. And those standards today remain 
in place as they always have. Now when it comes to a specific 
institution and the level of acuity of a patient load, the standards 
then are adjusted on the basis of the minimums set out by The 
Hospital Standards Act and Public Health Act to meet the needs 
of the acuity of a situation or a current institution. 
 
And so then decisions will be made and always have been made 
actually by directors of nursing or the administration of the 
local facility. Provincially, the minimum standards are set 
through The Hospital Standards Act. Local decision making 
then, as has been the case almost . . . well always since we've 
provided hospital care and acute care. 
 
I will say to the member that it is accurate to say that in fact 
levels of acuity in our acute care facilities have risen, that the 
treatments are intensive and the load is heavy on staff. I think 
that's a fair observation. But the standards — as they always 
have been — are maintained through legislation and then  



May 17, 1995 

 
2384 

through, based on that minimum legislation, through decision 
making at the local level. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I know others want to get 
into the debate tonight and so I won't get into too many . . . well 
I won't get into any other detailed questions. I would like to just 
make a comment that we're soon into an election. I think it's 
really important for you to understand that in rural 
Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, you are 
going to have to answer for what you've done, for what the 
previous Health minister has done, and the Premier has done, to 
health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think you would be amazed how many times I've been in 
long-term care facilities or in some of the hospital facilities out 
in my area, but in other parts of the province, where I've had 
seniors break down into tears, where I've seen family members 
of some of the seniors worried sick about the kind of care that 
they've had. 
 
In fact in case after case after case that I've brought forward in 
the last year and a half or two years in the House, where some 
seniors have been moved . . . the last one I think was a few 
weeks back. A senior from the community of Vanguard had 
been moved 13 times in a matter of months, finally to pass 
away. 
 
Mr. Minister, those are the things that you're going to have to 
answer for when you come out into the south-west part of the 
province for sure, but out into rural Saskatchewan, to do your 
campaigning. I think in fact you should be ashamed. And you're 
also going to pay quite a price, I believe, at the polls. You have 
really done damage in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it was 
interesting, the last time we met, as I was leaving, I was just 
going to walk out and head home for the evening, and a couple 
of young people called into the office and they had some very 
specific questions, a couple of questions that they'd like to ask 
and they'd like responses to. And so hereby I'm going to raise 
them with you and ask if you could have responses to me. 
 
Their specific question dealt with the abortion issue. And they'd 
like to know how many abortion procedures have been 
performed in the years '93-94, for '94-95; the cost of procedures 
for both years; and the total cost of the abortions performed in 
the province in those two years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we don't have those exact 
numbers here tonight, but we'll sure put them together and get 
them to the member right away so that he can get them to those 
who inquired. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, as I promised I'd 
raise the questions and get them to them. 
 
Mr. Minister, a question comes from Edam, the community of 
Edam, and it's a call we received from a licensed practical nurse 
employed at the Edam integrated facility and that's . . . Edam is  

in The Battlefords Health District. There's . . . in that district 
there's one hospital located in North Battleford. And I'm just 
going to go through the comments that were made and ask for a 
response. 
 
Approximately a year and a half ago the LPNs (licensed 
practical nurse) were forced to sign an agreement with the 
district where it essentially lowered the LPNs to a nurse’s aid 
level, which incidentally lowered their wages by $1 an hour. 
Problems are occurring in this area now that the health district 
is up and running. The licensed practical nurses are being sent 
out on emergencies and are performing functions that they are 
not allowed to perform as nurses’ aids. The districts have told 
them that they are not allowed to perform these functions but 
the former LPNs find they have no choice. 
 
Mr. Minister, their question is: who is liable if someone is 
seriously injured if they are treated by a nurse’s aid and if 
something goes wrong? Isn't the district putting both patients 
and LPNs at risk? How can licensed practical nurses work as 
nurse’s aids when we had legislation last year changing the 
name of certified nurses aids to licensed practical nurses? How 
can a district be allowed to eliminate an entire profession at an 
integrated facility? 
 
And their concern is, have you any responses or can you 
address this concern raised by this individual from the Edam 
district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for 
raising the concern of the situation. If I may speak generally, all 
of our districts do have all of the appropriate liability insurance 
for their employees. In fact I've had some cause to check this 
recently and I'm assured that this is the case, that there is 
liability protection for all of the employees of our districts 
delivering health care in their various and respective roles. 
 
This is the first I've heard of the situation that the member 
draws to our attention here tonight. I'm going to ask his patience 
on this. That I'm going to have the department investigate . . . I 
think we've got enough of the specific we won't need the 
individual name. I think there's enough in what you've said to 
give us sort of a description of the situation and we'll have this 
followed up and again provide that information to him. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, another 
question, and it relates somewhat to what the member from 
Shaunavon was talking about, a letter received from a Doreen, 
and I'm not sure if I'm going to pronounce this right, it's 
Prenevost. Ms. Prenevost was writing to voice extreme 
displeasure with your government's cuts to beds for 
Saskatchewan seniors in the personal care homes. 
 
It seems her mother had been placed in a personal care home 
last December. Previous to this move she lived in the Tisdale 
area all her life. When her mother became ill she was admitted 
to Prince Albert Hospital. They informed her that her mother 
was unable to live alone but they wouldn't have room for her in  



May 17, 1995 

 
2385 

the hospital, and advised that there was no 24-hour home care 
available, and that she did not qualify to get into a government 
home because she was still classed as a level 2. And due to cuts 
by the provincial government, personal care homes were only 
accepting level 3 and 4. 
 
Because of this, this lady is now in a personal care home in 
Codette, and at the same time her daughter is saying she is 
unhappy, homesick, feels cut off from her former life. Both her 
daughters live out of province and therefore cannot provide the 
24-hour care that the hospital suggested she have. 
 
Based on this situation, Ms. Prenevost would like you to answer 
the following questions. Is this a humane way to treat someone 
who is 84 years old, has never been burden on society, and is 
still paying her own way in life? How can your government be 
losing money on their personal care homes when the people 
who are doing this privately are obviously in the business to 
make money? 
 
And a final comment she made was is this the case . . . am I 
then to believe the government allows private operators to 
provide a substandard care and accommodation to the elderly in 
order that they do make some money? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again I think the member's 
identified enough information here that we can have a further 
look at the specifics of this individual family circumstance, and 
we will do that. And I commit to get that back to the member. 
 
I think it is important for the record that we differentiate here in 
our conversation between the personal care homes and the 
publicly tax-subsidized, long-term care facilities. Personal care 
homes are understood to provide a more basic level of care as 
opposed to the more significant level of care that's offered in a 
long-term care facility. And hence the operational costs are 
quite different. 
 
On average the monthly cost for a bed in a long-term care home 
will be around $3,000; $2,000 of that cost is subsidized by the 
taxpayer, and so the cost on average to an individual would be 
in the neighbourhood of a thousand dollars, less or a little more, 
depending on income. 
 
And so there is significantly more care offered, heavier staffing 
levels, a different physical plant, and that would explain the 
difference between the care that is provided and subsidized 
through the taxpayer, and the personal care home which is paid 
by the individual. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
question that I had raised and gone through a bit of debate with 
the Minister of Education who kindly informed me that the 
proper person to talk to regarding the subject is the Minister of 
Health . . . And you're probably quite well familiar with what 
I'm coming to now. And that's the symposium held in 
Saskatoon, entitled, working together toward sexual and  

reproductive health in Saskatchewan. 
 
What I'd like to know, Mr. Minister, and I understand the 
symposium agenda was . . . and a quote of the agenda was: 
 
 The goals of the symposium are to encourage positive, 

healthy attitudes to sexuality and to promote the delivery 
of comprehensive sexual health education and services 
to youth. 

 
Mr. Minister, there's a number of questions here. What I'll do is 
try and break them down to about three so that I'm not 
overloading you and your staff. And maybe you could respond 
to them. 
 
As the Minister of Health, did you attend this symposium? Did 
any departmental representatives attend this symposium? If so, 
how many and from what division? And as you see it, what was 
the purpose of this symposium in your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think I can answer the 
member's first three questions here. It's my understanding, and I 
do recall, that the former minister of Health did attend and 
gave, I believe, some opening remarks. I think the extent of her 
attendance at the symposium consisted of that opportunity to be 
there and bring the opening remarks. I was not there personally. 
 
There were representatives from the Department of Health. We 
believe there were four people there from the Department of 
Health, all from the programs branch, including public health, 
public health nurses. 
 
And in terms of the objectives of the symposium as I have 
understood them and believe them to be, the objectives were to, 
one, increase public awareness of some of the very important 
issues around this matter; number two, to provide some 
opportunity for dialogue about particularly teen and young 
people's sexuality and related health care issues among a broad 
group of Saskatchewan people, and number three, to examine a 
variety of approaches to sexuality education. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, following the symposium, did you 
receive a report, or your office or the former minister receive a 
written report, from the department representatives attending 
the symposium? And what did they have to say about the 
symposium, if you received a report? Could you inform us? 
And would you please indicate what any of the officials might 
have felt they achieved by attending this symposium. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, it was not 
intended, nor was there, as a result of the symposium, any 
formal report or formal list of recommendations. And no such 
recommendations or report were expected from the symposium, 
and none have been delivered to myself or to the Minister of 
Education. 
 
There was a follow-up evaluation done with the various 
participants. And of those who were part of the symposium — I 
believe there were something over 200 people involved —  



May 17, 1995 

 
2386 

through the evaluation process there were 130 who did the 
evaluation. That evaluation was put together and was provided 
to the Advisory Committee on Family Planning, and so in that 
sense there was some reporting. And the understanding that I 
have is that the vast majority of those present expressed 
appreciation for the symposium. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I guess the question that really begs 
asking is, are any of the ideals or the ideas that were put 
forward at the symposium, are they being adopted by the 
Department of Health? Are they being implemented, if you will, 
in some of the sexual reproduction courses? And certainly 
issues pertaining to contraceptive uses, are those being 
implemented into the wellness program? As well, is the 
Department of Health pursuing a dialogue with the Department 
of Education suggesting that some of the ideas that were 
brought forward at the symposium be included in part of the . . . 
whether it's health education or the sexual family life program 
within the Department of Education in the school program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think just again to be clear 
about the purpose of the symposium, it was a symposium that, 
as I indicated earlier, had as two of its first goals was simply to 
increase some public awareness around some of these very 
important issues, and number two, to provide a forum for 
dialogue about people who are involved, both through health 
and education and other fields. And also in that context to 
examine various options in terms of sexuality education. 
 
I know that the Minister of Education, under questioning by the 
member, made it very clear that the Department of Education, 
nor for that matter the Department of Health, is recommending 
or talking about mandatory sex education in the schools, that 
the process which has existed will continue to exist, that it is a 
matter of local decision making by the local school board 
authorities. 
 
There are ongoing discussions, as I think are appropriate, 
between the Department of Health and the Department of 
Education, utilizing some of the expertise now of our Advisory 
Committee on Family Planning, to look at the very important 
issues. I don't think anyone will disagree that the issue of teen 
pregnancy in our province is one that we need to deal with very 
. . . consider and deal with very seriously. The issue of the 
sexually transmitted diseases, not just among the young but 
among the young and among all ages in our province, these are 
very significant health and social issues. 
 
And so there are ongoing discussions between the Department 
of Health in terms of health education and the Department of 
Education in terms of the public school system and the 
tax-funded school system. But I can assure the member that 
some of the materials which I think the member is aware of that 
were shared as part of this symposium, those materials are not 
being incorporated into the discussions and will not be utilized 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'll take your word for it, but 
I'm trusting that you'll even go further and maybe as Minister of  

Health give some direction, because I'm sure that the letters that 
I've received, your office has probably received as many if not 
more. No doubt the Minister of Education has received them as 
well. Because there are a lot of people do not believe that this 
type of a symposium and the type of . . . the topics that were 
discussed there were discussed just by chance, but the fact they 
believe that eventually they will become part of the educational 
program or even the wellness clinics in this province. 
 
And there are a lot of people in our province who still firmly 
believe that the majority of the sex education should come from 
in the home. And there's no doubt there are the concerns . . . 
and some of the reasons that why you would address some of 
the issues at a public level. But, Mr. Minister, I would like to 
add, you may have seen the newsletter or the paper that was put 
out by the journalism . . . I believe it was the journalism 
students out of the University of Regina, I think it's about a 
month ago. 
 
And there was an article in there done by one student about this 
sex education program a student had attended where basically 
this very information that was presented at the symposium was 
viewed, distributed, and shown. And they had some interesting 
comments from a student who had seen the video, also from a 
parent and from other parents. 
 
And the concern is that while you would say, or while the 
Minister of Health would say — or pardon me, Education — 
would indicate that this isn't really part of the program, the fact 
is, someone is continuing to, subtly if you will, bring it in and 
introduce it in the hopes that it would become part of the 
long-term educational program. 
 
And one, unfortunately I don't have it here tonight, but one 
school board member — while the Minister of Education, she 
happened to be watching — said that school boards have the 
opportunity  and parents can through the school board say no, 
we don't want that part of the education, of the sex education 
program, taught in our schools  can have input. This parent 
indicated to me that their board had a directive from the 
Department of Education that while they had the opportunity to 
choose, they would prefer that they left that course in, made 
sure it was available in their school. 
 
So I guess there are many people who still feel that they really 
do not have the option of speaking out, or the ability of voicing 
their concerns and that their concerns are realistically listened to 
and accepted. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would encourage you to at least voice your 
concerns and take some leadership and maybe give some 
direction that would establish some of those guidelines down 
the road, because there's no guarantee after the next election — 
or even if an election isn't called — that we may not have a 
cabinet shuffle. It just means someone else is in place. And then 
your promise to us tonight falls by the wayside. 
 
So I would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to indeed take a 
stronger view and make your views known more publicly, if  



May 17, 1995 

 
2387 

you will. Maybe you'd like to comment before I go on to 
another issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'll just make a short 
comment. The member is right that I've received many letters 
about this particular symposium and about the subject matter in 
general. I received letters of all sorts, from all varieties of 
positions, on this very important issue. 
 
I will commit to the member that with the family advisory 
committee we're struggling through these issues and trying to be 
as sensitive to all the points of view as we possibly can. 
 
But I will also say that we recognize that here we have a very 
significant health issue that faces the young people of our 
province and indeed the whole population of our province. And 
I think working with members of the opposition, working with 
our educators, working with health care providers, what we 
need to do is find the appropriate tools for both treatment and 
prevention for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, a couple of questions related to the 
recent brochure sent out by the Department of Health. What 
was the total cost of printing the brochure, the cost of 
distribution, the cost of producing, and what was the total cost 
of advertising or communications consulting associated with 
any aspect of the production of this brochure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if I could just ask one bit of 
qualification. Is the member referring the Health Update that 
was recently delivered to households in Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The Health Update, yes, that's the 
Health Update. We'll have the numbers in just a moment. 
 
Mr. Chair, the total cost, the total cost of the Health Update 
which was delivered to every home in the province, the printing 
costs were $19,520; the production costs were $23,000; creative 
development costs, $4,300; the distribution costs, $10,000; the 
postage costs, $19,000. Mr. Chair, the total cost was 
$87,478.55, which, by my quick calculation, represents about 
21 cents a household. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I want to draw to the attention of the 
members something that is contained in the appendix to our 
standing orders, our Rules and Procedures, concerning laptop 
computers. And it indicates: 
 
 That the use of lap-top computers be allowed in the 

Legislative Chamber subject to the following 
restrictions as interpreted by the Chair: 

 
Including section: 
 
 (b) they must be programmed to operate silently; 
 
Yet I can distinctly hear some laptop computer being anything 
but that. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for 
having such a good ear, Mr. Chair. I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, we do have, I don't know if it's a large complaint 
or a small complaint, re your office. We've had a problem in 
one case of getting any calls back regarding a message of 
questions . . . a question that's been asked . . . actually six 
messages are still waiting for a return call on an issue regarding 
a constituent, and we haven't had a call back on that, and our 
staff are just getting a little frustrated and trying to respond to 
the issue that's been raised. 
 
And I'm not exactly sure what the issue was because it hasn't 
been directed here. But we're just wondering, Mr. Minister, 
what kind of attention the public would get if even as MLAs 
we're having a difficulty responding. And I'll have to get some 
further details to maybe double-check on this. But maybe you 
could indicate to us what policy your office follows up if there 
happens to be a slip-up and someone doesn't get back a 
response to personalized questions that are raised with any of 
your ministerial assistants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do deal with literally 
hundreds of calls in my office. And we endeavour as best as we 
are able to get responses back very quickly, as quickly as we 
possibly can. 
 
Either there is something here that wants further follow-up, 
that's for sure . . . If you want to just . . . Mr. Chair, if the 
member would please give me the details, we'll ensure that 
there's follow-up right away. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We'll follow up on that. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you be able to provide us with a list of the 
health boards indicating contact numbers for each board and 
specifying the location of the head office? As well, Mr. 
Minister, would you have a response to a number of our 
questions regarding the last . . . I believe you received . . . what 
was it? About a month ago, not even a month ago — two weeks 
ago when you released the document that indicated the auditor's 
report regarding the health boards. Would you be able to release 
that to us so we could see what all the expenditures of the 
different health boards were? 
 
We've had a number of questions that we've raised and we've 
been waiting for some responses. And regarding the total 
amount spent on board members’ remuneration for '94-95 fiscal 
year; number of employees on staff working directly for the 
board; support services, administration, communications, etc. 
for the fiscal year; total spent on communications and 
advertising; total spent on severance packages for the '94-95 . . . 
or '93-94 fiscal year, because '94-95 isn't in; and whether 
employees severed by the health board were rehired; and if yes, 
providing names and severance packages. 
 
And this would be for all board members or all boards, Mr. 
Minister. Would you be able to provide us with that 
information, please? 



May 17, 1995 

 
2388 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to ask the member if I 
can address his question in some parts here. The first part in 
terms of addresses and head offices for the district boards, we'll 
have those to him right away. There's no problem there at all. I 
know that some of the information he asked for through a 
motion in the house here, which had been a motion for return 
(debatable). 
 
And some of the information is available to us already and that 
will be provided. Some of it we need to secure from the district 
boards. We're doing that. And some of it isn't technically 
available until the district boards are finished their auditing 
process, which is reported to us then at the end of June. And so 
that which comes through the auditing process and available at 
the end of June, then we make available when it's available to 
us after the formal audits. 
 
And I also want to report to the member, just this day we 
finished the compilation of another bunch of information that 
he's asked for. I signed a letter to the member today with that 
information. He should get that tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. So I understand, 
Mr. Minister, you're giving us your assurances that all this 
information we've asked for will be forthcoming as it's available 
 what's already here, what's coming, and what will be finally 
reported at the end of June  I'd just ask for those assurances, 
and thank you for that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, one final question. It comes . . . and this is 
another one where we've . . . actually this is my colleague, the 
member from Kindersley, has written a couple of letters, and 
he's still waiting for a response re an issue about ambulatory 
service. 
 
An individual at the Alsask area, Ron and Joanne Murray from 
Alsask whose mother was visiting from British Columbia. She 
became ill and was hospitalized in Saskatoon. And she had 
indicated that she did not have ambulance coverage, and that if 
they were to release her, if they were going to release her to 
please notify her daughter and son-in-law, I believe — that's 
right, her daughter and son-in-law — and they would come and 
pick her up. Unfortunately they discharged her and sent her 
home in an ambulance at the cost of $827 which she didn't have 
insurance for. 
 
And what I'm wondering is, why the hospital would have sent 
or ordered an ambulance when specific instructions were given 
to call the family and they would have been more than happy to 
go and pick her up. I don't know if you'd have a response, but 
maybe you could give us an idea of what may have happened 
and why their wishes were not followed, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'll ensure that the inquiry that 
the member has made and that the Leader of the Opposition 
may have made in advance will be followed up. Immediately I 
can't respond to why that would happen, but we'll find out. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister,  

officials. I heard earlier this evening the Premier commenting 
that there were more doctors in the province now than there 
were last year. I wonder if you could give us the numbers for 
the number of doctors active in Saskatchewan in '93, '94, and 
'95. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, now we don't have, we won't 
have, of course, the end of year figures for 1995, but I'll share 
with the member the numbers as they exist for the years in 
which he asks. 
 
It is important, Mr. Chair, to remember that these numbers are 
physicians who are actually practising. There will be physicians 
who are registered with the college who may be retired and not 
practising, so that number would be a different number. The 
numbers that I'm bringing to the member's attention tonight are 
physicians who are actually practising in the province in each of 
the years. 
 
And so we will go back to . . . let's start at 1991. In 1991 the 
total, and this will include GPs (general practitioner) and 
specialists, the total at the end of 1991, 1,539; the total at the 
end of 1992, 1,492; the total at the end of 1993, 1,526; the total 
at the end of 1994, 1,558. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So these are 
the numbers who are not just registered with the college but are 
actually on the rolls for the medical billing services. Now how 
many of those are practising full time and how many of those 
are practising part time? 
 
Because I know of a number of doctors around various 
communities that perhaps practise one or two days a week or 
who have a very limited number of patients. They're not taking 
on any new patients, they're just carrying on with their patients 
that they've had for 20 or 30 years in their home communities. 
And so in reality they have very few patients, and while they're 
still billing, they are not taking on new patients and they're not 
providing for a great number of patients. So how many doctors 
would there be in those categories? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I don't think we can answer 
that question with any accuracy. We of course are not the 
employers of doctors. They do bill, but the billings alone will 
not indicate part time or full time in any strict sense. So I, to be 
fair to the member, I don't think we could accurately provide 
that answer. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps you can 
work it another way. What would the average billing be for a 
GP in the province and how many would be above that average, 
how many would be below the average, and how many would 
say be 50 per cent below the average? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think what I'll do is I'll share 
some of the numbers with the member, but I'm also going to 
have him provided with the annual statistical report from Sask 
Health, which all of the tables and all of the numbers are there, 
and he may be able to glean the more specific information that  



May 17, 1995 

 
2389 

he wants. 
 
As I review the tables here — and here again we're speaking in 
this case of all physicians — the average payment will be 
$171,400. There are a fair number that will be over that, and 
some who are under. I won't read the whole table to the 
member, but we'll provide the statistical information, and you 
can work from it. And again, these will be fee-for-service 
physicians, fee for service, which make up about 80 to 84 per 
cent of doctors. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I 
bring this up is because there is a number of . . . you're giving 
numbers that suggest that there are more doctors in the province 
today than what there were a year ago. Well I can think of one 
circumstance — I believe in Moose Jaw — where 
approximately five doctors have semi-retired. They still provide 
some service to old clients. They perhaps provide service to one 
of the nursing homes, but in general they're not available to the 
public for general medical services. Two doctors have come in, 
two GPs, to replace the five that have semi-retired. So you've 
got two doctors. Say you got three doctors on average that are 
providing full service out of those seven, but you now have 
seven doctors on your list as being billed . . . as billing. 
 
So rather than having a decrease, you actually have an increase 
because now you have seven. But they are only providing the 
service that would be provided by three or four doctors. So the 
net effect on the system is fewer doctors, fewer man-hours of 
medical service being provided in the communities. So you're 
splitting hairs, Mr. Minister, when you're saying that we have 
more doctors, but we're getting less service for it. 
 
And I realize that the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I 
believe it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . okay, Palliser has a 
problem with hair, talking about splitting hair. But perhaps he 
could seek some medical service that might rectify his problem. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think you need to inform the public as to 
how many doctors are actually providing full service in the 
province rather than simply the number of doctors that are 
billing. 
 
The other issue I wanted to bring up is I received a letter from a 
constituent, Jeanette Biberdorf of Frobisher, and I'd like to read 
the letter because it deals with her sister. And she's asking for 
assistance. And it's a letter to you, Mr. Minister. It says: 
 
 Dear Sir: I'm writing on behalf of my sister's husband 

and family. Sharon was in a motor vehicle accident 
September 20, 1992, and has sustained a brain injury. 
She is presently taking therapy at Life Skills Centre in 
Airdre, Alberta. 

 
 From a recent conversation with the centre and her 

family, I understand that Saskatchewan Health is 
planning to cut the funding for her to continue therapy.  

 This therapy is probably the only hope she has from 
being admitted to long-term care here in Saskatchewan. 

 
 When Sharon was admitted to Life Skills she was 

addicted to medications. For the first few weeks she had 
to be oriented to a new place, surroundings, people, and 
then the withdrawals of medication which has taken 
three months. Four months have passed, and the 
qualified staff at Airdre really have not had a chance to 
work with Sharon in therapy for her to gain her 
independence. 

 
And she goes on to describe the brain injury and Sharon's age, 
etc., Mr. Minister. And her final paragraph is: 
 
 I beg that you will make an exception in this case and 

use it as a pilot project to extend the funding for Sharon 
and give the brain injured people of Saskatchewan a 
chance to gain their independence, which they can't do 
on their own. In two years a facility could be opened 
and our brain-injured would have therapy and live 
closer to home. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, she's asking for assistance for her sister who 
has been brain-injured. She would like the therapy to carry on 
for her, to provide for her independence. And she's also 
interested in having a facility built in Saskatchewan to deal with 
those people who suffer brain injuries. Which in Saskatchewan 
at the present time, we have very small capabilities of assisting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I believe the member 
indicated that the letter has been sent to me, and we'll be 
investigating all of the specifics of the case. And we'll look at it 
very seriously. 
 
I want to just return a bit to the doctor's discussion, just to say 
to the member just for clarity, that the numbers that I refer to in 
terms of the numbers of doctors will only reflect those who are 
currently billing in excess of 40,000 per year. 
 
And so there is some work happening there in each case. And 
there is absolutely nothing that would indicate that the ratio of 
physicians who will be practising full time opposed to those 
who will be practising on a more part-time basis has changed 
for many years. 
 
The actual number of doctors practising in Saskatchewan is 
greater today than it was a year ago, and greater than it was two 
years ago. And there's nothing that would indicate to the 
department officials that the ratio between those practising full 
time or part time has changed for a considerable number of 
years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have a 
couple of questions before I make a few comments to . . . in 
closing. 
 
Mr. Minister, a couple . . . the questions I have, first of all a 
while back I think you recall a time we met in the corridor and I  



May 17, 1995 

 
2390 

said hello from Father Kushko and he has brought to my 
attention, I believe he's already as well brought it to your 
attention, talking about chelation therapy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what the 
department has done to date in regards to chelation therapy. 
 
Is the department looking at and reviewing the process, the 
mandate, and possibly with the idea of introducing chelation 
therapy into this province as a means of preventive medication. 
Certainly it is a much cheaper form of treating heart problems 
and problems with the veins that are plugging up than open 
heart surgery. And in many cases, information that I have read, 
would indicate that it certainly is effective and can be used and 
prevents that major expense of a bypass surgery. So I would 
like to know what the department is doing in pursuing that 
matter. 
 
And the other question I would like to raise, Mr. Minister, and 
I'm giving two right off the bat, is when the district boards were 
formed and the . . . A lot of local communities are wondering 
what happened to the capital funds that they had basically been 
donated to them — through donations, or bequeaths, or through 
fund-raisers — was there anything that would have indicated 
that capital money, whether it was for capital construction or 
whether it was for equipment, was to stay with that community. 
What has happened to those funds? There's two questions there; 
I'd like a response, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in relation to chelation 
therapy, and I know this issue came up in question period a few 
days ago, I said then and repeat tonight that of course the 
member and I have some mutual acquaintances and friends that 
have experienced chelation therapy. I think we all know 
neighbours in the province who have experienced chelation 
therapy whose personal testimonies on chelation therapy would 
indicate that it's been very valuable to them in some cases. 
Others would say it has not. 
 
We know in terms of Canadian approvals, the Canadian 
approvals for the drug does not exist for the purposes of 
chelation therapy and we know that it has not received the 
endorsements of the medical profession in our province. 
 
One of the, I think, important issues around chelation is the 
need for further study of its efficacy, a study that's well 
established with good parameters and so on. We know that kind 
of study has been recently announced in Alberta. And as I 
reported in question period, and again I report to the member 
tonight, that we have been in discussions, in some very close 
discussions, with the Alberta study and what's happening there. 
Further, I may say to the member, perhaps he could just stay 
tuned for a few more days and I believe we may be having 
further discussion about the matter of chelation. 
 
In terms of the capital funds and any funds that were collected 
in a community for a particular project or a particular facility, 
those funds, through the pre-amalgamation agreements that 
were signed in each of our communities and districts, those 
funds have been held for use within that facility or that  

community. If the reserve funds were dedicated funds that were 
raised for capital purposes on a local basis, those funds have 
been secured for that community or for that facility through the 
pre-amalgamation agreements. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, 
there are certainly a lot of other issues and questions that I 
could get into. But for the sake of time I'm going to take a 
moment to do a bit of a wrap-up and my wrap-up will depend 
on the length of time your response may be following. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, may I just . . . I guess a question I'm 
posing here is, you made a comment about staying tuned 
regarding chelation therapy. Am I to guess or presume that 
there's another election promise coming down the road in a day 
or so and that chelation therapy is going to be something that 
will be a norm in this province? I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would appreciate something like that if it was 
done well in advance or even had been done two or three years 
ago versus the number of election promises and announcements 
that we see taking place at this time. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, let me talk about where health care is today. 
Last night I sat down with a care-giver in our community, an 
individual who wanted to chat with me who is a home care 
giver. And she was going through this wellness pamphlet that 
had come out. And just to put it mildly, she said it just made her 
sick to think, to read through the different things that you were 
espousing as a government, how much better our health care 
system is versus what she as a care-giver is seeing and the 
problems she is running into. And I just want to remind you of 
a few things. 
 
Maybe I'll just bring them to your attention, what your Premier 
said back in October 3, 1991, when it comes to health care. 
 
 Well to answer your specific question, we will not 

charge premiums or deterrent fees, or utilization fees as 
they are called, for a number of reasons. Basically the 
fundamental is they are not a fair way to finance a 
health care program. 

 
Well I'm sure, Mr. Minister, if you would have taken the time to 
ask the people of the province whether they'd be willing to pay 
for some health premiums, or whether they'd be willing to pay 
for — if you will — deterrent fees, you may have found, rather 
than what we see today, people would have said yes, we are 
more than prepared to put something into our health care 
system to maintain it. 
 
The Premier again, back in March of '88, through The 
Commonwealth said: 
 
 New Democrats will continue to fight the fight to 

restore social programs such as medicare, the dental and 
drug plans to their former place of leadership for 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And yet if we look over what's happened in the last three years,  



May 17, 1995 

 
2391 

none of those programs are available any more other than the 
dental program is still available to government employees. 
 
And it's also interesting, Mr. Minister, to note a few comments 
from some of the other colleagues. The former minister of 
Health, while in opposition — and I see she's come to visit us 
tonight — November 20, Leader-Post: the Conservatives cut 
back on public health nurses, provided stingy increases for 
home care and slashed programs. 
 
April 27, '91, Leader-Post, Simard said: “ The Devine years 
have meant cut-backs, health bed closures, and fired health care 
workers.” 
 
Atkinson in Hansard, November 4, '87: 
 
 The health situation in this province is out of control. 

We have a drug plan where people are making decisions 
between (guess what) groceries and prescription drugs. 
Too little, too late. 

 
Atkinson, Hansard, November 5, '87: 
 
 In view of all the evidence and all the concerns that 

have mounted over the last several months, will you, as 
Acting Minister of Health, on behalf of your 
government, stop hacking and slashing away at our 
health care system. 

 
Again Atkinson, October 20, '87: 
 
 In view of the fact that nearly 100,000 Saskatchewan 

citizens have sent you a clear message to reverse your 
harmful and hurtful health care cuts, will you now listen 
to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 
And I think that was following a period of time when there was 
members on this side of the House standing up and presenting 
one petition after another and tying up the whole process of the 
House for days on end. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems to me that the comments that I'm reading 
here, while they were coming from prior to 1991, it looks like 
they should be coming today because I don't know if there's a 
government that has slashed and cut and hacked and dispensed 
with so many services while at the same time suggesting they 
have done so much more. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me as I would close and 
suggest that it's not only the people of Saskatchewan, but even 
your own members have a problem in dealing with the way 
health care has progressed in the province of Saskatchewan 
over the past two and a half or three and a half years. And it 
would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that it would have been 
appropriate, rather than rushing into these district boards, rather 
than appointing board members, if you would have taken the 
time to look at some other options, that it could have included 
more community input. Because if there's one thing I hear, time 
and time again, it's a lack of community input. And it's not just  

patients themselves. It's not just . . . It's care-givers. It's doctors, 
and even some of the local boards are becoming frustrated. 
 
And I chatted with a board member who called recently and 
said, I really don't care any more because I'm not going to let 
my name stand for election because I am just sick and tired of 
what has happened and some of the decisions we've been forced 
to make. We really haven't had the ability to make decisions 
based on what the community around us has been suggesting. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you can stand in your place tonight, and you 
can brag about all your accomplishments, but there are many 
people out there who feel that you are really lacking when it 
comes to health care, unfortunately. So I can only close by 
suggesting that maybe it's time we sat back and took a serious 
look at where health care is. 
 
And if we're really interested in helping the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, in these final moments, will you 
give a commitment to this Assembly that you'll go beyond 
electing eight health district board members and electing all 12 
so that the district boards actually have the ability . . . and feel 
that they have been placed in leadership in their district to 
represent their constituents. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, no, I will not. We have 
established by legislation that 8 of the 12 district health board 
members will be elected, and four will be appointed. And that 
will be how we proceed through the first elections which will 
be held this fall. 
 
With that, Mr. Chair, I do want to personally welcome the 
former minister of Health to the House this evening, as she has 
joined us earlier. Now she's saying I shouldn't be doing that. 
 
And I want to, Mr. Chair, simply extend my appreciation to the 
critic from the opposition caucus, from the Conservative Party, 
who I think through the course of these estimates — and I think 
we've been in the House together now 9 or 10 times — I think 
has brought some very appropriate and important questions to 
the floor of the legislature. And I've appreciated the good work 
that he has done. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2392 

Vote 32 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, at this 
time I'd like to take a moment just to thank the minister and his 
officials for the time they've spent in this Assembly, and the 
deliberations, and certainly we look forward to responses to 
some of the questions that will be forthcoming. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to certainly add my 
personal thanks to the officials from the Department of Health 
who have been in the legislature assisting us through the 
process of estimates. I want to thank those who have been in the 
House and to thank, through them, many other members of the 
Department of Health staff who work so hard to provide the 
quality care from what I believe is the pre-eminent Department 
of Health in all of Canada. So my thanks to each and every one 
of our officials. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — I would ask that the minister please introduce 
the officials who have joined us here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I'm honoured again to have 
the opportunity to answer to my friends on the other side of the 
House. And with me for that purpose I have my deputy 
minister, Mr. Michael Shaw, on my right; behind Mr. Shaw, 
Ross MacLennan, the assistant deputy minister of operations; 
directly behind me, Les Cooke, the associate deputy minister of 
policy and programs; and immediately to my left, Bob 
Blackwell, assistant deputy minister of management services; 
and behind Bob, Donna Kellsey, the director of finance 
administration. I'd like you to join me in welcoming them to the 
House. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 
your duties as Environment and Resource minister, I also 
believe that you're responsible for the SARCAN operations and 
SARC (Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres), 
and that you work with that particular board structure in how 
they manage their affairs to the province of Saskatchewan. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, could you tell us what the current 
financial position of that organization is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I understand the 
SARCAN operation is in good financial position. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if the minister could 
tell us exactly what that good financial position is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — If I could just ask how much detail the 
member opposite wants, or whether he'd like me just to forward  

to him on another occasion or even today, the documents with 
the full financial outline and performance of the operation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I note in the year-end 
report ending 1994, that there was excess revenue over 
expenses of $2,766,248. Can you tell me, is that normal or is 
there an accumulated surplus there? What would be that 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there is an 
accumulated surplus in SARCAN, I'm told, of about $6 million, 
some of which was contributed to by the current surplus. The 
SARC operation is designed to break even operationally and 
generally the salvage value of products that are sold are used for 
other SARC projects with respect to examining new recycling 
opportunities or some of the programs that the association uses, 
so the numbers though, are larger than previous years because 
of the upturn in the value of some of the recycled materials. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And what do they do with that revenue, Mr. 
Minister? Do they invest that in any way? Do they invest in 
treasury bills, that sort of thing, with this particular money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The relationship between ourselves and 
SARCAN is a contractual relationship by which we contract 
with them to do certain things. We do not manage SARCAN; 
it's a contractual relationship that's reopened periodically. So 
that we're not directly involved in the financial decisions with 
respect to the reinvestment of surpluses that they may earn, but 
I'm presuming that they would use sound financial investment 
processes. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is that 
you have a contract with them, but you don't intrude into any of 
their financial dealings or into the conditions with which people 
 disabled, handicapped people  within the organization 
work or the pay levels of those individuals or any of the 
working conditions. That's of no concern to you in your 
contractual arrangement with them? 
 
(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, sorry for taking so long to 
understand this. I have understood it several times in my life but 
it is a complex arrangement. 
 
We contract with SARCAN for services directly. They operate 
it but they also then have extensive relationships as an 
organization with Social Services in terms of the management 
of the human services. And they would then also be required to 
abide by all the labour standards in the province just as a 
provincial operating agency, as an independent agency. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So who would determine, Mr. Minister, on 
the expenditure of these funds, of whether the money would go 
toward SARCAN depots or whether it would go toward, for 
instance, some of the sheltered workshops? Is that totally out of 
your hands or is that made by Social Services or is that made by  



May 17, 1995 

 
2393 

the board of SARCAN? Who makes that determination of how 
that money gets spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The contract requires, on depot location, 
for them to consult with us. The network that's set out, there 
was an original requirement for a certain network in the 
province so that there would be a comprehensive collection 
system in the province. But with respect to expansion of that 
network, they would come to us with their own plans and 
consult with us before they would expand it. 
 
Basically their decision making, as I've heard comments on it 
before through my office, are that they are often having to make 
decisions with respect to their own intentions in that regard 
against the profitability of additional services relative to the 
volume of recycled materials that are available in various places 
in the province. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So you're saying that they do consult with 
you. If workers in some of these situations were working in 
substandard conditions and there were complaints, who would 
they go to? Would that go to you, or would that go to the Social 
Services minister? Where would that go? Who has the authority 
and the responsibility to deal with decisions being made by the 
board in this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — As I've indicated before, we're involved in 
the establishment of the network. But with respect to the 
specific working conditions of people working in the system, 
that would be under the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I say to you, Minister, that not all is 
right in that system. I know in my own community of Moose 
Jaw, where there have been numerous attempts to have 
someone look at the working conditions of the SARCAN depot 
and have had very little results in getting anyone to pay much 
attention to what was going on in that particular situation where 
— in my view, in talking to people — there actually was danger 
to life and limb because of circumstances. And no one seems to 
want to take this very seriously. 
 
I'm told that in other areas of the province similar concerns have 
been raised about the working conditions of the people who I 
believe the system was set up to benefit in the very first place. 
And yet they seem to have no opportunity to improve the 
working conditions or in fact have the fruits of their labour 
rewarded by the current system. Do you agree or disagree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well in general I disagree. If however 
you're aware of a circumstance that we should be investigating, 
I'd appreciate alerting to it. I know there are concerns expressed 
to my office from time to time, and when concerns are 
expressed I've asked officials to look into those sorts of 
complaints when they're serious, because we want to make sure, 
I want to make sure, that the contractual arrangements under 
which the relationship operates is such that the best benefit for 
everybody in the system is obtained. 
 
And so I can tell that we have done reviews on circumstances  

people have drawn to our attention. If there are some, I'd 
appreciate hearing about it, because it's certainly not the 
intention of the system to put anybody at a disadvantage. It's a 
system that has substantial benefits for many and that's our goal. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm told, Minister, that an occupational 
health and safety officer had to be called into that situation and 
made some recommendations because any pleas for help that 
had been made both to the board of SARCAN and to your 
office were totally ignored. 
 
And I don't understand why, as the minister responsible, you 
would not find it serious enough to have somebody at least do 
something about it. Thank goodness others felt that there was 
some concern there and asked that things be done. I mean don't 
you feel that you do have some responsibility in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I'm having difficulty responding because I 
don't know if the member is referring to a specific case. If he is, 
I would appreciate him detailing that so that I would be in a 
better position to respond. But I can say that in general, the 
system operates soundly and the proper safeguards are there 
through labour legislation in the province, through the Social 
Services monitoring, and through the contractual arrangements 
we have with the SARC board and the SARCAN operation, 
which does generally operate in the interests of all the people in 
the system and for the Saskatchewan public. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, how many CEOs (chief 
executive officer) of SARCAN have you had since coming to 
office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, we were 
discussing a matter here when the member was asking the 
question. Was the question how many CEOs have been in the 
operation since we've come to office? 
 
Mr. Chairman, it's been one change since we've come to office. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So when was Walt Koehler; what was the 
term of his office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — My officials inform me that Walter 
Koehler was in place from sometime in 1991 until 1994, at 
which time Archie Balon has taken over. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And what role did Julian Bodnar play in this 
particular organization during that period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, there are, I'm told by my 
officials, 36 branches of SARC in the province. And each of 
them appoints a board member to the provincial board and the 
provincial representatives then choose their Chair. And Mr. 
Bodnar was apparently the Chair chosen by the representatives. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So he was the provincial chairman of the 
organization. And it would have been Mr. Bodnar then that 
terminated Mr. Koehler's employment as the CEO (chief  



May 17, 1995 

 
2394 

executive officer) of SARCAN? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I'm not sure of the terms under which Mr. 
Koehler left, but Mr. Bodnar was the Chair of the board at the 
time when Mr. Koehler left. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And he also would have been the individual 
in charge of hiring Archie Balon as the new CEO of the 
organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, the officials aren't absolutely certain 
of the timing of who was there exactly at which moment, but 
they believe that Mr. Bodnar was the Chair at which point Mr. 
Balon was chosen. They believe also by a selection committee. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And since that time now Mr. Julian Bodnar 
has also resigned from his position as chairman of that 
organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, my officials informed me that Mr. 
Bodnar resigned as Chair. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, does the name of Lorna Purdy 
mean anything to you in regards to any of these individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The officials may know something about 
that name; it means nothing to me personally. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And I'm curious about a lot of things, Mr. 
Minister. Ms. Purdy used to work in the SARCAN operation in 
Outlook, Saskatchewan, and was involved in a situation with 
one of the local board members there, an individual by the 
name of Jim Wankel who was charged with sexual assault on 
Ms. Purdy. Also some other allegations. Were you aware of this 
particular thing, especially after Ms. Purdy was terminated from 
her employment by SARCAN? 
 
(2315) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, these are matters that are, 
as we described earlier, matters under the management authority 
and jurisdiction of the SARC board. And they're not matters 
that would come to me for a resolution, or decision, or advice. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well the reason I asked these questions, 
Minister, is because I know that you and a lot of other members 
of your government have been made aware of all of this stuff. 
It's a very well-documented report by an individual who was 
also terminated because of bringing a lot of these issues to the 
fore. And this was discussed by a large number of your caucus 
members, in fact. 
 
And today we have Lorna Purdy Greenaway, who was 
terminated because of raising concerns. We have another lady 
by the name of Pat Olson who made, I believe, some allegations 
concerning the leadership in SARCAN, lost her job. Mr. Carter 
Currie of Moose Jaw, who I think you probably know. I'm sure 
that the member from Moose Jaw informed you of probably  

where I was going in this questioning. And I'm really concerned 
that you, the minister responsible of dealing with an 
organization who employ literally hundreds of disabled people 
in our province, under a contractual basis with the government 
of Saskatchewan, would be going through a whole series of 
changes at the top. Dismissals, which as I understand, to this 
point aren't in some cases resolved; that individuals have been 
terminated because they were suffering from stress and mental 
illness, which according to the legislation that your own 
government recently brought in, is not acceptable. 
 
And that today we have in excess of $6 million in various forms 
of which you're not quite sure what they are but with your 
contractual partners performing, I say, a great service to the 
province of Saskatchewan. And yet I haven't, until recently, as a 
member of the Legislative Assembly, heard about any of this. 
And I am really wondering why all of these terminations, 
resignations, clouds of suspicion. 
 
The board member from Outlook was charged and yet this very 
day I am told still has under his jurisdiction, under his roof, a 
handicapped person. I know that's not your responsibility. 
That's probably Social Services. But this organization that you 
do all of this business with appears to be less than pristine from 
what I've been able to determine . . . and interviewed several 
people across this province, and I'm wondering why, if this 
problem exists, you as minister have not been proactive in 
cleaning it up, especially when it was brought to your attention 
some time ago. 
 
And I know it was because I've got the correspondence here, all 
of it. There's all sorts of letters to yourself. There's letters to 
other ministers of the Crown, all very well documented, 
involving a whole host of people. And I'm wondering why you 
would allow this situation to go on when we're dealing with the 
lives of people that sometimes can't really defend themselves 
like you and I can. And I'm wondering why you would want this 
to be prolonged and swept under the rug apparently and not do 
something about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, just to respond to the 
question that the member has made specific reference to, a 
particular series of concerns that were reported, just to assure 
the member and the Saskatchewan public that the information 
that was sent to ministers was referred to the responsible 
bodies, and internal investigations were done with respect to 
each of the concerns that were raised. And it's my belief that 
they have been dealt with. On the side of the contractual 
adequacy between ourselves and SARC, that contract is up for 
renewal from time to time. And it either just has been or is near 
ready for renewing. 
 
That has been under negotiations, and in preparation for those 
negotiations our officials have reviewed with SARC their 
management structures, and there are provisions for improved 
accountability within the system in the new contract. And 
hopefully people will continue to be well served by this 
organization. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2395 

I think it is unfortunate that from time to time in systems, these 
sorts of concerns arise, and it's unfortunate if in fact people are 
hurt in circumstances, but we must have provisions and 
manners in which to deal with those. And we do through Social 
Services, and labour legislation have ways of dealing with 
concerns. 
 
And the contract between ourselves and SARC is one that is 
there to provide a service, environmentally, and the other areas 
of concern that have been raised with respect to the nature of 
management and the concerns raised between managements and 
staff, do have other ways of being dealt with. And we will 
continue to ensure that they are dealt with soundly. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I would hope that would be the case, 
Minister, because some of the correspondence that I have is 
fairly graphic. And I know that this correspondence has been 
made available to your office and to other . . . You know, when 
an individual brings forward allegations about board members 
touching clients' breasts and that sort of thing, I would think 
people would get sort of upset. And when employees are forced 
to put up with that kind of stuff for several years and then find 
themselves terminated because they raise those concerns, I 
would think that people within government would be very 
concerned. 
 
And I would really wonder at you wanting to continue on a 
contractual arrangement when there has been these types of 
allegations. And there were convictions, by the way. So they're 
not unsubstantiated; there were convictions. 
 
This isn't hearsay. This stood up in a court of law. But those 
individuals still found themselves terminated. And I think that 
that is indeed very shameful, that an organization which, as I 
say, was developed in this province, I think with the best 
interests of handicapped people first and foremost, and as a 
growth industry in environmental management, certainly one 
that every citizen in this province appreciates, and yet we 
appear to have an unfortunate circumstance where we have a 
number of employees shoved out in the cold and your 
government turning an absolute blind eye to them. 
 
And these concerns brought forward on several occasions to 
you, the members of your caucus, and yet still there appears to 
be no resolution. And I didn't want to just take hearsay so I've 
interviewed most of these individuals on a personal basis. And 
those are tough stories to sit and listen to and yet this whole 
issue appears to be something that no one wants to deal with. 
 
And I ask you then, why was this contractual arrangement that 
you have, not reviewed some time ago given all of what appears 
to have been a very unsavoury situation occurring? Why would 
you want to prolong this relationship if there are very 
substantive issues involving abuse of handicapped people, 
disabled people, and employees? And why would that not be 
exposed to the public instead of, in my view, covered up over 
quite a long period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I can assure the member opposite that  

there has been no covering up. The comments that were 
received by our office — you've got the mail in front of you — 
was received quite a long time ago. Can you give me a date 
possibly on that? It's, I think in my recollection, a year or year 
and a half ago. 
 
Since that time, as I had indicated earlier, the processes of law 
and the processes of the Department of Labour and the 
processes of the Department of Social Services have been 
applied to the various concerns that were raised. And in terms 
of our own contractual obligations and arrangements with 
SARC, we believe the organization is doing a good job. 
 
And in every instance in independent management systems, 
people can make mistakes where other people are hurt and we 
have processes in law to deal with those and they have done. 
We have processes in management to deal with them and it's 
my understanding that those have been dealt with. And in terms 
of the contractual obligation and arrangement that we have with 
SARCAN, the new agreement will continue to give authority to 
them as an independent body, and we will continue to ensure 
that a good service continues to be provided for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I believe the latest correspondence I have 
which you would have had, Minister, would be September 29, 
'94, and October '94. That's not that long ago. And I've been 
assured that you were made aware of this correspondence, an 
open letter to SARC board members, SARC members, and 
SARCAN staff and workers. And I believe that correspondence 
was provided to your office at least, if not to you directly, 
talking about many of these issues, some of these outstanding 
dismissals. 
 
And I'm wondering, Minister, are you contemplating as you 
negotiate this new arrangement, are you contemplating, putting 
in both more safeguards for the employees within the system 
and a process that perhaps the public can become more 
involved in, vis-a-vis the disbursement of funds? Or are you 
going to leave it as it was with control of an organization that 
looks like it's had difficulty controlling itself over the last few 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, we have, in the new 
contract, included measures for public reporting which were not 
there before. 
 
But with respect to the matters of employee safeguards and 
management responsibility, we will continue to provide the 
same protection in this situation that every other Saskatchewan 
citizen has under Justice, under Labour, under Social Services, 
and continue to encourage people to make the various systems 
aware when there are concerns, because certainly it's our intent 
to see the system running wholly well and not putting people in 
any difficult circumstances. 
 
(2330) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, would you think it fair to  



May 17, 1995 

 
2396 

suggest that perhaps before that new agreement's signed that 
maybe some of these outstanding issues concerning personnel 
and some of these, what I would consider to be very serious 
allegations, would be cleaned up? 
 
At least you would want to make the organization aware of your 
intent to sign a contract with people that obviously are wholly 
reputable when dealing with the people within their own 
systems. Could you give me the assurance that before that new 
contract is signed that you personally will make sure that some 
of these issues are looked after before you sign that contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I can tell you that the 
SARC board is a responsible and reputable board that has done 
good work for a number of years and they, I'm sure, are no 
happier with incidents of this sort that arise than any of the rest 
of us are. I will, on your behalf and on my behalf, pass on the 
concerns that have been raised so that they are aware that, as 
I'm sure they already are, but they're aware that others are as 
well concerned with the circumstances that we've discussed 
here tonight. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well thank you, Minister. I was quite hesitant 
to even bring this issue to the Legislative Assembly. I am not 
one that chases ambulances or fire engines or . . . and I certainly 
don't want to end a 10-year career in this House by bringing 
some spurious garbage to the floor. But when one sits down and 
talks with these individuals, you understand that there is a lot of 
concern and a lot of hurt, and I found it very strange that people 
weren't taking more of an interest in some of these issues. 
 
This is very serious stuff. And if this organization is going to 
carry on the good work that it does, I would think that its 
employees, the working conditions surrounding disabled people 
in this province, and the ability of those kind of people to 
integrate into our society, would be first and foremost before 
we, as a government, would want to be involved in signing 
contracts or doing all sorts of things with them. 
 
And if the people don't come first in this thing, then maybe the 
environmental stuff doesn't matter quite as much, is my view. 
And I'll leave it with you and I don't know where it will go 
beyond that. We're probably going to have an election, but it is 
on the record, and I hope in future that people will be watching 
this and see where it goes. And if your commitment to the 
House tonight isn't lived up to, I would hope that somebody 
would take you to task for it in a fairly strong way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I appreciate the concerns the member 
opposite has raised. It's obviously a concern to any of us who 
have become aware, and I want to just conclude this part of the 
discussion by saying that there has been . . . that the matters 
have some time ago been referred to the various responsible 
bodies and thoroughly investigated. The letters you referred to 
secondarily must be subsequent to that discussion because this 
began long before September of '94 in terms of the original 
reporting to me. 
 

I say extensive review has occurred, and it's my understanding 
that the issue has been relatively fully dealt with through one of 
the courses that's available to people when they find themselves 
in difficult straits. So I thank you for your concern because it's a 
concern of all of us that systems do function for the benefit of 
all Saskatchewan people including the people that work in the 
system. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — One final question, Minister. Do you know 
how I would obtain the board expenses — say of the last three 
years — per diems and that sort of thing of the SARCAN 
board? Where would I go to find that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The SARC board does run independently, 
as we had indicated, and so if you would just contact the board 
and ask for that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
officials, one of the issues that has been ongoing within 
Environment around the province is dealing with water. And 
this particular spring we have a significant amount of water 
along the eastern side of the province. And I know that some of 
you over there are thinking I'm going to ask about 
Rafferty-Alameda, and I'm not. We've got lots of water in 
Rafferty and Alameda . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well there 
was a young gentleman down in Rafferty who found out that 
there was a little too much water in Rafferty unfortunately. 
 
The question I have though deals with the Langenburg east 
project. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can give us an update on 
what is happening on that project and why an environmental 
assessment was ordered to be done on that particular project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes I will, to the extent of my 
responsibility for that area. The whole issue is a matter that is 
more directly under the responsibility of the minister 
responsible for Sask Water. But we have indicated that an 
environmental impact statement will be required on the project, 
so that's where that's now at. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How small or 
how large of a project do you have to be involved with to 
warrant an environmental impact study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The Environmental Assessment Act 
doesn't define size of the project as a criterion. It defines impact 
on the environment and on people, and on the . . . in this case it 
was decided that there was significant enough concern about 
the impact of the application that an environmental impact 
assessment should be done. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it a function 
of the volume of water that is being considered? Is it a function 
of the amount of land being affected? Or is it some other 
criteria in which you measure whether or not an environmental 
impact study is done? Does it take one complaint to generate an 
environmental impact study if your assessment is done by your 
department to say that yes, there will be some impact so we 
should study it? 



May 17, 1995 

 
2397 

What is the criteria that you look at, that your department looks 
at, to make a determination as to whether or not an impact study 
is needed or not needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the easiest way 
of dealing with this question might be to just encourage the 
member to ask of the department, the file. We, this spring . . . 
earlier this winter actually made a change in the access to 
information in this regard, so that the information that the 
member opposite is asking for in greater detail than I can give it 
here, would be available to him through that source. 
 
But to speak generally that, as the member is aware, there is 
division within the community and it is significant . . . there are 
significant concerns on both sides of the question of drainage. 
And the best way to resolve those questions then from the 
environmental side is to actually have an impact study that can 
examine the impacts both locally and downstream in Manitoba 
where others are expressing concern about the impacts of the 
project. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I've been 
out and had a look at the Langenburg project and there seems to 
be a large amount of drainage already in the area. I believe there 
are three separate projects, and the Langenburg east project is 
an extension of one of those projects. 
 
As we toured the area and had a look at it, there seemed to be 
already within that project a significant amount of drainage that 
was being done — some of it legally, some of it illegally. And 
in fact it was pointed out to us that some of this drainage was 
on the land of the people that were complaining about the 
project. 
 
So there is, I agree, a large amount of conflict within the 
community there. And I think that one of the problems that is 
generated there is some of the people downstream who have 
already drained their land both legally and illegally, are 
concerned about other water coming onto their land from 
upstream that would have an impact on it. Whereas the impact 
of their drainage downstream does not seem to be of great 
concern to them. That's the Langenburg east project. 
 
But there's another project in this province that also needs some 
consideration, Mr. Minister, dealing with some drainage, where 
the neighbours are not happy about the drainage that's involved. 
And that is up in the Tisdale area, where one Jack Messer of 
SaskPower fame perhaps, or infamy, is carrying on some 
drainage in that area, Mr. Minister, because of a beaver problem 
that is occurring on his land and draining water. That's a 
problem to his neighbours. Well, Mr. Minister, are you going to 
carry out an environmental impact study on the drainage being 
done by one Jack Messer, past president of the NDP Party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — If there, Mr. Chairman, if there are 
concerns with respect to drainage by any individual in 
Saskatchewan, then it should be brought to the attention of Sask 
Water. We become involved only at the point of environmental 
impact statements on projects that are proposed. So the Sask  

Water does have the responsibility for water management in the 
province and for drainage, the nature in which you're expressing 
concern about. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, this project has 
already been proposed and is perhaps even completed. So when 
that happens, if someone drains a piece of project or a piece of 
land, when do you become involved? Does it take a written 
complaint from somebody? Because it's been in the newspaper 
that the people have been complaining up there about Jack 
Messer's drainage. So what does it take to get you involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I wouldn't become involved in those 
projects because that responsibility is the responsibility of Sask 
Water. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So as long as Sask Water doesn't have 
any concerns about it, the Environment then is not involved. So 
unless Sask Water is involved in a project or complains about a 
project, your department will never get involved. Is that what 
you're telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — If there is public concern about a 
proposed project, a legally described project, and it needs an 
assessment, then we would become involved. I'm not certain 
from your remarks whether you were contending that someone 
drained without permission but the normal procedures, the 
normal procedures that Sask Water uses for dealing with 
conservation developed projects is a relationship between the 
community that's established that it wants to do something 
within that framework and Sask Water. If through that process 
as in the Langenburg east case, public concern is raised, then 
the request for an environmental impact assessment can be 
made and responded to. So I'm not sure exactly how you're 
characterizing the project that you're concerned about. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the public has raised 
concern about this. Now I'm not aware whether Mr. Messer has 
a permit to do this draining or not, but if the public brings the 
concern to you and under the auspices of that it's affecting the 
environment, would you investigate it and would you conduct 
an impact study? 
 
(2345) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Without knowing more details of either 
the project or the state of it or the extent . . . well the magnitude 
or whether it's proposed or done, or with permit or without, 
without knowing any of that it's very difficult to respond. But I 
can assure you that if there is a concern and someone writes us, 
we can respond appropriately. 
 
And certainly at the end of the day if there are projects of 
significant environmental impact, it's within our authority to 
make sure that they're properly examined for impact and 
conducted in such a way that the environment is protected. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have you 
received any complaints or concerns about this particular piece  



May 17, 1995 

 
2398 

of draining? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I don't recollect having been made aware 
of it, and our officials don't either. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm sure 
that someone will be in all likelihood contacting you about Mr. 
Messer and his drainage project. 
 
I'd like to talk to you about another environmental concern 
that's taking place in the southern part of the province, and 
that's at Bienfait, dealing with Plains Environmental Inc. and 
their proposal to put it in an incinerator at Bienfait. 
 
I wonder if you can give us an update on what the 
circumstances are with that particular proposal, and you have 
the environmental impact study report available on that — or 
it's not the study, but the proposal from Plains Environmental. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Our environmental assessment process 
provides a time and an opportunity for the public to respond to 
environmental impact statements. The department has received 
the environmental impact statement, it has done its technical 
review, and the environmental impact statement along with the 
technical review have been made available for public 
examination and comment for a 60-day period beginning May 
5. And it's my duty to, during that period, hear public comment 
before making any decision at the end of it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It says 
here that the . . . normally it's a 30-day review period and that 
has been extended to 60 days, so when will that extension 
expire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — July 4. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, under the circumstances, 
with the spring that we're having this particular year, most of 
the people in my area are not on the land at all yet. So that 
would in fact give them some opportunities now but they're all 
busy out there trying to see to it that they can get on the land. 
And I'm not sure that an extension to July 4 will be sufficient to 
provide people with the opportunity to prepare submissions 
either for or against the proposals. Has any consideration been 
given to extending that perhaps for another 30 days to allow the 
people to have the opportunity to prepare their reports? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The Act, as it is constructed, provides for 
a normal public review period of 30 days, and because of the 
request of the community raising some of the concerns you've 
raised, we extended it to a 60-day period to give them the 
maximum time under the Act in order to respond. 
 
When I receive the responses at the end of the 60 days, if 
significant issues are raised that need some other process for 
further review, we have options at that time. But the Act for this 
process allows for 30 days and an extension for 60 days after 
which I have to then make a public response to what I've heard. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you can give us some information as to what this proposal 
entails. What kind of volumes is this incinerator looking at and 
what kind of products would they be incinerating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I don't want to duck that discussion. As 
the member opposite knows, we've had elements of it before. I 
feel constrained by the period of public review that we're in to 
not get into a detailed discussion of the project personally, 
although the documents are available to you. And if any 
clarification by officials is necessary, I can ensure that they'll do 
that for you. But I would personally appreciate your 
understanding that in order to maintain impartiality that I not 
discuss the details of the operation in this public review period. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could supply me with a copy of that report that you have 
available because it is a very contentious issue. I receive quite a 
few phone calls and letters dealing with that issue, and the 
communities have had a number of meetings also. 
 
I'd like to move on to the other half of your department now and 
that being the resource side of it. I have here a copy of the 
Saskatchewan big game draw, and this is probably the area of 
your department that most of the public has contact with this 
and the fisheries parts of it. 
 
You're proposing to make some changes to the wildlife 
management zones, particularly along the forest areas where 
they transition between farm land and forest. I wonder if you 
can give us an indication of what those proposals are and to 
what extent they are, and how they're going to affect the 
outfitters in those areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, as the member may 
know that outfitting is carried on principally in the forest zone 
in Saskatchewan. It has been an area, a transitional area 
between agriculture and forestry where outfitting has as well 
occurred. 
 
The concerns have been raised by farmers and RMs (rural 
municipality) that because of the longer seasons in the forest 
area, it causes some concern for the farming community. So 
what's been proposed is that we create a transitional zone in 
areas where there is also farm land, where the seasons for 
hunting will be adjusted to remove that conflict, but to do it in 
such a way that there is a cooperative relationship between the 
hunting community and the farmers and the people that live in 
the area. 
 
So we've met a number of times with the people who have had 
concerns, and we're going to be working with the committee 
that the outfitters will put representation on in order to make 
sure that this transition happens in a way that does not threaten 
their businesses but addresses the concerns that farmers have 
raised in the past. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It's my 
understanding that these changes were initially to be  



May 17, 1995 

 
2399 

implemented this fall. And these changes occurred after a good 
majority of the outfitters had already gone to a number of the 
shooting shows, the hunting shows, where they were booking 
hunters to come up to hunt in these areas, after which you went 
ahead to change the rules, which caused a great deal of 
consternation and problem for them because all of a sudden 
their hunting times were shortened up, and there were fewer 
tags, I believe, available at that particular time. 
 
Also a change that you were making in there was going to 
charge the hunters, I believe, upfront $75 per permit, or to the 
outfitter $75 a permit, without them having the knowledge of 
whether or not they were going to be able to sell those permits, 
and yet they had to pay for them upfront. Have you made 
necessary changes so that the bookings that have already been 
made prior to these regulation changes can be honoured? And 
what changes have you made in relationship to the $75 per 
permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I should preface my remarks by saying the 
outfitters in Saskatchewan have been working with us in trying 
to enhance the quality of outfitting in Saskatchewan. And I can 
say that I have very much appreciated the efforts of the 
outfitters' association who have worked with us very strongly in 
developing some new processes, but also those who express 
concern as you described, who felt that some of the changes 
were premature relative to their own operations and because 
they also when they met with me, were most understanding and 
cooperative with respect to making adjustments. 
 
I make that comment because we did then reach an 
understanding about what would happen this year and what 
would happen in future years that everyone is generally happy 
with. There is significant support for the idea of an allocation 
fee. Outfitters are as concerned as anyone that we use our 
hunting processes, whether they be outfitting or hunting in the 
South as a process for wildlife management. And it's important 
that we use those management tools with as much precision as 
we can. 
 
That's of course the reason while we have the opportunity, that I 
want to add one more time for the record, the concern of the 
hunting community in Saskatchewan, and my own concern, and 
that often expressed by Mr. Mitchell for other reasons about the 
current federal proposals with respect to gun control; that in 
fact if it begins to affect the nature of hunting in Saskatchewan, 
be it outfitting or be it regular hunting by Saskatchewan or other 
Canadian residents, that this seriously impacts on one of the key 
tools we have for maintaining wildlife populations in balance 
with other activities in the province. 
 
(2400) 
 
And as I said in the rally in Rosetown, we've seen what the 
European fur lobby has done to beaver populations because the 
prices have dropped and the market has vanished, and we have 
significant concern in that area. And I again have serious 
concerns that if there are serious impacts on the hunting in 
Saskatchewan that we again could have other wildlife  

population imbalances in the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It's 
unfortunate though on our initial topic — we'll get into gun 
control later; as you know it's one of my favourite topics — it's 
unfortunate though, Mr. Minister, that these changes that you 
did implement to correct the imbalances that you had put into 
place through adjustments in your department, that that only 
happened after we brought the issue up in question period with 
a whole group of the outfitters sitting up in the galleries. 
 
Now it would have been nice if your department and yourself 
had taken their concerns and considerations into place before 
they had to drive down from Nipawin and across the northern 
forest fringe area to come into the legislature to get the 
solutions. It shouldn't have to be that you have to go to the 
opposition or to the government and sit up in the galleries to get 
solutions to your problems. But unfortunately with you, Mr. 
Minister, it seems to be that is one of the few ways in which 
changes can be made. 
 
On the gun control issue and the impact on hunting, I agree 
with you that this will have a very detrimental effect to our 
wildlife. Unfortunately a good many of those people who are 
not in favour of firearms also aren't in favour of hunting, and 
they really have no concern as to the impact that that will have 
on the wildlife within the province of Saskatchewan or indeed 
across Canada. Their sole purpose seems to be the elimination 
of firearms. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you have prepared any financial 
information as it relates to hunting and fishing in this province 
and the impact that diminishing firearm use would have in this 
province if Mr. Rock's Bill goes through and the American 
hunters and the offshore hunters find it unfavourable to come to 
Canada to enjoy our hospitality and our hunting opportunities. 
 
I realize that the member from Saskatoon Fairview has spoke 
out a considerable amount on this, but he's not the only one in 
this Assembly that has been dealing with this. I have spent a 
considerable amount of time in this session, indeed prodding 
the Minister of Justice to be a little more proactive on the 
firearms issue rather than simply sitting back and talking about 
it. I wonder if you have some financial information that would 
be pertinent to the hunting in Saskatchewan if this legislation 
does indeed go through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have the extent of 
the detail that the member opposite wishes, but we do have it in 
the department and we'll make sure we forward that detail to 
him. 
 
I just want to say again that with respect to the earlier issue the 
member had raised, that the original consultations had been 
with the outfitters' association, taken at great length, and it was 
only after that extensive consultation that occurred that we 
discovered that there was a group of outfitters who found 
themselves, their concerns, not to have been represented, they 
believed. And they came to us, and unfortunately the day that  



May 17, 1995 

 
2400 

the members came here I was not here to meet with them 
because I was elsewhere. 
 
And I appreciate the member raising it and I'm happy that the 
issue is resolved because the outfitting industry in the northern 
part of the province is a significant part of the economic activity 
and the wildlife management activity that goes on there and I'm 
happy that they are working harmoniously again. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
appreciate it if you could put some of the financial numbers 
together, because I think it would be a valuable addition to the 
arguments in relationship to this firearms legislation and the 
impact it will have on hunting and fishing in this province. 
 
I have another concern dealing with provincial parks. A number 
of our provincial parks have commercial enterprises being 
carried on within those parks. If such an enterprise wanted to 
change the focus of its activities, something that it may have 
been permitted for, would it need another permit or can it 
simply change its focus and provide new services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Presuming . . . it depends on the extent of 
the change. If the change was substantial, we would enter into 
negotiations with respect to the new activity that a lessee 
wanted to engage in. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If, say, a 
commercial outlet had a small store in a provincial park and 
they wanted to provide some other service such as an 
auctioneering or a flea market or something like that, would 
they need another permit for that or would they simply carry on 
under their current retail permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — My officials inform me that within all of 
our park leases we have a competition clause, so that if a new 
activity wants to take place it has to be examined against 
existing services already provided. So there would have to at 
least be a discussion so that the question could be examined, 
and depending on the nature of the outcome of the discussion, 
possibly new negotiations for a different sort of contract. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — When this determination is being made, 
Mr. Minister, would it simply be an activity being carried on 
within the park, or within a certain distance away from where 
that would be carried on in the park, even though it may be 
outside of the park boundaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — We would not generally be permitting 
businesses whose main purpose would be to function outside of 
the park. If there were a store in the park and it happened by 
accident to serve some people who lived outside of the park that 
would be fine. But we wouldn't generally be set up in such a 
fashion as to serve a population outside of the park. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I think maybe you misunderstood the 
direction of my question there, Mr. Minister. If the 
establishment in the park was wishing to offer a service that 
was available just outside of the park, would that be considered  

as under your consideration for permitting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — While the department is concerned mostly 
with activities inside the park, we're also concerned with what 
is necessary to be done in the park. And so if a service was 
adequately available close enough to the park for park residents, 
then it's unlikely we would permit a new activity. But it would 
have to depend on distance and access and convenience. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 
that answers that particular question. I have another concern 
down at Moose Mountain Provincial Park. I believe that this 
summer on July 9 they will be holding a 90th celebration 
birthday for Saskatchewan. 
 
At that particular celebration they have asked the Friends of 
Cannington Manor to participate and to help out as volunteers 
within their birthday celebration. The Friends of Cannington in 
return, would like to be able to put up a small advertising 
platform or display dealing with the Cannington Manor site and 
the old Manor house. 
 
They have been told that they can't do that; that they can work 
at the park, provide their volunteer services, but they can't 
provide a display of the Cannington Manor site and historical 
area. Is there any particular reason why they should be denied 
that opportunity when they are more than prepared to provide 
their services for free? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I can say to the member opposite that 
we're very pleased that this new association has been formed, 
but it is brand-new and they've just begun discussions. And 
barring difficulties, there haven't been . . . no no has been said, 
and barring difficulties, we appreciate the work they're doing 
and would want to work cooperatively with them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, a 
couple of questions to the minister, depending on his responses. 
About three weeks ago the minister was aware of the fact that I 
attended a meeting up at Maidstone regarding the Bronson 
forest. I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what you have done to 
address the concerns of the citizens in that area regarding the 
Bronson forest and native land entitlement, and have you been 
in contact with people in response to the number of questions? 
Actually I've got four pages of questions if you want me to go 
through them all, but maybe you can save the time of going 
through all of those if you can address them with a positive 
response to the concern that's been raised. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — As the member opposite is aware from his 
attendance at the meeting, that there were departmental officials 
there. They have the list of questions as well and they're 
working with the group to try to address the concerns that have 
been raised. The member knows this is a matter of longer 
standing discussion. It's been going on for some time. 
Significant progress has been made in the discussion with a 
number of people through the facilitators who've been working 
with the Thunderchild First Nation and many of the people  



May 17, 1995 

 
2401 

involved there. And I hope that discussion continues to bring 
forward cooperation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well what would be the concern that would 
continue to be raised, that would suggest that it would be 
appropriate to continue to deal or to offer this land to the 
Thunderchild Band other than looking at other provincial lands 
available in the area, or land that may be available in the area, 
and indeed putting the Bronson forest under an environmental 
protection, if you will, umbrella and leaving it for every citizen 
of the province of Saskatchewan in its present state. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — While I don't have the documents before 
me this moment, my recollection of my last reading of them is 
that there have been very broad offers of access by the 
Thunderchild First Nation in terms of access to the lands. 
 
The issue has arisen because it grows legitimately out of a treaty 
land claim adjustment process that was begun under the 
previous government and completed under ours. The request for 
this land was made legitimately under that process and it was 
offered to be made available. And under the process, once land 
has been offered to be made available, then third-party interests 
must be met. And so discussions have been going on for 
roughly 18 months with respect to the understanding between 
the third-party interest and the Thunderchild First Nation. 
 
I don't know what the proportion of people who were out at the 
meeting the other night were third-party interest and how many 
were other community citizens. But I know that Thunderchild, 
through the mediators and negotiators, have been in a 
discussion. And it's my hope that the significant progress that 
occurred over the last 18 months will continue over the next 
short period of time so that everyone's interests can be met 
because that is the intention of the treaty land entitlement 
process: to provide an avenue for first nations to access lands 
that they have deserved and have not yet been given access to, 
but do it in such a way that it meets the interests of the 
community within which they are accessing the land. 
 
(0015) 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're basically saying, Mr. Minister, is 
that even though the individuals . . . and there must have been 
around 200 or so people at least were at that meeting, passed a 
motion that . . . first of all, some people were suggesting that at 
least the resort property, none of that land be made available. 
But by the end of the meeting, the motion was that none of the 
Bronson forest be considered as part of the treaty land 
entitlement. 
 
What you're telling me tonight is that you're not really going to 
take notice of that motion, that negotiations will continue. And 
if the Thunderchild . . . rather than asking the Thunderchild . . . 
or offering land that may be available outside of Bronson forest, 
you will just let it continue to progress and allow the usurpment 
of some of the land within the Bronson forest for the 
Thunderchild Band. 
 

And it seems to me that the people within the Thunderchild 
Band are more than willing to look at other alternatives and that 
maybe . . . I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, why you can't give us 
assurances that you will or that the department or your officials 
will offer some other alternatives that are quite conducive and 
will work with the people of the surrounding area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I can assure the member opposite that 
there is no resort property in the land that's been offered and 
that the first nation has requested and been offered significant 
lands outside of the recreational area. 
 
The good news is that there has been very sound discussion. 
And I can say to the member opposite that in fact I not only 
took notice of the concerns recently, but I took notice of them 
18 months ago or two years ago when they were first raised and 
put forward . . . the facilitator that could help people understand 
each other's concerns in order that they could be resolved. And I 
can tell you that I am very proud of the progress that's been 
made today. And I'm hopeful and optimistic that further 
progress would be made so that the community can see this 
issue through as a common interest and not as a matter of 
division. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
one of our favourite topics that we haven't had the opportunity 
to discuss yet in these estimates and that's underground tanks. 
So, Mr. Minister, I have a few questions for you dealing with 
the underground tank situation. 
 
The Environmental Fairness Association has tried to work with 
you in the problems that are associated with the underground 
tank regulations that you have in place. They've worked with 
you on the committee that you struck with your department. 
They've come up with alternative solutions to those that you've 
put in place, and yet they still seem to have a great deal of 
problems in working with you. In fact they tell me that they're 
waiting for reports from your action committee to come forward 
with some recommendations on new means in which to deal 
with this. 
 
And it seems that either your department or the back-bench 
MLAs that are on this committee are somewhat reluctant to 
come forward with the report. Or if they have come forward 
with a report, that the Environmental Fairness Association . . . I 
don't believe the last time I talked to them that they had this 
particular document in their possession, that they could deal 
with it. 
 
And it's not just small businesses that are being affected by this, 
Mr. Minister  and a lot of the small-business service stations 
across the province are being affected  but it's also school 
boards and rural municipalities that are being impacted because 
they also have underground tanks that they have to deal with. 
And some of these removal costs are running as much as 2 and 
$300,000 which is not an insignificant amount of money as I'm 
sure that the Minister of Finance would point out to you if you 
were to ask her for that much money for your department. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2402 

So, Mr. Minister, there needs to be something done with this 
particular situation. It's my understanding that in Alberta they've 
taken a somewhat different approach to this particular situation. 
In fact, is one of the issues . . . manners in which they're dealing 
with the issue is the revenues that are being generated from 
their environmental regulations are being turned around and 
used for environmental projects such as the removal of storage 
tanks or other environmental concerns. 
 
It's simply not just being funnelled back into the Consolidated 
Fund to be swallowed up by government as a whole and 
perhaps that's one of the solutions that you should be looking at 
for this particular environmental issue, is that some of the 
monies that are coming from the environmental funds be used 
to provide support for the environmental concerns of this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what is the status of the underground tanks? 
What new proposals have you put forward to help alleviate the 
costs to the service stations, to the school boards and the 
municipalities, both rural and urban, that are going to have to 
deal with this particular circumstance? 
 
You've had three and a half years now to deal with it. If the 
Premier doesn't call the election, you could potentially have 
another year and a half to deal with it. So surely, within either 
three and a half or five years you can come up with some 
solution that would be amenable to every one involved in the 
province  the service stations, the school boards, the 
municipalities, and all those that have to deal with it. 
 
I guess the other solution that is available to you and through 
the Minister of Justice is to simply fight it out in court for the 
$200 million that the Environmental Fairness Association is 
suing you and the government for. So hopefully, Mr. Minister, 
you can come up with some solutions rather than simply going 
ahead in the manner that you are, that is, in such a fashion that 
it's going to be a detriment to, in particular, rural Saskatchewan, 
small town, small village, rural Saskatchewan, where they have 
perhaps only one service station, that is facing these very 
serious impacts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well the hour is late so I won't remind the 
member that I inherited this situation from the members 
opposite who left service station owners in somewhat of a 
dilemma with a set of rules that were difficult to respond to in 
the time frames that were allowed. 
 
And I can tell you that I very much appreciate the cooperation 
we've received from people in the Environmental Fairness 
Association, from service station owners, from others who 
participated with us in redesigning the regulations so that they 
both meet the environmental concerns and the public safety 
concerns around underground storage tanks, but also provide 
some flexibility with respect to how people can respond in such 
a way that it minimizes the impact on their business; is only 
done when there is risk there. 
 
The system that we've changed to is now a risk-based system,  

and so there will be changes for a number of owners in terms of 
when and how they need to do their upgrading. And I think for 
the most part people have accepted that that new set of 
regulations will now meet their needs and the public need. 
 
The issue that the member raises with respect to contaminated 
sites, however, is a very much larger issue that applies 
universally to all of us who do business in Saskatchewan. And 
we therefore have consulted on it broadly as I've indicated here 
before, and we have not yet fully brought together the results of 
that consultation. But there has not been unanimity with respect 
to the outcome of those discussions. But as soon as we have the 
opportunity, we will continue those discussions and find a 
solution that meets all the business people's needs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to applying environmental funds to these sorts of 
clean-ups, there essentially are no environmental funds in 
Saskatchewan outside of the ones that are within SARCAN, the 
area we were discussing before, that have to do with the 
collection of beverage containers. 
 
We are looking for solutions, in a Bill that we have yet to pass 
with respect to used oil collection, that we use a different 
resolution. As the member opposite may know, there are from 
time to time on the bills of the public . . . sometimes on my dry 
cleaning bill it says environmental fee. And sometimes on my 
oil change bill it says environmental fee. I can tell you those are 
not government environmental fees; those are business 
environmental fees that businesses use to deal with these issues 
in their own way. And I can tell you that I appreciate that 
businesses are responding responsibly to the need to be 
environmentally sensitive. I also want to assure you that those 
are not government funds. Those are business fees put on for 
the purpose of helping them handle the product in a responsible 
fashion. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately 
when you say that it's the responsibility of each and every one 
of us in society to deal with the environmental concern such as 
pollutants of leaking underground tanks, under the regulations 
though there's only one group that's paying for it, and that is the 
owner of those tanks: be they the service station, the school 
board, or the municipality who's left holding the bag at the end 
of the day when somebody else is either gone or bankrupt. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you had a committee together of your 
back-benchers and your department that has set out a timetable 
for mandatory removal of tanks, that when they reach a certain 
age limit or are within a certain soil category. But unfortunately 
that particular committee did not address the question of who is 
liable, who has responsibility to deal with this. That 
responsibility has been left solely on the landowner, on the 
owner of the establishment or the site. And if that owner can't 
be found, then it's being left up to the municipal district in 
which that site is located. And that creates a great deal of stress 
and problems for those areas, for the people involved. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, that there needs to be some more work  



May 17, 1995 

 
2403 

done on this, some more enhancement, some more government 
involvement to deal with some of the costs available to that and 
I would hope that before we come back again, Mr. Minister, if 
you happen to be lucky enough to again be the Minister of the 
Environment, and if you happen to be lucky enough to still be 
sitting on that side of the House, that we will have the 
opportunity to discuss this with you again and perhaps to 
resolve this issue once and for all. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
(0030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I want to take this 
opportunity to first of all thank my department for the work 
they're doing. The responsibilities of this department are 
substantial and in this day and age when both the proper 
competitiveness of Saskatchewan business and the proper 
protection of the environment are key in the public mind, the 
work of our department is absolutely central to the areas of 
environmental management, forestry development, parks, 
wildlife, and fisheries, in the province. They have a very broad 
mandate and a mandate in which the public is significantly 
interested. So I want to thank them for the work they've done, 
and work they've done in cooperation with the public, in 
continuing to represent these areas well. 
 
But I also want to thank the members opposite for their 
cooperation with respect to dealing with the business of our 
department and the questions in the House. We may even see 
them here sometime later on this summer. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just 
like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in this 
evening and for answering our questions. We look forward to 
working with them again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL RECOMMENDATION 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to 
the Assembly the receipt of Royal Recommendation of the 
following Bills which were not received in time to appear in the 
order paper. Therefore I beg to inform the Assembly that his 
Honourable Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the 
subject matter of Bill No. 67, An Act respecting the keeping of 
Vital Statistics; Bill No. 71, An Act respecting Victims of 
Crime; Bill No. 74, An Act respecting Non-profit Corporations; 
Bill No. 73, An Act respecting Elementary, Secondary and 
Post-secondary Education in Saskatchewan; and Bill No. 75, 
An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act; and recommends 
them to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 

The Speaker: — The recommendation has been received. It 
now being past our normal . . . 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Because we sit pursuant to an order of 
the House which did not specify time of adjournment, I believe 
that you could not adjourn the House pursuant to Rule 3(2), and 
you would have to entertain a motion to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member is absolutely correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:34 a.m. 
 
 


