






















































April 21, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 21, 1995 

 

 
1651 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions 
that I bring forward today come from Mont Nebo, Shellbrook, 
Windthorst, Kipling, Grenfell, Prince Albert, Maple Creek, 
Swift Current, and Piapot areas of the province. And the prayer 
reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions, and I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
From the Gull Lake, Tompkins, Medicine Hat, and Shaunavon 
area. I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding to the 
double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 57 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Social Services and the 

child action plan: (1) who are the groups who received 
grants under this program; (2) what is the amount of the 
grants and when were they paid; (3) who are the 
applicants who were denied grants? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today, I would like to 
introduce an old friend of mine, Colleen Matheson, and her 
daughter Lasha. They are residents of Lumsden. And with them 
today is also Mathew Barnes who is a high school exchange 
student from Australia. 
 
Colleen and I . . . Colleen is from Harris, my home town 
originally. We grew up together at Harris. I would like the 
members of the Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Earth Day 

 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 22, 1970 a 
group of friends in the United States got together to talk about 
the state of our fragile planet. They dubbed their local meeting 
as Earth Day and agreed to meet each year for a general 
discussion on the state of the earth. 
 
More importantly, this handful of people committed themselves 
to expanding their Earth Day across the nation and beyond. 
Now on the silver anniversary of the international Earth Day, 
people around the world celebrate our planet and its remarkable 
biological diversity. They are more aware of the environment 
and recognize that our very existence depends on a healthy 
planet. 
 
Nearly every day there are reports about environmental 
destruction. Unfortunately positive environmental news is often 
overshadowed, or not even noticed, as individuals make the 
well-being of their environment a part of the daily routine. For 
example, people are managing their backyards for the benefit of 
wildlife and driving more energy efficient automobiles. 
Recycling is a part of daily lives. Energy efficient standards are 
met in many new homes and office buildings. Tree planting and 
green space is a part of new subdivisions. 
 
Waste disposal, elimination of harmful chemicals, protection of 
natural areas and endangered species, and the reduction of 
pollution, are all happening on a daily basis. 
 
We have come a long way since the first Earth Day 25 years 
ago, but we still have a long way to go. However, as people  



April 21, 1995 

 
1652 

everywhere continue to do their part, not only on Earth Day but 
every day of the year, the goal to make this planet a better place 
to live will succeed. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Receives Award 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a bit out of 
the ordinary, but I want to take a moment to talk about a 
current, non-retired, very much alive member of this legislature. 
 
I want to announce with pride that my friend, the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, who has just taken his seat, has been 
named by the Canadian Wildlife Federation as legislator of the 
year for 1994. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — This award, Mr. Speaker, is given to federal, 
territorial, or provincial legislators for leadership in 
environmental issues. Specifically this award was given to the 
member from Indian Head for his work in getting another 
million and a half acres of habitat placed under the 
Saskatchewan wildlife protection Act. 
 
His colleagues know his current work on the caucus 
environment committee. We also know that this work is a 
continuation of his previous involvement as president of the 
Canadian Wildlife Federation, president of the Whooping Crane 
Conservation Association, and as president of the Canadian 
Natural History Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all pay lip-service to environmental protection. 
Some few of us perhaps extend our good intentions into some 
action. The member from Indian Head-Wolseley though, is in a 
class by himself, speaking and acting for us all in defence of 
our invaluable and shrinking natural environment. 
 
On behalf of all his colleagues, I congratulate him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North-west Trade Fair 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A very popular 
event will be taking place in my riding on the weekend of April 
28 to 30. The fifth annual North-west Trade Fair will be held in 
the Meadow Lake arena. This year's event is sponsored by the 
Meadow Lake Winter Festival. 
 
And just to give you an idea of the popularity of this event, last 
year the trade fair attracted over 6,000 people. The 1995 trade 
fair promises to be just as exciting. There will be over 90 
booths with exhibits from local businesses and exhibitors from 
across the prairie provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Meadow Lake has been proclaimed the forestry 
capital of Canada for 1995, and that is why this year's fair will  

focus on that theme. There will be displays inside the arena 
concerning reforestation by Mistik Management. There will 
also be forestry displays outside of the arena. 
 
Agriculture plays an important part in the local economy, and 
organizers of the trade fair are planning to include the futurity 
heifer competition, open class showmanship competition, and 
the cow/calf competition this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is Meadow Lake the forestry capital of 
Canada, but on the weekend of April 28 to 30, I am sure it will 
be proclaimed the entertainment capital of Saskatchewan. 
 
Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan — just a great place to live. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Tisdale Doghide River Festival 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
next weekend, beginning on Friday evening, the Doghide River 
Festival Committee of Tisdale will host the wildest and I'm 
afraid the wettest festival in north-eastern Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the fourth annual arts and cultural festival, one that was 
attended last year by over 300 celebrants. And the organizers 
hope for even more this year. 
 
The Doghide River, Mr. Speaker, is normally a sleepy little 
stream on the outskirts of Tisdale. Today, however, it is a 
raging torrent. So one event might have to be postponed or at 
least altered a bit. 
 
A series of walking trails have been built along the banks of the 
Doghide and they were to have been officially opened. But 
unless you bring your snorkel, this will have to be postponed. 
 
At any rate, the festival opens Friday evening with a dinner 
theatre production of the theme of wild, wild west. On Saturday 
and Sunday, there will be continuous activity at three separate 
events — singers, buskers, dancers, bands, most of them local. 
 
In addition, there is an exhibition called the curiosity exhibition 
— a booth for those strange odds and ends that we all have in 
the bottom of our desk drawers and can no longer identify. 
There is also a booth with two antique experts who will look at 
your possible treasures and tell you what they are and maybe 
what they're worth. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, something for everybody. I encourage as 
many as possible to bring their waders and to come to the 
Doghide River Festival next weekend. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Tunnels 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw's tunnels are  



April 21, 1995 

 
1653 

back in the news again. While excavating for a new spa which 
will be located on the site of the old Harwood Hotel, what 
appears to be yet another tunnel was discovered. I'm told a 
couple of old booze bottles were laying on the floor. 
 
Moose Jaw's tunnels have been a source of speculation for 
years, with great debates as to what they were used for, or 
perhaps more to the point, which were used for what. 
 
Well we all know that Moose Jaw is on the Soo Line to 
Chicago and that our River Street hotels may very well have 
been refuge for Al Capone when things got too hot for him in 
Chicago. Some say they were escape tunnels in case things got 
too hot in Moose Jaw. 
 
Underground routes for rum runners during Prohibition, gaming 
tables and wheels, brothels, opium dens, hiding places for 
illegals, all are part of the speculation as to what the tunnels 
were used for. 
 
What's the answer, Mr. Speaker? Perhaps it's a little of each and 
perhaps there were even other uses. The only thing I know for 
sure is that we'll continue to study Moose Jaw's history to try to 
figure it out. And people are welcome to come from all over to 
help us solve the mystery of the famous — or is it infamous — 
Moose Jaw tunnels. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Communications Allowance Misuse 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question this morning is to the Minister of Justice 
or to the minister responsible for the Board of Internal 
Economy. Mr. Minister, last year two NDP (New Democratic 
Party) back-bench MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) were discovered to have misused their MLA 
communications allowance through the distribution of NDP 
partisan material and blatant political information to their NDP 
membership list. 
 
Mr. Minister, at the time, the Board of Internal Economy, which 
is made up of a majority of government members, decided it 
would simply accept repayment from these members rather than 
proceeding with any punishment or reference to the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police). The member from Melville 
subsequently reimbursed his MLA constituency allowance by 
some $300 for this particular instance. 
 
My question is simple: can you tell us why this course of action 
was deemed to be the appropriate one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the member 
with respect to the issues he raised, I think he's well aware of 
the situation. And there was some dispute as to whether or not  

the expenditures were appropriately done under the 
communications allowance, and whether the expenditures were 
of a partisan nature or whether they weren't. 
 
And I want to say to the member, he sat as a member of the 
Board of Internal Economy, as I do. And the members, without 
being involved in dispute, decided rather they would pay back 
for the expenditures that were incurred under that allowance. 
 
So I would want to say to the member, the Board of Internal 
Economy sets the guidelines, and he knows that. We have set 
guidelines with respect to expenditures on communications, and 
I think the issues have been adequately addressed. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the member from Arm 
River please come to order. Order! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Minister, 
I appreciate the answer, but I think it's obvious to you and to 
everyone here that there is a double standard involved. Because 
to date, Mr. Minister, to date, where a government member has 
been found violating the MLA communication allowance, all 
they've had to do is pay the money back and nothing further is 
said. No criminal charges were laid in these instances at all. 
 
So I guess the question begs, Mr. Minister, where it is a clear 
violation of the communication allowance rules, why these 
cases weren't turned over to the RCMP for further investigation. 
Why was that, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say, Mr. Speaker, that 
it's certainly not up to the Board of Internal Economy to 
determine whether or not criminal charges are laid. I think 
you're well aware of the judicial system that we have in this 
province. The investigations are not done by the Board of 
Internal Economy. 
 
We have a legal process; it's been in place  and I think well 
respected in this province  it has been in place for many 
years. And I think you're well aware of the fact that there are 
enforcement agencies that will investigate activities that are 
believed to be criminal. They will then make their 
determination as to whether or not it's referred to the 
Department of Justice, and I think he's well aware of that. 
 
I want to say to the member from Thunder Creek that he's been 
around the Board of Internal Economy for a long time and 
understands its role. And I think he is well aware of how the 
justice system works as well and should take that into 
consideration when he is making his allegations or posing 
questions. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
understand very clearly about the role of the Board of Internal 
Economy and I also understand very clearly who is in the 
majority there. 
 
You see, Mr. Minister, we aren't the only ones who see a double 
standard. Mrs. Gloria Baer from Southey was given a  



April 21, 1995 

 
1654 

newsletter from her MLA, the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. That newsletter was clearly on MLA 
letterhead, Mr. Speaker, and sent from the member's 
constituency office, yet the information was entirely political 
and even included advertising for the NDP member's 
nominating meeting held on February 5. 
 
Mrs. Baer assumed that this was as illegal as the other charges 
she had heard about. She therefore laid a complaint with F 
Division of the RCMP. Sergeant Leitch and Inspector Skead 
informed Mrs. Baer that, while they agreed, if the newsletter is 
prohibited by the rules of the Legislative Assembly, they 
refused to investigate and told her to refer her complaint to the 
Board of Internal Economy. 
 
In other words, Mr. Minister, one group of MLAs has the full 
brunt of the Justice department on them for four years; the other 
doesn't even get a brief look at the improprieties. Now that 
double standard was apparent to Mrs. Baer and that's why she 
brought it to the attention of the Assembly. 
 
What do you say to that, Mr. Minister responsible for the Board 
of Internal Economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think the brunt of the question, Mr. 
Speaker, goes to the way in which F Division dealt with this 
complaint. And I would say to the member, as he perfectly well 
knows, that complaints of that nature should be taken up with F 
Division. And if the matter can't be resolved with F Division, 
then the matter should be referred to the complaints 
commissioner for the RCMP, because what you're really 
complaining about is the conduct of RCMP officers. 
 
It's not for the minister responsible for the Board of Internal 
Economy to answer in this legislature for investigative 
decisions made by officers of the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Minister of Justice 
then wants to answer the next question. 
 
If he is so confident about the processes involved, then perhaps 
to clear the air for people like Mrs. Baer and others around this 
province, who quite frankly think there is a double standard in 
place, then maybe what should happen is that all members of 
this Assembly, irregardless of party, should have their records, 
their accounts, their request for payment forms, all turned over 
to the RCMP and all looked at and all put under the magnifying 
glass for scrutiny. And then we can be assured after that, Mr. 
Minister, that there is no double standard in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Would you like to answer that instead of the other minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well the Board of Internal Economy are  

in charge of these matters and it's not for the Minister of Justice 
to stand and speak for all members of this House or for the 
Board of Internal Economy. You guys . . . the member is on that 
board, Mr. Speaker; he can raise the matter there. 
 
That committee, as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, has been 
working very hard on this question of the communications 
allowances and has been trying to develop some guidelines and 
make it perfectly clear what is allowed and what is not allowed. 
But I repeat to the member, if he's got any question about how F 
Division has handled any of these complaints, these are 
investigative matters that are not the business of the Department 
of Justice. They are not the business of the political arm of 
government. They are a matter for the justice system itself to 
handle. 
 
And we must not, we must not in this House, in this Assembly, 
or in this government, ever interfere with the conduct of an 
investigation or with the way in which the justice system 
handles cases. And that is the fact whether the member from 
Estevan likes it or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, you didn't answer the question. 
I said there is a cloud hanging over this Assembly because of 
actions of all types of members, Mr. Minister. Obviously the 
Board of Internal Economy only deals with it when it isn't going 
to be a problem for the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this complaint was brought forward. They 
said clearly they didn't want to have anything to do with it, 
throw it back here. What we've seen in the past is that those 
members simply pay back the money that was improperly used. 
 
Mr. Minister, the public, Mrs. Baer, perceive a double standard. 
I say, sir, it is up to you to remove the double standard, even the 
perception of one. Why not have all members of this Assembly 
have their records looked at in the period of time under 
question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Again the member refers to the RCMP. 
And I say to the member again — and I wish he'd listen to this 
answer so he wouldn't have to ask the question again — if 
you've got complaints, if you've got complaints, if you've got 
any complaints about the way in which the RCMP have 
responded to the complaint made by that particular woman, 
then take it up with F Division; take it up with Assistant 
Commissioner Proke; take it up with the complaints 
commissioner of the RCMP. Don't take it up with members of 
the government. It's not our business — it's not our business. 
The investigation of criminal complaints is the business of the 
RCMP, and that's the fact of the matter. 
 
Now there's no cloud hanging over the members of this 
legislature with respect to the expenditures of their 
communication allowances. All kinds of members here have 
never had any questions raised whatever — whatever. 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1655 

The Speaker's office has administered expenditures out of the 
communications allowance, as I understand it, and they're being 
administered in a very tight, very business-like fashion. The 
member himself, Mr. Speaker, is the one who is attempting to 
throw a cloud over all members of this legislature. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, what is the member's motive in trying to 
throw a cloud over all members of this legislature, all of whom 
are spending their communication allowances in accordance 
with the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Board Elections Office 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question today for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if you could inform us about the names of the people 
who are running the district health board elections office, and 
were these positions publicly advertised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I don't have with me the 
entire list of everyone that would be working on that important 
task. I commit I will get the list of those names to the member. 
 
I want to remind the member that this is an historic opportunity 
for Saskatchewan people, for the first time in history, to 
participate in a democratic process in health care decision 
making in our province. Mr. Speaker, the work of that office is 
an extremely important work. We know it's being done by very 
qualified people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that historic answer 
very interesting. Maybe the Premier could respond. 
 
Mr. Premier, prior to the last election you promised to quit 
appointing former NDP candidates and party hacks to important 
positions. A few weeks ago, we saw a list of over 70 such 
appointments published in one of the newspapers. 
 
And now who do we find in charge of your new health board 
office? None other than Mr. Dickson Bailey, former NDP 
candidate, and Anne Fehr, former constituency secretary to 
Louise Simard. 
 
Mr. Premier, how do you explain these blatant patronage 
appointments? Why have you broken your promise to the 
Saskatchewan people, a promise where you said you would stop 
making these kind of appointments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member would rise in 
the House today and attempt to portray a situation where he's 
revealing something. Good grief, we've issued news releases 
and it's been widely known all over the province that Mr. 
Dickson Bailey is in fact heading that operation. 

The member asks for all of those who are working over there, 
and I committed I'll provide the total list. I don't have the total 
list, and I'll provide that to him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, this is an historic occasion for 
Saskatchewan people. We've brought together a team of people 
to work with our districts and work with communities across 
the province. Indeed Mr. Bailey has been doing that, travelling 
the province, working out the ward boundaries, working out the 
various regulations that are going to need to be put in place for 
this occasion. Because, Mr. Speaker, it has been the 
commitment of this government from the beginning of health 
renewal that communities and Saskatchewan people should 
have a much more direct involvement in making the important 
decisions regarding health and health in their communities, 
health for their families. And so we see this as an important role 
and we know we've got a competent team there helping us to 
work through the important details. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that again we have a 
double standard. Just prior to the last election, the Premier said, 
no more blatant political partisan appointments. However, what 
have we seen over the last four years? It seems to me the 
Premier forgot his promise to the people of Saskatchewan. I 
wonder if the promise is going to be made in the next few 
weeks  no more blatant partisan political appointments. 
 
Mr. Premier, or Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that if there 
is an office that should show non-partisanship, it should be an 
electoral officer. Election officers rank high, right at the top of 
the list, yet virtually every deputy returning officer in the 
province of Saskatchewan is an NDP partisan. And now we see 
two more New Democrats in charge of the district health board 
elections office. 
 
Mr. Premier, I'm wondering, if you would have had the courage 
to open this position up for nominations, if you would have 
been willing to look at people on the basis of their ability rather 
than their political connections. Why did you choose to appoint 
Mr. Bailey and a former NDP candidate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, many in this House will 
know and many across Saskatchewan will know that Mr. 
Dickson Bailey served as chief electoral officer for the province 
of Saskatchewan at one point in his career. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Bailey brings a level of expertise to this task that I'm sure it 
would be very difficult to find in any other individual in our 
province. 
 
We have sought this kind of expertise because of the 
importance of the work that's being done there. Again I repeat, 
Saskatchewan, we are here pioneering  pioneering an historic 
election process. This will be the first time in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the first time anywhere in the nation of Canada, 
that health boards, health decision makers, will be elected by 
local communities. 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1656 

Mr. Speaker, it is a crucial and key component of health 
renewal. We are endeavouring as best we can to ensure that the 
processes are sound, that the people of Saskatchewan are made 
acquainted with the various issues that will attach themselves to 
the election of the district boards. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 
that we have a very competent individual and a competent team 
of people working that process through. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care for Seniors 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
raise an issue today that a resident of Ogema feels must be 
addressed in this House. Lornie Talbot is grieving the loss of 
her mother, Taneda Evelyn Schreiner, who passed away on 
January 19. But not only is she grieving the loss of her mother, 
she's grieving the way in which her mother spent the final three 
years of her life. 
 
Taneda Schreiner was shuffled 11 times  11 times  
between hospital, respite care, and long-term facilities. And I'd 
like to table a list of those facilities today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: Mr. Minister, how do 
your health care reforms allow an elderly person to be 
transferred from facility to facility 11 times in three years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have heard the member's 
question. I have heard the information that he brings to the 
House this morning. I want to say, generally, that it is not 
uncommon that in the final years and the final days of life, we 
will find ourselves moved to meet the needs that occur where 
the needs can be appropriated provided. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to assure the member, as we have with others, of his 
questions in this House, we will follow up very thoroughly on 
the information that he brings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, on April 13 of this 
month, that member from Shaunavon came into this House and 
said, quote, on behalf of Mr. Dave Nelson of Shaunavon, "Mr. 
Nelson was without health coverage for almost a year and a half 
. . ." The member said that. He then referred to Mrs. Nelson. 
 
I had officials from the department speak with Mrs. Nelson. 
The fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker: Mr. Nelson was not 
without health coverage for one day  not one day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now maybe the member would want to explain that to the 
members of this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm somewhat 
disappointed with the Minister of Health for calling into 
question the truthfulness, again, of one of my constituents  

because, Mr. Minister, she has told the media, myself, and 
people in this Assembly those facts. And the Minister knows 
that to be correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the late Mrs. Schreiner had a bed in a long-term 
facility in her hometown of Vanguard, a time during which 
Mrs. Schreiner was surrounded by friends and was getting the 
best of care. However, she was then moved to other facilities 
and passed away only weeks later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Schreiner would have celebrated her 80th 
birthday on February 18, a birthday her family truly believes she 
would have been alive to celebrate if it were not that she was 
constantly being shuffled from one facility to another. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Health: Mr. Minister, 
when will we begin to see some compassion in your policy 
positions and statements that affect the elderly, our pioneers 
and the people who built this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I repeat that we will 
take the information that the member has brought to the House 
this morning, and I will attempt to ascertain the entire situation. 
 
Now the member well knows, and all members know, that we 
have taken amazing strides forward to bring services to people 
in their communities. One of the things that I am most proud of 
that has been accomplished in the last two years is the 
development of palliative care across our province  palliative 
care models in our institutions, in our hospitals, and palliative 
care that can be provided in communities and in individual 
homes. Mr. Speaker, these kinds of service has not been 
available before. These kinds of services are deeply, deeply 
appreciated by people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he will criticize; I think that's part of his political 
role. But I would ask the member when he's raising issues in 
this House, as he did with Mr. Nelson, to be truthful, to bring 
truth into this debate, and then I think we can have a more 
profitable debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the document which I tabled 
earlier has Mrs. Lornie Talbot's phone number of . . . 
(inaudible) . . . has that phone number on there, and I challenge 
you to phone her and ask Mrs. Talbot what she thinks about 
your health care reform process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Talbot has a message for the House, which is 
that, and I quote: not every decision should come down to 
dollars and cents. She adds, these people are not animals, but 
even animals have groups that protect their well-being. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 
when will you commit to reviewing your policies regarding the 
care of our seniors and that are being provided since you began 
dismantling our health care system? 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1657 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know that 
we are constantly working with our districts, working with 
health care providers, working with senior organizations across 
our province, to do just that: to improve services for the senior 
community in our province. 
 
We've been approached by leaders of that community, saying 
it's about time you're doing the kinds of things you're doing, 
talking about bringing services to where people are. 
 
Now I, Mr. Speaker, yesterday met with a large group of seniors 
in the community of Esterhazy. And I tell you, we had a good 
discussion, a good discussion about the future of medicare and 
health care provision. 
 
And I tell you those seniors, Mr. Speaker, sure don't want the 
Liberal Party in charge of our medicare. Now that's for sure, 
Mr. Speaker. They're seeing some of the things that the Liberal 
Party of Canada, Ottawa, are endeavouring to do to health care 
across Canada, and what the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan has 
stood for in the past in this province when they kicked down the 
doors, tried to kick down the doors to stop medicare, Mr. 
Speaker. There's not a lot of credibility in the Liberal benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Road Conditions 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this morning is for the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Minister, yesterday I was in the north-eastern part of the 
province, an area that I know the NDP likes to call Red Square. 
Right now it looks a lot more like the Red Sea. 
 
I want you to speak a little bit about that, Mr. Minister. This is 
actually a very serious question for the people who live in that 
area. Some highways are impassable; many grid roads are also 
impassable. What contingency plans, Mr. Minister, do you have 
in place for hospitals and people in that area in event of a 
medical emergency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'll take this question on 
behalf of the government, if I might. This is indeed, as the 
Leader of the Opposition has pointed out, a very serious matter 
because of the spring flooding conditions in that part of the 
province, but not only that part of the province. 
 
I've indicated on behalf of the government that we are 
committed to doing all that can be reasonably done to assist the 
RMs (rural municipality) and the local authorities to provide 
proper transportation services. And we hope in the next very 
few days, on a general policy, to be able to make some specific 
announcements. But in the meantime the Department of 
Highways is working with the appropriate local authorities. 
 
Specifically on the question of health care, the Minister of 
Health indicates that during this immediate current situation of 
difficulty we have made arrangements, the Department of 
Health has made arrangements, for emergency helicopter  

service if that's required, in terms of getting people to the 
appropriate health site for health attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is now for 
the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, I realize there isn't 
much can be done right now while the roads are under water, 
but I understand according to one of your officials, asphalt is 
starting to lift off the road surface of Highway 9 and it is really 
starting to deteriorate. Both the highways and grid roads in this 
area were in terrible shape to start with; now they're getting 
even worse. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you reallocated any funding to rebuild these 
roads in the area as soon as conditions allow for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I will take this 
question because it's a follow-up from the first one which I 
think is, as I've said before, a very serious, immediate problem 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Department of Highways and Transportation staff are 
working side by side with the municipalities at this very 
moment and trying to respond to the situation. 
 
And as the member points out himself, there's not very much 
that can be done while they're still waiting for the . . . actually 
the tide of the flood to even strike some areas. 
 
The government has also advised municipalities that they can 
reallocate their road construction and regravelling funding to 
address current situation as the spring thaw continues. 
 
But what we really need to do is to assess this  the question 
of regravelling, the question of any disaster relief emergency 
funding, the entire package  in such a way which is sensible, 
practicable, as immediate as possible, and as manageable of 
course financially. And in this regard what we need here is still 
some more information and attention to the issue. 
 
But I can assure the Leader of the Opposition, who raises this 
very important matter today, the House, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, this is one of the top-of-mind issues which we 
are looking at, and if you can just bear with us for another few 
days, we'll be able to outline, I hope, more specific, detailed 
program of financial assistance. 
 
But there is on-site assistance now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. We'll now turn to ministerial 
statements. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1658 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just noticed in the east 
gallery, a couple and their son that have joined us this morning 
 I believe the Morrisons from Whitewood. Randy happens to 
be a teacher in the community. And I see they've taken 
advantage to take a moment out of their busy schedule. I'm sure 
they've enjoyed a bit of a break from a hectic time at school and 
a week to come and join us this morning. So I'd invite members 
of the Assembly to welcome the Morrisons to the Assembly 
here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Health Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Department of Health Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As it relates to question 62, I move 
it be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question 62, motion for return debate. 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 42 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 42  An Act 
to abolish the Rules Against Perpetuities and The 
Accumulations Act and to enact Consequential 
Amendments be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the other 
day when the former Justice minister introduced this Bill as 
being a minor housekeeping matter regarding a silly, useless, 
and obsolete principle of law, it appeared to us that that was 
indeed the case  that this was just a very minor and trivial Bill 
to address a number of issues. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we've also found that as we've reviewed 
the matter and reviewed the Bill, we've had the opportunity to 
discuss this matter with some lawyers, and we are not so sure 
that the Bill is as inconsequential as the former Justice minister  

suggested. 
 
In spite of what the former minister said, the rule regarding 
perpetuities affects more than the land holdings of British 
aristocrats. And I believe we had a couple of individuals from 
Saskatoon join us yesterday afternoon, and they came to our 
office and indicated that they have some grave concerns based 
on some of the comments that we had made previous. 
 
It is a far-reaching, well-established principle of law around the 
world with deep implications for contract law and the 
implementation of wills. In light of this, Mr. Speaker, it seems 
that our . . . and our caucus believes that to simply abolish the 
rule regarding perpetuities is rash and should be reconsidered 
more carefully. 
 
The rule regarding perpetuities, Mr. Speaker, exists in most 
British common law and American jurisdictions in one form or 
another. Mr. Speaker, I doubt that the minister could name 
many jurisdictions where it does not exist. The one example 
that does immediately spring to mind is Quebec, but that 
province does not follow British common law so it perhaps is 
not the best example to cite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many jurisdictions have substantially altered the 
perpetuities rule and have dispensed with the legal reference to 
the rule in Whitby v. Mitchell and The Accumulations Act of 
1800. Certainly if the government wanted to bring forward 
some reforms to the rule rather than offhandedly abolishing it, 
we would feel much more comfortable with the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize that this matter has been considered by 
the Law Reform Commission and therefore is probably not 
something that the government has a lot of ideological stake in. 
However it is our advised opinion that this legislation could 
cause considerable upset and confusion in the business 
community. 
 
Contracts and wills going back generations have been 
formulated on the existence of the rule regarding perpetuities in 
this province. Since this legislation is retroactive back to the 
formation of the province, every single one of these contracts 
could well be thrown into confusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we could support this Bill, we would have 
to be convinced by the government that they have studied these 
potential effects and have a plan to manage any legal problems 
that may arise from this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former minister of Justice mentioned that this 
Bill was prompted by complaints brought forward by the oil 
and gas industry. Certainly our caucus understands how much 
this industry contributes to this province and we would not 
want to stand in the way of any measures that would improve 
the competitiveness of it. 
 
However we have been advised that the province of Alberta 
retains a modified perpetuities rule. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would 
find it hard to believe that the province of Alberta would retain  



April 21, 1995 

 
1659 

anything that would not favour the oil and gas industry. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, our caucus is not entirely comfortable 
with the drasticness of this Bill; we would rather see the rule 
modified rather than abolished. However we will, for the 
moment, bow to the expertise of the Law Reform Commission. 
 
None the less, I think we should take a bit more time and spend 
a few more days reviewing this piece of legislation before we 
would proceed to Committee of the Whole, where I'm sure we 
will have a number of questions. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure we've taken the 
time to have given everyone who has some concerns regarding 
the Bill and the problems that it may affix to them, the 
opportunity to speak to us. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move adjournment of debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1045) 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 — An Act 
to establish an Aboriginal Courtworkers Commission be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before we 
allow this Bill to go to committee, I just wanted to make a few 
more comments. I believe many if not all of us may have seen 
the — and I believe it was on the news last night — a bit of a 
blurb about the aboriginal courtworker program and some of 
the work that has already been started; the training sessions that 
have been undertaken in order to bring aboriginal people up to 
speed regarding the Act and how it will apply, and the 
circumstances in which they will be utilizing it. 
 
And as I indicated the other day, we certainly understand the 
need for a better communications process for our aboriginal 
people regarding the court system. And the fact that in our 
aboriginal community we have so many linguistic and language 
changes and languages among our aboriginal people, I can see 
where if we were to run the system as it continues to exist, it 
does create a bit of a problem. And many times maybe some of 
our aboriginal community do not receive the respect that is due 
them, or even have a good enough understanding of the laws 
that they may be charged with or that they may be facing. 
 
So while on one hand we feel there are many good things to this 
Bill, we also want to have brought forward the point that it's 
imperative that we do not create a double standard, or a double 
system, in this province, where one group may be favoured over 
another group of individuals. 
 
And I don't know if this Bill necessarily does that. It does raise 
some questions and those are some questions that we must take 
the time to address and seek . . . or raise with the Minister of 
Justice to indeed let him know and let this House know, the  

Assembly know, let the people of Saskatchewan know, that the 
laws will apply — even with the establishment of an aboriginal 
courtworker program — will apply equally and fairly to all. 
And we trust at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that certainly 
the aboriginal community will have a better understanding of 
the legal system and how it applies to them and how they fit 
into that system. 
 
And I'm sure on many occasions they have felt that the system 
hasn't treated them fairly. I'm sure that you will find people of 
Caucasian descent would feel that the judicial system hasn't 
necessarily treated them fairly. But it's certainly important that 
we at least create a level playing-field and that level 
playing-field treat everyone equally and fairly. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Act does indeed 
try to create that level playing-field and we will certainly have 
some important questions to bring to the minister's attention as 
we get into Committee of the Whole. And therefore at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I don't see any reason why this Bill should not 
proceed then to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 49 — An Act 
respecting Interior Designers be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We've had the 
opportunity to discuss this Bill on a previous occasion and I 
think that we spent some time elaborating to the members of the 
government that in general principle we think this is not too bad 
of an idea. But we have had some people that have come 
forward now of late to discuss with us their feelings about the 
Bill in a negative way, as it might affect their lives in a negative 
way. And we have been studying those complaints and the issue 
on their behalf and we've been listening to their ideas about the 
Bill. 
 
Now the main purpose of the Bill is to protect the title of 
interior designer, and in turn to protect the public engaging the 
services of someone in this profession. And as such we think 
that that is probably a good principle, to protect people's 
interests when they hire someone so that they know in fact they 
are getting a professional to do a certain kind of a job when in 
fact they are considering to pay a professional fee for the work 
that's going to be done. 
 
We're not quite finished though, consulting with those people 
that have concerns about the Bill and we are going to continue 
to do that in the days to come. And I think probably it'll be a 
few days before this Bill does come forward again in 
committee. And of course our questions are somewhat detailed 
now to find out exactly what's going on, so we feel that we will 
be better off going into committee to look at this Bill, to find 
out exactly what the answers are to the questions that people  



April 21, 1995 

 
1660 

out there are posing to us. 
 
And so through us, we are going to work with the government 
in committee to try to find out if there is a need to change any 
parts of the Bill with amendments and that sort of thing, and we 
can only effectively probably do that in committee. 
 
So having considered that this is the proper place for it, so that 
we can get the work done of the House and serve the people in 
their best interests, we're going to allow this Bill to go on into 
committee. And so with that having been said, Mr. Speaker, we 
suggest to the government that they carry on with the process of 
this Bill into committee so that we can get on and try to make it 
a better Bill and serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. 
Protection Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask that 
the minister responsible to please introduce the official who has 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm joined by Peter Wyant, who is 
certainly not new to the Assembly; he's been here both the other 
times. But I'm happy to introduce him and happy to have him 
here. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I had asked for some information 
and I believe that the previous minister had agreed to provide us 
with that information. And I wondered if you would have it 
available with respect to royalties and various monies 
associated with the upgrader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, we do not have the information 
available, and given the nature of the request, it cannot be 
provided for a period of time. It's not going to be available 
during the period of time these estimates are before the 
Assembly. We'll provide it as and when we can, but it will not 
be available during the period of time these estimates are before 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, would you just mind explaining 
why you can't provide information with respect to the financial 
position of the upgrader. This Bill is about the upgrader and 
we're just asking very straightforward questions about the 
financing and the costs of operation and associated structure of 
the oil coming into the upgraders and going out of the upgrader. 
I mean it's pretty basic information, the amount of royalty 
associated with oil. I mean it's just fundamental questions about 
the operation of an upgrader. Why can't the general public 
receive information? What seems to be the problem? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, this request has 
absolutely nothing to do with the Bill. The Bill is the repeal of 
the provisions which would have placed this project under 
trusteeship. Your questions have to do with something entirely 
different; it's the royalty structure. 
 
Notwithstanding that, in an effort to be as cooperative and 
accessible as possible, the former minister, in a brief but 
brilliant career as minister in charge of Crown Investments, did 
undertake to provide this information. However the question 
you asked with respect to royalties is very complex and it 
cannot be provided quickly. I say to the hon. member, it has 
nothing to do with the Bill. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the Bill that was 
enacted in this legislature and used, had everything to do with 
financing of the upgrader, and now they're repealing the Bill. 
And it has everything to do with financing and the government's 
revenues associated with the upgrader and with heavy oil. 
 
And I asked the minister if he would comment on the general 
economic conditions associated with upgrading and whether the 
government made money on one hand from all the oil royalties 
associated with pumping up to 50,000 barrels a day into the 
upgrader, and how that might offset some costs to the general 
public associated with financing the upgrader. And he promised 
he would get that information back to me, and you say it's not 
relevant. It's the whole reason for the Bill. 
 
So I can't understand why . . . in a factual nature, if the minister 
offered to get me the information. It's not good enough for you 
to say it's not associated; the minister's already agreed. We 
agree on that? The minister agreed to give me the information. 
 
Now you're saying you don't want to give the information 
because it's not connected to this Bill. Well the first question 
has been resolved. The minister agreed this is relevant financial 
information. 
 
So the second question is: why in the world wouldn't your staff, 
after being involved with an upgrader now for years and years 
and years, have information on the financial wherewithal 
associated with a barrel of oil going into an upgrader? I mean, 
Mr. Minister, I can't think of a legitimate or logical excuse for 
you not to have information on the upgrader and the financing 
of the upgrader when we're here talking about a Bill that you 
used to deal with the upgrader. 
 
So again, could you enlighten the Assembly why you don't have 
information with respect to the oil upgrader when we're talking 
about the upgrader and oil royalties and the financial position of 
the upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member is partially wrong. We 
did not say we wouldn't provide it — indeed I said I would. It is 
simply a complex question, the answer to which cannot be 
provided quickly. And I'm not given assurance by the officials 
that they can provide it within the next two or three weeks  



April 21, 1995 

 
1661 

which is normally the length of the session. 
 
So that we will provide it, but can't provide it in a timely 
fashion. That's what I've said to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Minister, we could be sitting here for several 
weeks. Could you briefly describe the financial operation of the 
upgrader, which is relevant to this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, it's not relevant to the Bill. This 
is not estimates. This is a Bill which repeals a trust . . . which 
repeals a Bill which might have put the whole project under 
trusteeship. It is not a Bill which structures, financially 
structures, the deal. This is not estimates. 
 
And I'm not going to take the . . . one cannot do that simply. 
That's actually a very complex question and it is not a fair 
question on a Bill of this sort. And before the chairman rules 
both of us out of order, as I'm sure he's going to, I am telling the 
member that it's not relevant to give you a description of the 
financing of the upgrader. 
 
The member knows that just as well as I do. You were the 
author, your government was the author, of the problem. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would the minister then describe why the Bill 
is before the House? And from that point if he'd give us a little 
bit of history of the reason for the Bill, why this Bill is before 
the House, and put it in context. And did it have anything at all 
to do with the financial operations of the upgrader or the 
province? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That information was provided to 
you last time in something less than summary form. It is not 
entirely clear to me why the member wants to waste the time of 
the House, but you're patently doing so. You got that 
information the last time. Moreover — moreover — you knew 
it before the information was asked. 
 
In a few sentences, the financing of this project was difficult. 
Both parties were being required to ante up additional operating 
capital. Both parties, being both levels of government, indicated 
the undesirability of continuing that state of affairs. The 
Federated Co-operatives . . . or I shouldn't say the Federated 
Co-operatives, but the parties generally indicated, one or more 
of them indicated, they weren't prepared to proceed. And if that 
had happened, the project would have been in a cash short 
position. 
 
The Bill was introduced in the event that that happened. It 
didn't happen. Eventually an agreement was reached. The 
matter has now been concluded and the project is functioning 
satisfactorily, as these projects function. That was explained to 
you in some detail the last time. As I say, it's not entirely clear 
to me why the members want to waste the time of the Assembly 
on this issue. But you seem intent to do so. 
 

Mr. Devine: — But, Mr. Minister, we got into the financing 
and that's why I asked for the information on financing. So to 
complete the discussion on financing, if you don't want me to 
go back through it, then all I'm asking is for you to complete 
what the minister said that he would do. He didn't say it was too 
complicated. He just said, I'll have my officials in the 
Department of Energy and others get the information on 
royalties and how much the province makes on royalties, and 
then connect that to the operation of the upgrader. 
 
And we had a very good discussion. He was reluctant to give 
me that information, but he finally gave me a lot of information. 
And you're starting off the same way he did. I'm not giving you 
anything — that's what you say — just let me do this Bill and 
get out of here. 
 
This Bill is an embarrassment to you and to the administration. 
The fact that you had to browbeat the co-op members and 
threaten them with legislation is an embarrassment. There's 
co-op members all over the province who absolutely remain 
upset that you would use this kind of Bill. And what's more, 
you didn't need to use. 
 
And if we look at the financial position of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the money coming in from oil royalties, of 
course you didn't need to use it. And that's the point and you 
don't want to admit it. That's why you're saying it would take 
just a little bit longer than the House is in session to get you that 
information. 
 
Well that's a bunch of malarkey. You're stonewalling. And the 
co-op members know you're stonewalling, your colleagues 
know you're stonewalling, and the public knows you're 
stonewalling. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come on, Grant — stonewalling on 
what? 
 
Mr. Devine: — And the member from Swift Current says: 
stonewalling on what? On the information. If the member from 
Swift Current has the information on oil royalties, he can stand 
in his place or take the place of the minister and he can talk 
about the reason for this Bill. 
 
The contention, Mr. Chairman, is that there is no reason for this 
Bill, and the Bill that was before it. None at all. The financial 
position of the province of Saskatchewan as a result of oil 
royalties and up to a hundred thousand barrels a day being 
processed in the province of Saskatchewan . . . generated a 
substantial amount of money. 
 
But the minister, but the minister . . . can he at least take the 
time to confirm how much oil the upgrader uses, the financial 
position of the upgrader today, the differentials that are 
necessary for it to break even. And in the event that they don't 
break even, who pays? 
 
And also would the minister, before he gets on his feet, remind 
the public how much money the federal government put into  



April 21, 1995 

 
1662 

this project recently. How much did the feds put in, and what 
did they get for it? What was the . . . how much money did they 
put in? And if he could — I think he's the minister of the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) — how 
much did they put in the other upgrader recently, and what did 
they get for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Member, you got 
all that information last time. You got it all. 
 
Now there's got to be a limit to the extent to which you waste 
the time of the Assembly repeating questions. These are not 
simple questions. The information is . . . the information you 
asked me for is complex. 
 
It is, in my view . . . in my view, it's irrelevant to the Bill. 
Nevertheless, the former minister correctly, and I think 
generously, gave it to you. But you've already got the 
information you just asked for. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, this Bill is about browbeating 
Federated Co-op into submission. That's what this Bill is about, 
and it's an embarrassment. 
 
And the co-op members know that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has both hands in the energy business — one on 
the royalty side of oil and the other as an equity participant in 
the upgrader. And they can win on both. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell the Assembly, as minister of CIC, 
how much royalty the Government of Saskatchewan gets on a 
barrel of heavy oil, or heavy or medium oil that goes into an 
upgrader? Could he simply give me that number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Let me just say, we don't have that 
information. You have not yet closed the estimates from Energy 
and Mines. That's the place to get that kind of information, not 
here. We don't have that information. 
 
Let me just make a comment, Mr. Chairman, about what the 
member from Estevan is attempting to do. What you're 
attempting to do is rewrite history. Your government entered 
into some abortive deals, cost the taxpayers an enormous 
amount of money, for which the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan has been judged guilty and found guilty by the 
public of Saskatchewan. And indeed what this is is a vain 
attempt by the member from Estevan to breathe a bit of life into 
the dying corpse of the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am not the person who wants to shovel the last shovelful of 
dirt in the coffin of the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
But I may say, the member opposite, by your tactics and your 
resolute refusal to accept responsibility for the damage done in 
the '80s, is doing exactly that. 
 
If members opposite could admit that the arrangements which 
you entered into were unwise, they have indebted this province 
for generations to come, if you could admit that, you could 
begin the process of rebuilding the Conservative Party. But this  

vain attempt to prove you were right all along is the exact 
opposite of what's needed — it's the exact opposite of what's 
needed. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Chairman — I'm going to say this once and I'm 
not going to continue to repeat this comment — this Bill does 
not establish a trusteeship for the upgrader. That was done last 
year. This Bill repeals it. It's a very narrow Bill with a very 
narrow purpose. 
 
And the questions being asked by the member from Estevan 
again and again and again and again, are (a) irrelevant to the 
issue; (b) out of order; and (c) as I say, a vain and I think a very 
destructive thing for the Conservative Party, a very destructive 
attempt to prove you were right all along. 
 
Mr. Former Premier, you've been judged wrong; you've been 
judged guilty. And until you're able to accept that fact, the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is not going to be rebuilt. I 
for one regret that. I think it's had a proud history. But you're 
going about it the wrong way. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to note for the record 
that in this Bill before the House, we can talk about the 
Conservative Party, we can talk about debt of the province, we 
can talk about projects of the province, and we can talk about 
political strategy without objection. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've opened up the whole can of worms with 
respect to things that you want to talk about in this Bill. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to ask the minister if he can provide the 
public of Saskatchewan the amount of money the federal 
government put into . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I wonder if we could have the attention of the 
members. If it's all right, we could have the attention of the 
members, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you advise the Legislative Assembly how 
much federal money went into this project after you brought in 
the legislation that forced and browbeat the Federated Co-op 
into submission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — 125 million in October '94 as an 
unrepayable grant. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Can the minister describe what the federal 
government received for providing that $125 million. Did they 
receive equity; did they receive a share; did they receive 
down-the-road benefits? What were the benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — What they got was the release of 
liability from a very bad deal. They got out. That's what they got 
out of it. For 125 million bucks they got out of this deal, and we 
assumed all of their liabilities. That's what it cost the federal 
government to get out. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, is that true of — and I think 
you're minister of both upgraders . . . is that about the amount  



April 21, 1995 

 
1663 

of money that they contributed to the Lloydminster upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's completely out of order. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, we're trying to determine the 
financial dealings of the minister with respect to the piece of 
legislation that he had in place and now he's so embarrassed 
with, he's repealing. That's what we're dealing with. 
 
Isn't it interesting that we find that there is several hundred 
million dollars coming into the upgrader in Regina and the 
upgrader in Lloydminster at a time when several hundred 
million dollars went from the farmers of Saskatchewan back to 
the provincial and the federal government. 
 
When we look at something in the neighbourhood of $300 
million of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) money that 
was taken out of the hands of the farmers, goes back to the 
provincial and then subsequently to the federal government, and 
about the same time, about $125 million goes from the federal 
government into the upgrader in Regina and the federal 
government to the upgrader in Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you comment — and I'm sure that you 
have the information — on the amount of money going into 
upgraders as a result of your administration dealing with the 
federal government, the co-op, and Husky Oil and the Alberta 
government, associated with federal money coming into the 
province of Saskatchewan in your renegotiation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. What went into the Bi-Provincial 
upgrader is simply not relevant to this Bill. And I'm not going to 
get into that discussion. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, you won't tell us what the 
royalty structure is on the oil. You won't tell us the financial 
operations of the upgrader. You won't tell us how much money 
the province makes on royalties of money going into the 
upgraders. 
 
When I pushed the previous minister and said it's about 17 per 
cent, he had to admit it, and the Minister of Energy had to admit 
that there's something like a $100 million a year coming in in 
value added to the province of Saskatchewan associated with 
the upgraders. And you don't want to admit that because that 
was a basic argument of the co-op for you not to use this 
legislation. 
 
They said, look at the money that you're making. On top of 
getting a gift from the federal government — hundreds of 
millions of dollars that you took from the farmer — you're 
picking up royalties from heavy oil and medium heavy oil. Goes 
into your coffers. 
 
And then you bring in a piece of legislation that browbeats the 
co-op into submission when you're making money on both ends 
of it. You're going to be making money on the upgraders; you're 
going to be making money on the royalty structure. 
 

And all we've asked, and the co-op has asked me and others 
have asked, is that would you just outline the amount of money 
coming into the province as a result of the two upgraders. Do 
them one at a time. 
 
(1115) 
 
And the last minister, after hours of this debate, finally said, yes 
I'll get you that information. Fair enough. It's associated with 
the upgrader; it uses 50,000 barrels a day. We make money on 
royalties; we make money on running the refinery. It pays taxes, 
it pays sales tax, and we make money as equity participants if 
the differential is appropriate. 
 
And finally after hours and hours he agreed yes, maybe it's 
relevant. And he promised to get me information. And in fact in 
Hansard he said yes, I'll get information; and you just finished 
saying, that's true, but we just can't get it in time. 
 
Well see how you just keep dodging back and forth? After 
hours and hours of browbeating the previous minister, he said 
yes, we'll get you more information. And then when you come 
to the House you say, well heck, I mean, it's been what? — a 
week, two weeks since we last did this? And now you say, oh 
no, it'll take maybe just another two or three weeks while the 
House is on, and we won't be able to do that. It'll be probably 
just after the House closes. 
 
Isn't that interesting. It took hours and hours of questioning to 
get you to a point to say yes, this is relevant information; I'll get 
you that information, the minister said. Now when you're back 
here you say, well no, it just . . . maybe just after the House 
closes we might be able to get you the information. 
 
Why are you so afraid to tell the public the amount of money 
you make on oil royalties, and money you make pumping oil 
into upgraders? Why are you so afraid of that? 
 
The point is the upgraders are going to make the province of 
Saskatchewan a lot of money in pumping oil out of the ground. 
You've got drilling, you've got exploration, you've got royalties. 
And in fact with the efficiencies that we see in operating those 
upgraders in Lloydminster and in Regina, we're going to make 
money even in upgrading. Because those differentials, the 
necessary differentials, are dropping and dropping from $6 a 
barrel down to just over $4 a barrel. 
 
Well I've been advised by Husky and advised by the Co-op that 
we're getting more efficient and more efficient as we learn to 
run them. And we knew that all along. And yet you have to 
bring in legislation to browbeat them. And that's what's so 
upsetting and that's why it's so embarrassing to you that you had 
to treat a co-op and cooperative members in such shoddy 
fashion. 
 
Well it's really interesting that after all of this time and all of 
this debate in here, when you finally admitted that you were 
going to give us the information, now it's too late. 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1664 

Mr. Minister, its been I think a week or two since we've been 
into this. Could you . . . would you please tell the Legislative 
Assembly what you think the break-even differential is today, 
and what is the differential today between synthetic crude and 
your heavy crude that you deal with in the upgrader? What is it 
today, and what is the current break-even margin necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — All of that was provided last time, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, oil prices change. This is a 
dynamic industry. It is a day-to-day operation and certainly is 
month to month. 
 
Would the minister like to give me . . . I mean doesn't he have 
enough respect for the Legislative Assembly to say well, all 
right, the current operations, here are the differentials today, or 
this is what they are this week, here's what's necessary for a 
break-even analysis. I mean the last minister at least would 
cooperate and talk about the operations of the upgrader. This 
Bill is about the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Chairman, how can he talk about the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party and about projects and about everything 
else, but not talk about the operations of an upgrader in a Bill 
like this? I mean this is pitiful. 
 
Take the responsibility; you're minister in charge of the CIC and 
the upgrader; talk about the upgrader. How does it operate? 
Give me the differentials today and tell us what's necessary to 
break even. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — You got it last time. It's the same 
figure last time. It doesn't change with the price of oil. It's 
$4.07. That's what you got last time and that's what you're 
getting now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Of course I do. It's 
in The Globe and Mail. What I'm not going to be . . . It is in The 
Globe and Mail. I'll send you across today's copy of The Globe 
and Mail if your caucus doesn't have access to it. 
 
What I'm not going to be, Mr. Chairman, is a party to the 
member from Estevan: (a) wasting the time of the Assembly; 
and (b) trying to rewrite history in doing so. You're asking the 
same questions now that you asked two weeks ago. And the 
answers are the same. They were correctly given two weeks ago 
and the information's still correct. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the minister won't give the rest 
of the information. All he does is stonewall and say it'll take 
three more weeks. Well what kind of an answer is that when he 
has brought in legislation that has been as Draconian as we've 
ever seen in here because of the financial operations of an 
upgrader, and he won't talk about the financial operations of the 
upgrader? He says no, I'm not talking about it; I'm not talking 
about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you . . . You did say that the federal  

government put up $125 million into the upgrader. You just 
said that. I think that number came up before. Why did you 
repeat it? Because it's relevant to the operations of the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you can tell us how much the federal people put 
into this upgrader, would you tell us the amount of money to 
date that the province has put in as a result of the previous Bill 
and the one that we're repealing here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — You asked that last time; you were 
given the information last time. I commend to the member's 
reading a copy of Hansard from the last time. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I asked the minister about the 
federal contribution and he was willing enough to talk about it. 
He's willing enough to talk about politics and he's willing to 
talk about projects. But he won't carry on the conversation with 
respect to the operation of the upgrader. 
 
Will the minister confirm, will the minister confirm that the 
royalties paid on oil going into the upgrader on the 
neighbourhood of 17 per cent of the value of the price of the 
oil. Will the minister confirm that today? That's ballpark and 
that's generally the kind of money that the Consolidated Fund 
can look forward to when you're pumping oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The royalty rates, you asked those 
questions in Energy and Mines estimates. I think they'll 
probably try to answer them. They're complex questions and not 
within the purview of CIC officials. 
 
This is not . . . the royalty rates are not relevant to this Bill. The 
member is either asking questions which are incapable of being 
answered, or they've already been asked. I really do not know 
what the member from Estevan thinks he's accomplishing this 
morning, but what you're not doing is speaking to the Bill. 
 
There must be some purpose in mind. I assume this is not a 
morning's entertainment for you. But your purpose really 
escapes me. It's not relevant to the Bill. You've asked the 
questions before, and some of them are incapable of being 
answered. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the minister is too 
ashamed to answer and get the information. It's obviously 
relevant questions to talk about the financing of an upgrader 
when you're dealing with a Bill and an upgrader, and he won't 
respond. 
 
So I'll just put it on the record, Mr. Speaker. We'll have it 
available that the minister will not respond to financial 
questions associated with the upgrader in the city of Regina 
when we're dealing with a Bill that is being repealed, a Bill that 
repeals an Act that was here to browbeat Federated Co-op into 
submission. 
 
And it was a shameful Act. The co-op members don't like it. 
Nobody's, I'm sure, particularly proud of it on the NDP side. 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1665 

And they would not acknowledge, as the Co-op has asked me to 
do and asked others to do, that an awful lot of money comes 
into the province of Saskatchewan as a result of oil royalties 
going into upgraders. And they wouldn't even acknowledge that 
when they're negotiating with them. 
 
So they brought in an ugly piece of legislation that just flies in 
the face of every co-op member in Canada. To treat people like 
that in the face of . . . And I think it's fair to say, and the 
minister could certainly talk about it, that as the auditor put 
together in financial statements and summary statements by the 
auditor, that the projects — CIC projects — and Crown 
corporations are netting something like $600 million to the 
province of Saskatchewan in 1994 — $600 million net to the 
province of Saskatchewan in the summary financial statements. 
 
And the co-ops has said, look of course, as a result of these 
projects, fertilizer projects, upgrader projects, diversification 
projects, paper projects, pulp projects, there is going to be — as 
well as Crown corporation projects — an awful lot of economic 
development that will pay. And the co-op members have said, 
why did you bring this ugly piece of legislation when you know 
all of this revenue is going to be there? And the revenue has 
certainly grown since these projects were developed. 
 
And what the NDP, I'm sure, of trying to do is put their stamp 
on it, rewrite a little history and say, well we'll do this and we'll 
do that. 
 
That's what's relevant about this Bill. You're ashamed of the 
Bill and you should be — you're repealing it. 
 
I mean why bother repealing it? I don't think it ever was finally 
proclaimed. Why are you taking it off the books? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because it was right in the original Bill. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Why are you taking it off? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because it was right in the original Bill. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Listen to the member from Swift Current. He 
must be really sore about this, jumping up and down and 
saying, ho, ho, listen to the answer. 
 
Mr. Chairman, isn't that interesting? Why is this Bill before the 
House? Why? Because you said it would be an embarrassment. 
If we didn't have to use it, we'll pull it back, we'll just use it as a 
what, what was it? What do you call that? Blackmail or . . . 
what's the word for the Bill that was there that you had to 
repeal? What did you call that? What did you tell your co-op 
members it was called? What was it supposed to be? 
 
And . . . (inaudible) . . . did you go to all your co-op 
membership and you say, this Bill is going to be called — 
what? — the co-op blackmail Bill? And I tell you what, if we 
don't use it we'll repeal it. Right, we'll get it off the books so it'll 
never be recorded. It's sort of like the NDP deals with their 
version of history. 

Well that's why the minister doesn't want to prolong this. He 
doesn't want to talk about the financing; he's embarrassed by the 
Bill — which he should be — co-op members are embarrassed 
by the Bill. 
 
So I'd ask the member  maybe I'll just maybe wrap this up as 
quickly as possible  why are you repealing the Bill? Why is 
this Act necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Because a satisfactory arrangement 
was entered into between the parties and the Bill is no longer 
necessary. The repeal of the Bill is part of the agreement which 
I've described as a satisfactory arrangement. 
 
Mr. Devine: — The minister described why all the parties 
thought it was a good idea to include in this agreement the 
repealing of the Bill. What was so negative about the original 
Bill that you had to include that it would be repealed? Could 
you describe what motivated people to include in that original 
Bill the repealing of the Bill? Because that's rather unusual. 
 
Could you tell me why co-op members were so upset with the 
original Bill that they would demand that you repeal it? Or was 
this just a carrot you put up and said: now if you behave, you do 
as we like, we'll just repeal the Bill so it isn't on the record? 
Could you elaborate on some of your rationale for that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The agreement to repeal the Bill was 
agreed to by the parties because it is no longer necessary. 
Satisfactory arrangements have been entered into and the threat 
of bankruptcy — insufficient cash flow is a better way to phrase 
it — threat of an insufficient cash flow is now patched and it's 
no longer necessary. That's why it was agreed to repeal it. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, can you then elaborate what the 
original Bill's purpose was and how it was used? If we're 
repealing that Bill, if this Act repeals it, could you describe the 
purpose of the original Bill and generally how the co-op 
members felt about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member, once again, is really 
straining at the boundary of what's relevant to this Bill. That has 
been described to the member repeatedly. We have said that the 
original project faced a threat of an insufficient cash flow. The 
Bill was introduced to . . . the possible trusteeship was entered 
into to handle that problem. A satisfactory arrangement was 
entered into between the federal government, the Federated 
Co-op, and the provincial government, to deal with the financial 
arrangements. The new financial arrangements are in place; the 
Bill's not necessary. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Minister, could you, for the House, describe 
what you particularly mean by the trusteeship characteristic of 
the Bill that we're about to repeal. What does that mean? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, it means pretty much what it 
says. I'm reluctant to be drawn into an exhaustive discussion of  



April 21, 1995 

 
1666 

the Bill that we're repealing. It is there to be read by the 
member. It's not, strictly speaking, a subject under discussion 
now. The original Bill would have placed the project under a 
general trusteeship, and it's no longer necessary; we're repealing 
it. I'm not sure what the member needs. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Just clarification, Mr. Minister. The general 
trusteeship, could you just briefly describe to the average 
person, the ordinary Saskatchewan person, what that meant. 
General trusteeship in the Bill that we're repealing means . . . 
What does that mean in real terms? Or do you want me to 
describe it, or you can describe it. What does that mean, that 
you would have . . . What kind of power did that give you over 
the Federated Co-op and the upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — In ordinary parlance, it gave us the 
ability to take control of the project. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So in ordinary terms, what you did is to 
threaten take-over — take over the upgrader from Federated 
Co-op. And you were not . . . so what it says is that you were 
not able to sit down with co-op members and the federal 
government and negotiate a financial arrangement. You failed 
at that. You sat down and you tried to negotiate a fair 
arrangement between the co-op members and the federal 
government and you failed. 
 
And then what you did is you said, all right, if you can't have it 
your way, you'll introduce a piece of legislation that says the 
NDP government will take over your operation, Mr. Co-op, 
unless you do it the way we want. I just want that on the record. 
 
You failed in your negotiations with the federal government 
and with the Co-op. And because you failed . . . because the 
Co-op kept saying look, you're making enough money; you've 
got royalties; you've got your hands in both sides of it; you're 
double-dipping; you don't need to do this; we can work out an 
arrangement. 
 
You failed in those discussions, so then you come back to the 
Legislative Assembly and you introduced a Bill that would take 
over the Co-op operation of the upgrader, which essentially 
says . . . and that would have the major implications to the 
refinery, the Co-op refinery, because they're linked just like this. 
And you brought in a Bill and passed it, saying: Mr. Co-op 
members, if you don't do exactly as we say, we are going to take 
over your operation. 
 
Now that's what the Bill did. Because you failed to be able to 
cooperate with the co-op movement — and you didn't; you 
failed miserably. You couldn't get an arrangement; you couldn't 
get negotiations; you couldn't get an agreement. So you had to 
use this building to bring in legislation that forced the Co-op to 
do what you wanted. Now isn't that exactly what the Bill did 
that we're going to repeal today? Wasn't it that? That threat of, 
as you said, take over the Co-op grader? Wasn't that the threat 
that we're repealing today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. 

Mr. Devine: — Or would the minister care to describe what the 
Bill did that we're going to repeal? Or does he just want to just 
. . . I'm just asking for an explanation of what the Bill did that 
we're repealing. You started to get into it, and I asked you in 
ordinary terms to describe it. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, and I said . . . and you did that. The reasons for that Bill 
were that you failed to reach an agreement and you couldn't 
reach an agreement. You were incapable of reaching an 
agreement with the Co-op and the federal government. 
 
So what did you do? You brought in this Bill that gave you the 
power to take them over. And that's the one we're repealing 
today. I'm just . . . just for the sake of posterity and the record, 
isn't that why you brought in the Bill? Because you failed to 
reach an agreement? You were incapable of reaching an 
agreement with Federated Co-op and the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member places his own 
interpretation on it. You may do so. I'm not going to get into a 
debate with the member about a Bill which was passed last 
year. What we've said and I think all that's necessary to say is, 
the Bill has now become unnecessary; we're repealing it. It was 
part of the agreement and has been explained to the member. 
 
I'm really not sure that an exhaustive debate about last year's 
Bill is relevant to this Bill. Suffice it to say the Bill is now 
unnecessary. The motivation behind its passing seemed to me to 
be not relevant now. 
 
Mr. Devine: — That's fair enough, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. 
Chairman. I wanted to put on the record that the motivation for 
the original Bill was a result of the NDP’s inability to reach an 
agreement with the co-op movement, and they had to use this 
terribly Draconian piece of legislation. And now they're forced 
to repeal it, which is an embarrassment. It's so embarrassing 
that they won't talk about it. They won't acknowledge the 
history. And in fact they won't even talk about the financial 
wherewithal associated with the upgrader because they know 
the Co-op had valid arguments all along. I have no further 
questions, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move the committee report the Bill 
without amendment. Before taking my seat I want to thank the 
official for his attendance. This may sound a little strange in 
view of the acrimonious tone of some of the discussions, but I 
also want to thank members opposite for their participation in 
the debate and their questions. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. 
Protection Act 

 



April 21, 1995 

 
1667 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce the 
officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I'd like to introduce to my right, Brian Kaukinen, 
who is the president of the Water Corporation. Behind me is 
Wayne Phillips, the vice president of finance, and Mr. Wayne 
Dybvig, vice president of water resource management, to my far 
right. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. I think you have an 
ironic kind of a situation being in charge of water in 
Saskatchewan. You get a spring like we have here in 1995, 
water that is referred to as the Red Sea in some parts of 
Saskatchewan, and of course in other parts of Saskatchewan, 
where the Department of Agriculture is telling us that 
conditions are below normal and even only fair in terms of 
moisture to get a crop started. 
 
So you have an ironic twist here of the differences that we have 
within a province like Saskatchewan. The irony being that if we 
could just get a pipeline to bring some of the water from 
Melfort down to south-west Saskatchewan, we'd have an awful 
lot of happy folks. They could use a lot less and of course the 
people in the south-west could use a lot more. 
 
The member from Swift Current, of course, I think is agreeing 
that we could definitely use a little water in the south-west. I'm 
not sure how he's suggesting we convey it but nevertheless 
there are, Minister, solutions to some of these problems. And 
the solution I'm going to point out to you — and I'm sure you 
already know this — is not to try to fight off a flood in the 
middle of the flood and it's not to try to fight off a drought in 
the middle of a drought. 
 
The solution to these problems is long-term planning  
long-term planning where you get your ducks in line and you do 
the job that needs to be done ahead of time. In areas where 
you're prone to flooding, you put in drainage systems and you 
put in dyking and you do the work necessary to control a flood 
before it happens. 
 
The Americans to the south of us have spent hundreds of 
millions of dollars fortifying their country against nature.  

They've been successful in many, many ways and yet we do see 
that there still are a lot of disasters down there; but they've 
worked hard at it. They've done it through their military, and of 
course we don't have that option here in Saskatchewan. We 
don't have a military budget that allows us, for example, to 
claim that our river system is so important to the national 
security that we can spend defence dollars dredging our river 
systems and providing canals and drainage for the eastern part 
of the province. 
 
However, we do have a provincial budget and we do have a 
federal government that works through PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) and other organizations like that. 
 
(1145) 
 
So, Minister, we can't deal with what we don't have available to 
us, but we can deal with what is real. What is real is that a little 
forward planning over the last three years could have prevented 
much of the problems we have in the eastern part of our 
province today. Those kinds of projects that could have 
alleviated the flooding now can't be done in the middle of the 
flood. And you can't realistically be expected to call in the water 
bombers and load them up with gravel and start gravelling 
roads in the middle of this great disaster. 
 
Now maybe it's not such a bad idea to try to get some gravel on, 
but I'm sure that the concept of using the water bombers 
probably won't work. So you have to work ahead of time. And 
the member from the area over most affected on Highway No. 
19 is agreeing that probably we are in a desperate enough 
situation that we might even want to try to use that approach 
and try to get some gravel on the highways. 
 
But realistically, realistically you should have forward planned, 
Minister, and now is the time to start to plan for the next flood. 
You can see where the water levels are. And I'm going to 
suggest to you that you should be doing that right now. 
 
More realistically though, we have the opposite contrast that I 
want to talk to you for a minute about, and that is the 
south-west part of Saskatchewan where there is not an 
over-abundance of water; in fact there is a shortage. We have in 
our community where I live dugouts that are not full, dugouts 
that haven't filled up. As a result there is no spring run-off this 
year enough to fill those dugouts up for our water supply for the 
cattle in that area for the summer. 
 
We have a situation that you are well aware of, which is the 
Battle Creek in the extreme south-west corner of this province. 
People have lobbied governments for 40 and 50 years down in 
that corner of the province to try to get a very small, 
insignificant, very minimal-cost dam put into a small 
river-creek-type basin that would so greatly alleviate a lot of the 
drought problems in that area. 
 
The total cost of the project, 3 or $4 million, would be sort of 
like you having a $5 bill in your pocket in comparison to the 
provincial and federal budgets. The federal government had  



April 21, 1995 

 
1668 

agreed to and had put money in place through the PFRA; I took 
the time to phone them to talk to them about this. Their money 
was allocated for that project; it was in place. The provincial 
government money was in place. And then you people came to 
power and chose to take that money and spend it somewhere 
else. As a result, the PFRA took their share of the money and 
spent it somewhere else because they didn't want to waste it and 
have it not used. 
 
So you've deliberately stopped a project in south-west 
Saskatchewan that should have been built three years ago. Now 
as luck would have it, while the same snowstorms that are 
causing the flooding in the eastern part of the province initially 
started in Montana and formed up in a low pressure system that 
came through the south-west corner of the province and 
dumped a huge amount of snow a couple of weeks back, that 
snowfall of course, because the ground is so warm around 
there, melted very fast and there was a run-off in that very 
southern part of the Cypress Hills. 
 
That run-off went straight down through that Battle Creek in 
one swift flow and is gone — gone for ever to Canadians 
because it went straight across the border to the Americans. 
They didn't get any use out of it either because it just whipped 
right on through. 
 
Nobody got any use out of that run-off because there wasn't a 
small little 3 or $4 million dam there to stop that water that 
could've been used all summer long to irrigate the alfalfa fields 
out in south-west Saskatchewan. A little project that the 
Americans themselves have come up to meetings in south-west 
Saskatchewan and said, this is a great idea; we support you; we 
encourage you to do it because we don't have a dam in place 
that will control that water or make it useful. And it will help 
the flood situation all the way through the chain of rivers and 
canals right down to the Mississippi and wherever it goes out 
into the south part of the United States. 
 
The entire length of the continent . . . the entire length of the 
country of the United States watches that water go running 
through and causes them nothing but trouble in flood situations. 
And a simple little dam at the border of Saskatchewan could 
help a part of that flooding problem that they have. 
 
It would give us the use of the water that the Americans 
themselves are saying, we do want 50 per cent of because that's 
our international agreement. But that 50 per cent they say, we 
would be much happier to have in a regulated flow later on in 
the summer when ordinarily, in south-west Saskatchewan in the 
middle of July, the rivers go dry and even the fish have to carry 
a water bucket in order to get a drink. It's almost that bad; it's 
not quite that bad. But realistically, having water controlled in a 
nice flow that is regulated is better for everybody. 
 
And the former member for Shaunavon will know that and 
understand that because he has lived there and he knows how 
important it is to have a steady, controlled water source. It not 
only makes the boating a little better to have water, but it's an 
awful lot better for your fish supplies and things like that; for  

recreation, as the member is pointing out. You can't have a 
good, healthy fish stock if you have water beds that are drying 
up and all you have is mud holes left in the summertime. 
 
So, Minister, the people in south-west Saskatchewan have 
gotten together and they've held some meetings recently, again 
in the hopes that you would reconsider your position, in the 
hopes that you would have some humanity, some ordinary 
common decency for people and do what's fair, irregardless of 
the politics of this province. 
 
As near and dear as that is to your hearts in this period of time, 
those people are hopeful that you can overlook the partisan 
political nature of the beast that runs this building and go out 
into the country and do something that would be useful for the 
province, constructive for the province, and helpful even to 
your government, although you don't presently having a sitting 
member in that particular area. 
 
There would be a tax base that would be built up as a result of 
this small little project. There would be, certainly, water that 
would be used for irrigation. That's the main part of this thing 
— you would control the flows of your water and the use of the 
water. Recreation, I've mentioned, obviously would be a 
spin-off effect. 
 
And with all of the dynamic things, Minister, that have been 
happening in our area, it would be so important to have a little 
bit of a water reservoir extra in that area considering the tourism 
that we're going to generate as a result of the tyrannosaurus rex 
and the discoveries around that in that Eastend valley and up 
the Chimney valley and all of those other areas that are around 
Eastend, and over to the west towards this water basin. And if 
you're going to develop tourism, you have to have a variety, a 
diversification of activities for people, Minister. 
 
So it would be ultimately a benefit for you as a government. 
You would have a tax base; you'd have revenue. Three or $4 
million spent at putting this little dam project in — you 
wouldn't even have to pay for it, not the most of it. You might 
have to put up a million-or-two dollars — now that's like 
having a $2 bill in your pocket, as a comparison, or mine, in the 
scheme of things of what our wages are compared to a 
provincial or a federal budget. 
 
The truth of the matter is that PFRA have told me on the 
telephone . . . I don't have this in writing so I'm not going to 
have anybody hold me responsible for what they said, but I 
think they're genuine; I take them at face value as being honest 
with me on the phone. 
 
They said that there is another budget, another year, for the 
federal government and federal departments. PFRA will have 
another budget. Even though they spent their $2 million 
commitment to that project somewhere else, there will be 
another budget in another year and they are not opposed to 
dedicating some of that budget to a project like this because 
they say it is very important and they recognize that. The  



April 21, 1995 

 
1669 

people, the officials in that department are fully in agreement 
that there should be something done in terms of putting that 
dam into place — and the quicker, the better. 
 
Now they've said that for years, and they maintain that and they 
haven't flip-flopped or changed or diversified their approach 
one little bit. They say this is a good project that would work. It 
would help people. It would help for irrigation. It would help 
for recreation. It would help in every possible way. And there is 
no one, Minister, no one that is against this project in the whole 
of the south-west corner of the province. 
 
I hear there are some environmental concerns from a group that 
the federal government itself has set up. That, Minister, is just 
plain foolishness to listen to that kind of argument because the 
wildlife in south-west Saskatchewan needs a drink far ahead of 
anything else. We need water even for the environmental things 
that exist in south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
When farmers started building dugouts, for example, in the 
great south-west as far back as 40 and 50 years ago — I guess 
you'd have to go back to the PFRA developing and becoming an 
entity back in the Dirty Thirties — since that time water has 
been collected by farmers and ranchers through the construction 
of dugouts and small dams and things like that on their own 
initiative, on their own farms, assisted by the federal program; 
they've done that. 
 
Wildlife populations have sky-rocketed in numbers as a result 
of the fact that they've got water. You can't have anything that 
lives without water, and that includes owls or deer or antelope 
or anything else. 
 
So our point has been argued and argued, Minister, with each 
and every minister that has come through this House over the 
years. And I've become the vehicle for that argument to be 
presented to you again here. 
 
Is there any possibility, having considered the fact that now 
we've got 163 names on a petition that we presented to you the 
other morning . . . and you will say well, that's not so very many 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. But I want you to 
understand, Minister, that in south-west Saskatchewan, in a 
community like Consul which is close to Vidora, 163 people 
out of that area signing a petition probably amounts to 75 per 
cent of the entire population. Everybody that was concerned 
with this project signed this petition. It is almost a unanimous 
consent of those people for you to take some action on their 
behalf. 
 
I've talked to the landowner who owns the property that would 
be flooded. He jokingly refers to himself as being one of those 
people that might have the name like Tetzlaff. Only he says it's 
a reverse kind of a feeling because he himself says that he 
knows that this project is good, it is necessary, and he 
encourages it and supports it. 
 
Now I've talked to these people myself, so I know for a fact this 
is what they're saying. All they want is to have the piece of land  

that they have replaced with another piece of land that also 
could be irrigated. Just a replacement of the same value. They're 
not asking to become millionaires, they're not asking for the 
moon, and they're not saying that in any way, shape, or form 
that they would be against the project. Just treat them fair. 
 
How much better could you have it to try to do a project than to 
have everybody concerned with a project in favour of it and 
supporting it? How could you politically not want to do 
something like that for the good of a community and for the 
good of the province? 
 
There are so many positive things about this project, I just am 
overwhelmed with trying to understand why this hasn't been 
done. And of course the only understanding that there is in this 
for why it's not done is the sheer numbers of people. There 
aren't many votes for any government in south-west 
Saskatchewan, so nobody gives them too much of a look 
because 160 people won't affect the next election probably very 
much. 
 
Well let's get away from the politics of it, Minister. Let's get 
away from that idea because there's lots more at stake here than 
a few numbers of people that might show some effect in the 
next election. Let's take a look at the spin-off for the 
community, the spin-off for the province, and the development 
that can come as a result of putting that one little project in a 
very key and critical area. 
 
Here is something, Minister, that you can do starting right now. 
You could go down there, because it's dry enough now, you 
could start equipment working. You could create some jobs. 
You could probably convince the PFRA to put up their $2 
million again. You'd likely only have to put up a million or a 
million and a half. 
 
I know the municipality will provide you with a road to get your 
equipment there. They're quite anxious to be a part of this 
project, and they would be quite happy to cooperate with you. 
They're not a rich municipality, but I know they'll give you 
every ounce of strength they've got in order to get this project 
going. 
 
(1200) 
 
So I say simply to you, Minister, here's a project you could start 
that would do a lot of good for the province and a lot of good 
for yourself because you yourself then could take credit for 
having done something positive when it could be done. And 
then we'll talk about the rest of the flooding and that sort of 
thing in a few more minutes because I want to give you an 
opportunity to respond to this very important issue and this very 
important question. 
 
Will you, Minister, reconsider your position and go ahead with 
this project in the Battle Creek of south-west Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, and I want 
to thank the member from Maple Creek for his comments and  



April 21, 1995 

 
1670 

for his concerns with respect to the Battle Creek initiative. 
 
I want to begin by saying that I am hoping that the member 
from Maple Creek would not want to couch this as being a 
decision based on politics, because it certainly isn't. We have a 
responsibility as government to govern for all of the people, 
whether we have a sitting member in an area or whether we 
don't. The corporation has a mandate to manage water across 
the province, whether it be in the East, the West, the South, the 
North, or in the centre of the province. And we base our 
decisions on a number of criteria, one of them being 
cost-benefit analysis that we do on every project. Because I 
think it's important that there be some economic spin-off from 
projects, whether it be through water management or whether it 
be resource development or any other area. 
 
And I want to say as well that the member from Maple Creek, 
I'm afraid, trivializes the amount that it would cost for this kind 
of a project, suggesting that 2, 3, or $4 million is pocket change 
for the government. Well it may have been at one time, pocket 
change for government. In the previous administration of which 
was governed by his political party, it was quite clear that 2 to 3 
to $4 million was pocket change. 
 
And I regret to say that as a matter of fact, hundreds of millions 
of dollars became pocket change. Many decisions were made, 
in my opinion, for straight political reasons without the benefit 
of an economic analysis. 
 
Which leaves us to where we're at today, after three and a half 
years, almost four years now, of struggle and sacrifice by the 
people of Saskatchewan, we've been able to balance budgets 
and we've been able to cease the ongoing additions to our 
provincial debt which is in the neighbourhood of some $15 
billion. We're in a position now where we're able to deliver 
surplus budgets so that we can look at reduction in taxes; we 
can look at enhancement of programs. 
 
And I want to say that the 840 million a year that we spend on 
interest is fairly glaring when you compare it to what we may be 
able to do if we had that 840 million that we're spending on 
interest alone. How many of these kinds of projects could be 
funded totally without provincial share or without federal share; 
840 million represents an awful lot of dams. 
 
And I mean if we're looking at $4 million for the Battle Creek 
as an example, we could do 210 of these as I calculated. We 
could have these kinds of projects all over the province. But 
that's not our option, Mr. Chairman. We have the third biggest 
expenditure in this province, being that of servicing the debt, 
built by his government, by his political party in the 1980s. And 
that's a reality that we deal with. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that we are dealing in a very 
prudent way with the resources that are available to us. We have 
cut the cost of government internally. We've been very prudent 
with respect to capital expenditures because we know the 
priority needs to be getting our government's fiscal house in 
order. 

And the member talks about humanity and common decency, 
and I think that's what we're trying to instil into this 
government. In terms of our expenditures and our programs, 
we've attempted to do and direct tax reductions to the lower 
income people in this province. And I think that speaks very 
much for what the nature of this government is all about. 
 
And I want to say to the member that it would be, I guess, a 
very positive thing if we had the money to fund projects such as 
the Battle Creek reservoir, but we don't have the capital. We 
don't have the money. 
 
And I want to suggest to him, although the petition that was 
presented, I've certainly recognized that many people in that 
area would like to see this project completed. But I want to 
indicate to the member from Maple Creek that it is not 
unanimous, in terms of agreement, that this would be a totally 
positive initiative. The Canadian Wildlife Service of 
Environment Canada have some major concerns and those have 
been voiced. And the member might be aware of that. But I 
think it's fair to say that good water management is a goal of the 
corporation and the officials who work in Sask Water Corp. 
 
He indicates that the Americans are very much committed to 
this project. And I want to remind the member from Maple 
Creek that the commitment on this $4 million project only 
extended to an expenditure by the Americans of about $80,000 
which, proportional to the $4 million expenditure, is really 
pocket change. And so I would suggest that the commitment 
from the Americans is not that overwhelming. 
 
But the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, is that we will continue to 
operate this corporation. This government will continue to 
operate this corporation in a very responsible manner. We will 
embark on capital projects as we can afford them and when we 
can afford them. And we are very, very cognizant of the desire 
by many in the Battle Creek area to have this project proceed. 
 
But I want, just in closing, to say to the member that it's not by 
any stretch unanimous, in terms of agreement, that this project 
would be favourable. We've done a cost-benefit analysis of the 
program and frankly it doesn't meet our criteria when it's 
stacked up against other expenditures and other initiatives. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 
guess the discussion we're having here today will prove that this 
is a forum of debate. And in this forum of debate you will take 
one side and I will take the other side, and we will try to make 
our points and let the public judge who's right and who's wrong. 
 
And so in the spirit of debate, I will rebut your observations and 
contentions. Because you're wrong. And I believe that as a 
humanitarian, when I prove you to be wrong and if I do that in a 
reasonable and non-adversarial manner, that you will 
understand the error of your thinking and change your position. 
So I will take your points, point by point. 
 
You claim that the environmental branch of the federal  



April 21, 1995 

 
1671 

government has some concerns in the area, and you're right. I 
have read the report. I have read their concerns, and I've also 
read all of the report of the analysis done in terms of the 
environmental impact study. 
 
The final conclusions of the study are this, in my words, but 
they say that in exactly this. That every negative factor that has 
been brought up can be, is able to be, and will be, completely, 
totally, and absolutely offset; that there will be no negative 
impact whatsoever from this project to the environment if 
certain things are done. Each of those things not only can be 
done; they can be done easily and relatively inexpensively. 
 
And so that is the final conclusion of that report, which I 
suggest, sir, you should read. Because it is very interesting to 
note that the only opposition that anyone could find to this 
report had to come from an organization that the federal 
government set up, funded totally, and were specifically 
designated to do the job of finding fault. That was their 
mandate. Under the federal government's money put in their 
hands, given that job, and they were told, this is your mandate; 
go out there and find any problems you can possibly find. 
 
Now believe me, Minister, if you get paid a year's salary and 
your job is to go out and find fault with a project, you will find 
fault. I could do that. Everybody that would be hired for a job 
like that would do it, could do it, and would put it in writing 
and offer it as the negative position. That was done with federal 
government money. Somebody was hired to go out there and 
find fault because nobody in the community, nobody in the 
area, could be found that would find fault. 
 
You see, there were people that wanted to stop this project at 
the government level for political reasons, and this is a fact of 
life. They wanted to find fault. They even tried to convince the 
landowner that he should oppose it. They offered him some 
actual . . . some incentives if he would find fault so they could 
use him as a crutch to try to stop the project. He refused. The 
community refused to find fault. The wildlife wouldn't even 
cooperate because they were looking for a drink. 
 
Minister, the reality of life is that a paid political arm of 
government is the only people that could find fault with this 
project. And in turn the people that did the environmental 
study, who were paid a salary to do that, to study all of the 
negative factors and all the positive factors and to come up with 
a report, said yes, these are the faults that could be found by 
someone who was hired to find fault and here's how those 
things can be offset. 
 
They clearly outline how every negative aspect could be offset 
with consideration to the wildlife, with consideration to the 
grasses that grow there, with the consideration for the flowers 
that grow there. And in fact it got so silly — as I recall as I'm 
talking now, the report — it got so silly that these people that 
were paid to find fault found fault that there would be many, 
many grasses in the area that no longer have a habitat to grow, 
and that their numbers were getting low. 
 

And the report clearly reveals that many of these grasses only 
grow in a milder climate, and that this particular area of 
Saskatchewan is the dividing line between the warmer climate 
and the colder climate and there's only a few of these kinds of 
plants that actually grow in that area to begin with  that 
mostly their habitat is south of the border in a warmer climate 
and there they grow in abundance. 
 
And so it was grasping at straws by this group of people that 
were hired to find negative positions. They were grasping at 
straws to try to earn their wages. I don't fault them for doing 
that because that's what people who get paid are supposed to 
do, is to do a job. But it was clearly proven that this was not a 
reasonable excuse to not carry out the project. 
 
So let's not get hung up on that, Minister. When you understand 
that they were paid to do a job, they did it. Other people were 
paid to do a job to offset these arguments, and they have also 
come up with a solution and they've done their job which was 
to find solutions to the problem. 
 
The nice thing about it is that they are inexpensive solutions. 
They are solutions that can and will work for the environment. 
And with every other aspect of this project being positively 
viewed, there is no reason in the world why we shouldn't do 
that. 
 
Now you have said that you couldn't do it because of financial 
problems. Well the fact of the matter is that I've taken the time 
to discuss this matter with people who were in charge of these 
projects, with the PFRA, with the provincial government 
officials who were in charge of doing the work — the 
bureaucrats, not the politicians — the people who were doing 
the work of actually getting the job done back in those days. 
They said, quite frankly, that the money had been allocated. 
 
The funds had been located and they had been allocated and 
they were basically set aside to be used for this project, both 
federally and provincially. Federally through the PFRA; 
provincially the monies were available and it was a political 
choice to take those monies out of that allocation and use them 
elsewhere. That's what those bureaucrats have told us and it 
happens to be that I believe them. 
 
Now, Minister, you might still say, well of course we came into 
power and we found out we needed that money somewhere else 
more desperately. And then we could get into the whole 
political argument about interest rates on debt and all that kind 
of thing. And that really doesn't wash with the people of 
Saskatchewan, Minister, any more because, quite factually, 
every jurisdiction of government at the provincial and federal 
levels in Canada has got debt and deficit problems. 
 
Every province has tried to win the support of the voters by 
coming up with a balanced budget, just as you folks have done 
in this province. Even Newfoundland has found a way to 
balance their budget, and they don't even have any fish any 
more, which only proves to the people of the country that you 
can come up with a balanced budget; it's what you come up  



April 21, 1995 

 
1672 

with as a result of that budget that really will matter in the long 
run. 
 
The result of not paying people, of not getting jobs created, the 
result of not doing projects — that's the result that will matter. 
 
Then we could go into the issue of why are you paying $800 
million in interest when you were only paying $700 million 
back in 1991? How come you're paying 8 now when interest 
rates have fallen from 12 per cent down to 4 and 5 per cent a 
year back? Now of course they're back to eight point something 
at the federal level. 
 
(1215) 
 
Why is it that you weren't able to capitalize on those falling 
interest rates at the provincial level? What kind of 
mathematicians are you people? I mean you're going to sit here 
and cry to us about how terrible it is to have to pay all this 
money, and you don't even have the good sense to go out and 
bargain for better interest rates. I mean give me a break. 
 
The last time you went shopping for money, you went to New 
York and Toronto instead of offering a bond issue to 
Saskatchewan people, at a time when they were looking for a 
place to invest their money. 
 
Now, my friend, if you want to talk about mismanagement of 
money as being the problem, I'll show the people how you 
mismanage money in Saskatchewan today when you don't put 
in a dam that can create jobs immediately and that can create a 
tax base for the future. 
 
How do you plan on paying for your bills? Let me put this in 
terms of something you might even understand, Minister. If 
you're a farmer and you decide to buy another quarter section of 
land, and you pay $50,000 for that quarter of land — and you 
don't have $50,000  where do you get the money? You go to 
your banker. If your banker believes that you have enough 
collateral and assets and all that, he'll borrow you $50,000. 
 
You will plant a crop on that land. Where do you intend on 
getting both the principal and the interest from to pay for that 
loan? You expect to get that out of the crops that you grow. 
And you will if all of the things that are natural in the scheme 
of things accomplish that; if you've done your mathematics and 
not overpaid for the land. And the banker, I'm sure, won't loan 
you the money if you haven't done a good job of figuring out 
how you're going to repay the loan. Especially these days after 
what they went through in the late '80s and early '90s. 
 
So, Minister, it applies exactly the same for a province and for 
the federal government as well. You borrow money to invest in 
things that will return you something in the future, a return that 
will pay for the principal and the interest. That's not uncommon 
philosophy in the scheme of things. Everybody that buys a 
home ends up with a mortgage. That's the way we do things in 
our society. That's how it works. 
 

So it's no great crime to borrow some money to buy an 
investment that's going to return you something in the future. 
On your quarter of land that I allude to, you're going to grow a 
crop. Maybe you'll be lucky enough to be in a canola area and 
you'll get $9 a bushel and you can pay back a lot of the 
principal right away, quick. On the other hand, if you're in our 
corner of the province, you may have to grow wheat and you 
may have to amortize that over 20 years instead of 10. 
 
Nevertheless, that's a plan — a futuristic plan of development 
and growth. It's how you build a farm bigger and make it more 
prosperous so your son or daughter can stay at home and farm 
in the family operation. It's how a family of people in a 
province, a community of folks in a province, can look forward 
to building and developing a province so that it has a tax base 
and a future where the population can grow and the prosperity 
of the province can grow. 
 
Minister, this is not such phenomenal information. It's the way 
things work very nicely in a lot of jurisdictions in the free 
world. And there's no reason why it can't work in 
Saskatchewan. In fact it has to be put to work, or we will 
stagnate at a million less people for the next hundred years 
when all kinds of folks in the rest of the world are looking at 
Saskatchewan and saying we should, at this point in history, 
have a population of 3 million people. 
 
Why don't we have that? Because we haven't had futuristic 
plans enough from you people to put in a simple thing like a 
little dam. 
 
Let's go into your argument one step further. You allude to the 
Americans only putting up $80,000 and you say that's 
chicken-feed in this project. That is not chicken-feed, Minister. 
It's a significant amount because remember this, you play with 
figures and you play with them all wrong. 
 
Sure the project might cost 4 million. That's a top figure on 
what I read in the reports. It was something like three point 
something. But let's use the 4; that's fine and dandy. The reality 
was that the federal government was going to put up $2 million 
and the provincial government was only really going to put up 
1.5 million or thereabouts. 
 
Now we'll look up the figures in the report, and you will have 
that as well. But the reality was that your portion was only to be 
1.5 million, not the whole 4 million. Most of that was being . . . 
the biggest share was being put up by PFRA through federal 
government money; through that arm of assistance to western 
Canada. A very good program; one that has worked well for 
western Canadian farmers and ranchers over the years. 
 
Now out of 1.5 million you say that $80,000 is chicken-feed 
that the Americans would put up. Why would you call that 
chicken-feed when their only benefit that they've got is really 
flood control? They already have, by international law, a 
guarantee that we're going to give them 50 per cent of the water. 
 



April 21, 1995 

 
1673 

They want that water controlled and they want it dribbled down 
there a little at a time instead of all coming in a flood. And for 
that they were willing to give you $80,000 which, out of 1.5 
million, is a pretty significant figure. It's probably 7 or 8 per 
cent; I didn't do the mathematics but I'm sure you will to correct 
me. 
 
But look at it this way. You say, well that's not a whole bunch, 
7 or 8 per cent or 9, but the reality is, it is a big amount of 
money because you said you can't afford 1.5 million because it's 
too big of an amount of money to spend out of a provincial 
budget. 
 
Well, my friend, looking at that 80,000 compared to the size of 
the project in a percentage term, and then looking at the total 
cost of the government share in terms of the provincial budget, 
you're looking at that project costing the provincial government 
not 10 per cent of the provincial budget — not even 1 per cent 
of the provincial budget. Get your calculator out and figure it 
out. It's like point zero-something per cent of the provincial 
budget, and then you take the 80,000 off that yet. 
 
So you really have got, in terms of provincial dollars involved 
in this little project, an insignificant amount of money if you 
compare it to the whole economy of our province. 
 
Then if you take a look at the report and check out the 
economic spin-offs, and the futuristic benefits . . . and this is 
where I really seriously wonder if you've read this report or 
studied it or had any of your officials even look at it, because 
you're making implications that there is some doubt that in the 
future this project would pay for itself or generate economic 
activity that would make it worthwhile. 
 
That tells me you could not have studied this. You could not 
have read the report because it clearly states in that report that 
this is an absolute boon for the province as a whole — not just 
for the area but mostly for the area  but not just for them. It's 
a tax-base revenue generating project that would help all of the 
province. 
 
It starts off with a few jobs in the area while you construct it. It 
goes on into the irrigation potential of providing a feed supply 
in a drought area. And you can't realistically say well look, we 
got all this rain up in the Yorkton area and the Melville area and 
they're all super wet, we'll be able to grow lots of feed. But you 
can't afford to truck feed from there all the way down to 
south-west Saskatchewan and make money doing that. The 
costs of trucking will break you. 
 
We've put this all through the test of the droughts in the dirty 
'80s. I can tell you about the dust storms and the clouds of dirt 
that went flying through the southern half of this province in the 
'80s, and all the problems that there were associated with that. 
But there never was money to be made trucking feed out of 
northern Saskatchewan to southern Saskatchewan in terms of 
anything other than to maintain the herd and keep them alive so 
that you would have a breeding herd for the future. It was 
always, always not cost effective to do that. The most cost- 

effective way of preserving a breeding herd in a drought area is 
to have an irrigation project that grows some feed for an 
emergency use in that area where you don't have these huge 
transportation costs. 
 
So this project, just with the irrigation potential alone to 
provide extra feed for that area in those bad years, would have 
enough economic spin-off effect to make the project 
worthwhile. But we don't just have that, Minister. And you've 
missed the boat completely when you never considered the fact 
that there is the economic spin-off of the recreation that goes 
with the tourist boom that is going to come to south-west 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is absolutely overwhelming numbers being talked about, 
about people's interests throughout the world who want to come 
to south-west Saskatchewan to check out our new dinosaur 
finds and the potentials there. The Scotty project has generated 
public meetings, Minister. And I'm sure you may have heard 
about this but just in case you haven't, they've had public 
meetings down in that area that have attracted all kinds of 
people from around the south-west. Because everybody from 
the outside, as well as locally, is getting stories about all of the 
tourists that potentially are coming. 
 
In fact there's even a genuine concern now there may not even 
be enough room to accommodate them all. We might not even 
have enough hotel space or enough restaurant space to be able 
to seriously give these people a good enough time so that they 
will go home with a genuine good feeling and want to say to 
their friends, we had such a good time there, you should go 
there as well; or we're going to come back again. And that's 
being dealt with. 
 
So, Minister, look at the hundreds of thousands of dollars that 
can be generated in everything that you sell down there — 
everything — to the tourists; comes back to you and the 
province through tax dollars. You tax everything  hotel rooms 
 everything’s got some spin-off tax effect. All the food that 
people eat, all the gas they burn up, all of the transportation that 
they use to come in and out, all of that generates activity 
economically for the province. You, in your general fund, end 
up having a provincial benefit. It'll more than pay this one and a 
half million dollars worth of investment in a small little dam. 
 
It is such a good project that I am absolutely dumbfounded that 
you haven't latched onto it for your own and claim it as your 
own, and go down there and build it and actually get on a big 
grader and start pushing dirt yourself, and have your picture 
taken and put it on the front page of the paper and say, this is 
my deal; I'm going for it to build for Saskatchewan. 
 
If I were you, Minister, I'd be down there doing this. This is 
such a good deal for Saskatchewan that you shouldn't even 
consider how good it is for the people in the south-west. But it 
is great for them, and they know it. Everybody agrees. 
 
So, Minister, it's not an economic problem. I have shown you 
clearly how you can finance it; I've shown you clearly how  



April 21, 1995 

 
1674 

your money will come back through the project. I've shown you 
clearly that the American investment is not only a good 
investment but it is a big investment in terms of what they're 
getting out of it. Why not take the money and run with it and do 
the job? 
 
Minister, we have offset every negative idea that has come up 
on this project with a positive result. It can all be done. The 
people in your departments, the people in the PFRA 
departments, and the people of south-west Saskatchewan, will 
work together. They have committed for this; they have all 
committed to this. And they've all said we'll do it together and 
we'll make it happen. 
 
All we wait for is for you to have the courage to climb onto that 
bulldozer and start pushing dirt. I could help you. I really could. 
Maybe you don't know how to get on this thing without 
stubbing your toe. I can show you how to get on; I'll even show 
you how to run it. Minister, it awaits only your decision to have 
this project go ahead for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Minister, I know that I get a little bit exercised about this issue, 
and my colleagues are going to poke a little fun at me here 
because I get so keyed up about things that I think are good for 
south-west Saskatchewan, but I just can't stop talking about this 
project as being good for the people of our province. 
 
It is genuinely a natural. It is just unbelievable that it hasn't been 
done before. And I can't believe that you would sit there, 
looking at going into an election, looking at ways to try to make 
your government look prosperous and meaningful and to have a 
history in the history books as having accomplished something 
genuinely good  I can't see how you could pass up an 
opportunity like this. 
 
I mean do you really want to go down in the history books, 
Minister, as the guys who managed to bring gambling and stuff 
like that to the province without something to offset that in the 
history books as genuinely natural and good? Something like 
putting water where it's needed in a desert; can't possibly do 
anything but win with that kind of an approach. 
 
Now, Minister, in the spirit of the debate, you have also 
indicated that things are worse here economically than they are 
elsewhere. Well I just want to remind you, as one last point on 
this issue, that that should not be a stumbling block for you. 
Even the great province of Alberta has a debt; they have a 
tremendous debt. You don't need to feel sorry about investing 
money if you're investing it for the right thing. 
 
I would seriously quarrel with you if you took provincial money 
and bought all of the members of your caucus a trip to Hawaii; I 
would seriously question the wisdom of spending money and 
borrowing money to do that. Everybody else would and you 
wouldn't do it I know, because you know very well you'd never 
get away with that. But if you're investing money in something 
that can generate income in the future, then you can't lose. 
 

Minister, I've given you an alternative to each one of your 
arguments against building the dam and I want to know what 
you think about my position with regards to this project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me begin 
by saying to the member from Maple Creek there is no 
mistaking his enthusiasm for this project and I guess I have to 
commend him on his commitment. There is certainly no grey 
areas. The member from Maple Creek in his mind believes that 
this is a project that makes economic sense, it makes social 
sense, and we can't mistake that enthusiasm for sure. 
 
But I would want to say to the member from Maple Creek, were 
I his banker, I would be more than concerned with respect to 
the enthusiasm he shows without dealing with the reality and 
the economics of the project. 
 
(1230) 
 
The reviews that have been done by Water Corporation show 
that this project will deliver about 60 cents on the dollar in 
terms of benefit as it relates to investment. There are many 
projects around Saskatchewan that will deliver more than twice 
that benefit but aren't proceeding, simply because we don't have 
the cash. We don't have the capital to begin the investment to 
deliver the project. 
 
And I would want to say to the member from Maple Creek that 
the approach that he takes to the expenditure of say $4 million 
on this particular initiative I think is a direct parallel to the 
approach that the administration of 1980s, the Conservative 
administration of the 1980s, took when they made the decision 
to embark on the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
I know the member wasn't elected. He was not sitting in this 
legislature when those decisions were made to invest that 
money that started in the neighbourhood of $40 million and 
ended up costing the people of Saskatchewan in the 
neighbourhood of 250 per cent more when all was said and 
done. 
 
But I think it was that kind of enthusiasm that was shown by the 
member from Estevan, without investigating the cost of 
mitigation, the environmental costs; it was made on a straight 
political basis. And was the enthusiasm there? The answer is, 
absolutely. Was the commitment by the former premier, the 
member from Estevan, there? The answer is, absolutely. But 
had that government done their homework? The answer is, 
quite clearly not. 
 
A project that started at $40 million ended up costing the 
people of Saskatchewan in the neighbourhood of $130 million 
plus $20 million that was put in through the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation — total expenditure, provincially, of around 
$150 million that started at 40. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Maple Creek — and I 
don't believe it's my role to lecture  but I think we have to 
relive history. We have to relive history in order to understand  



April 21, 1995 

 
1675 

why we can't afford some of these projects. Goodness sakes, 
year after year after year the former administration delivered 
budgets that were not based on any kind of reality. Projections 
were absolutely, totally inaccurate. Every year, deficits. Every 
year, they went to our international bankers and borrowed tens 
and hundreds of millions and billions of dollars more to finance 
expenditures — based on enthusiasm but not based on common 
sense. 
 
And so I want to say to the member for Maple Creek, I don't 
want to dwell on the debate as to whether or not the member's 
enthusiasm makes this a good project or doesn't make it a good 
project. I can only rely on the priorization of the officials at 
Sask Water Corporation who do the cost/benefit analysis on 
each and every project that is invested in. 
 
And these are professionals, people who for a living 
recommend, make suggestions to government, through the 
minister to cabinet. And I'm going to rely on the advice that 
they give me. And they tell me that this will return 60 cents on a 
dollar in terms of investment. 
 
I've got to tell you, the member for Maple Creek, this is not the 
kind of a project that I in good conscience would even take to 
my banker and suggest that he invest in. Nor would I take this 
to cabinet; nor would I ask Treasury Board to review it, because 
there are other projects that I think will serve the people in the 
province in a more positive fashion. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Maple Creek and to his 
colleague from Thunder Creek, if he had sat around the cabinet 
table and based . . . and input into the cabinet discussions was 
based on some common sense and some pragmatism and some 
understanding of how much the taxpayers of this province 
could afford to shell out every year and how much they could 
afford to borrow, we wouldn't be sitting here with $840 million 
of debt that goes directly to the interest on the provincial deficit 
. . . or on the provincial debt. 
 
And the member from Maple creek asks how this built to a $15 
billion debt in his comments earlier on. I'm sure his banker — if 
he would sit down with his bank manager — will explain to 
him the magic of compound interest. And I think in actual fact 
your banker could explain that to you maybe better than anyone 
on this side of the House has been able to do, because you still 
don't understand how you got into that problem. 
 
And he talks about the 3, $4 million . . . you know, and I say to 
the member from Maple Creek who I know . . . or from 
Thunder Creek who I know wants to get into this debate, if you 
had been watching the expenditures of a million here and a 
million there and a million there around this province, and had 
been putting the damper on in the control on some of those 
expenditures, it wouldn't have amounted to hundreds of 
millions of dollars in debt. 
 
But the problem was, you weren't watching the expenditures; 
the member from Maple Creek wasn't there to watch the 
expenditures; in fact, nobody was. And the end result is, $840  

million a year that we send to Zürich and London and New 
York, or wherever we borrow the money, wherever we had 
borrowed the money — and that's money that's gone, that can't 
build projects like the Battle Creek project that you so 
passionately and eloquently speak of. 
 
The fact is, I say to all of the members in the official 
opposition, we have and will continue to take a responsible 
approach to every expenditure, whether it be a million dollars or 
whether it be a thousand dollars, because we believe that it's 
taxpayers' money and that we have a responsibility to spend it 
prudently, wisely, and priorize our expenditures so that we 
invest their dollars in the best interests and in the long-term 
interests of the province. 
 
And I just want to close by saying that we have developed a 
plan in this province for growing our economy and for jobs for 
our young people, but the first step to that was balancing the 
budgets, and we've done that. We've projected four balanced 
budgets in the coming years. And we believe quite clearly we 
can do that. 
 
And we plan on paying down some of that $15 billion debt that 
your political party was responsible for creating, because we 
would rather spend money on programs. We would rather spend 
money on reducing the tax level in this province than we would 
servicing the debt that you created. And that's we paid last year, 
$540 million down on the provincial debt. 
 
So I say to the member, as passionate as you speak about this 
project, the facts of the matter are we don't have the funding for 
it. We have other priorities and I'm hopeful at some point in 
time we can have another look at this program, and that we can 
have another look at this project, and at some time it may be on 
the top of the priority list. 
 
But I only say to be fair to the member from Maple Creek, it's 
not on the top of our priority list now, and certainly we intend 
to continue to be prudent in our decision making and with 
respect to the expenditures on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I listened with 
great interest, Mr. Chairman, to the minister responsible for 
Sask Water. And it's very unfortunate, Mr. Chairman, that that 
member doesn't relate back to his roots around Woodrow, 
Saskatchewan a little better. I know that he moved into the 
North a long time ago and he's up in the green area around 
Prince Albert. 
 
And he wasn't around in 1988 in some of those years when 
most of southern Saskatchewan, as my colleague said, turned 
into a desert. But if he would have remembered his roots he 
would have known that life in southern Saskatchewan is very 
difficult times because you don't have access to water. 
 
And the member from Maple Creek is only bringing to this 
Assembly what generations of people in southern Saskatchewan 
have known to be a fact. That if you cannot have access to 
water, you do not have access to life. That you cannot sustain  



April 21, 1995 

 
1676 

agriculture, you cannot sustain communities, you cannot sustain 
a reasonable standard of living. 
 
Sask Water was created in this province as a Crown corporation 
to deliver water to communities, to farmers, to agriculture, to 
industry, to take all of the departments of government that 
previously had worked sometimes at cross purposes with a 
mission statement to deliver one of the most essential parts of 
life to this province in an economic way, and that was the 
development of a Crown corporation headquartered out of 
Moose Jaw — Sask Water. 
 
And the minister so glibly in his response to the member from 
Maple Creek says that you shouldn't be concerned about that; 
because you live in the South, the dry, hungry South, you 
shouldn't be concerned about water. And he writes it off. 
 
Yet he has the gall to stand in this Assembly, he and his 
members, and defend a pipeline at Melfort that leaks like a 
sieve because it was built with union labour. 
 
He wasn't worried about the debt or the province. He wasn't 
worried about the debt at all. He sat at the cabinet table and he 
said, we'll use union labour and we'll build this and we'll make 
sure the taxpayer pays another million and a half dollars. And 
when we're done we'll have it full of holes and it'll leak all over 
northern Saskatchewan. Did that bother him at the cabinet 
table? Did that bother him at the cabinet table?. Not one bit. 
 
I mean, that member, that minister, would stand here and have 
us believe, have us believe that his government was the only 
one that had ever had to face a deficit. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, in 1988 when this province was drying up 
and there wasn't a blade of grass in southern Saskatchewan, 
there was a government that cared and said that we will do 
things to make sure that farmers and communities and others 
can stay in their place and they'll be on the land; and they spent 
some money. Yes they did. And they protected people. And 
they didn't go around building pipelines, with union labour, that 
were full of holes and leaks. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, before you stand in the Assembly and 
lecture the member from Maple Creek about spending and the 
priorities of the previous government, you should tell your 
Finance minister, when she trundles off to New York to talk to 
those bankers that you speak so harshly about, to quit talking 
about Saskferco and the Meadow Lake pulp mill and all these 
wonderful things that you want to hitch your wagon to these 
days, that are returning such wonderful benefits to the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
You see it's the same old story. You say one thing in here and 
you say something somewhere else. All of a sudden, some of 
those things that create jobs that you haven't been able to create 
in four years in government are returning a pretty nice 
investment. 
 
You know, one day we're in here cutting up an upgrader and the  

next day we're investing in it. And it goes on and on and on. 
One day we're in here cutting up a company that moved to this 
province from Toronto, and the next day we'll come in here and 
reasonably explain why we're going to give them another $200 
million. 
 
I mean it just goes on and on, Minister. And then you say to the 
member from Maple Creek, when he asks on behalf of a whole 
bunch of people in southern Saskatchewan for a small amount 
of money that might be able to sustain agriculture and life and 
communities in that particular part of the province, you say to 
him, you're being unreasonable. You're being unreasonable to 
even come to this Assembly and ask about that; that I've got 
other priorities that are more important. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, that's why we in the official opposition 
sometimes question the way you run government and your 
priorities. I mean, how many more Melfort pipelines are we 
going to see in this province, under your leadership? From what 
I'm told there's going to be several and they're all going to be 
subject to the union-hiring rules that you put in place. 
 
The minister holds up five fingers to the Assembly — five more 
pipelines. Well if we do our mathematics, five more pipelines, 
and if you can overrun the cost by a million and half bucks on 
every one of them — which I think you can with your union 
labour — you've more than enough provided enough money for 
the member from Maple Creek to put a dam in place to save 
some water and help out people in south-west Saskatchewan. 
So the next time there's a drought in this province, which 
assuredly there will be, the people in that area won't have to 
truck their hay from 500 miles away in order to keep their cows 
alive. The communities down there will have access to water. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you know full well, full well, that a lot of 
the problems associated with the Rafferty-Alameda project are 
a direct result of the things that you did, sir, and your colleagues 
while in opposition, to do everything you could to get that thing 
into court and keep it there for years and years and years. And 
you know who won? You know who won at the end of the day, 
Mr. Minister, after you protested so much? The lawyers won; 
the lawyers won. They collected lots of fees. 
 
(1245) 
 
Did the environment change? Not one bit. Those dams today 
are doing exactly what they were proposed to do. And if you 
and some of your NDP friends had not forced those situations 
into the courtroom for years and years and years, those dams 
would have been built a lot closer to budget and they would 
have been providing what they were meant to do. And the cost 
would have been a whole lot less. 
 
But instead you saw it appropriate because you were in 
opposition, you wanted to be in government, that you'd go out 
and you'd do whatever you had to in order to raise roadblocks to 
make sure that those costs overran, to make sure that those 
projects didn't do what they were supposed to do. And that was 
appropriate at the time. 



April 21, 1995 

 
1677 

I wonder if anybody has ever figured . . . I'm sure your officials 
in Sask Water could probably come up with a reasonable 
number for you about what it cost Sask Water and the province 
of Saskatchewan in the construction delays, in the court costs, 
in all of the rhetoric and fooling around that was done over the 
Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
I bet they could find that for you, Minister, and maybe what we 
should do for the next session of your estimates is that you 
could bring those figures for us. You could come up with the 
numbers for us on what it cost to go to court; what it cost in 
construction delays when the prime contractor couldn't move 
his equipment because you and your friends had orchestrated 
roadblocks month after month, year after year. 
 
You know one of the things that I detested most about my days 
in government, Mr. Minister, was having to sit in my place and 
listen to the member from Rosemont and others go along for 
hours at a time and day after day yacking about 
Rafferty-Alameda as if they understood or knew anything to 
begin with, and tied up this Assembly for hours and days and 
spent the taxpayers' money. 
 
And you know what? At the end of the day, they didn't stop the 
project. At the end of the day, they didn't stop a darn thing. You 
know, my colleague tells me there's 80 feet of water in Alameda 
dam today — 80 feet of water. It's filling up. It's filling up and 
it's providing flood control. 
 
Rafferty-Alameda, Mr. Minister, Rafferty-Alameda could have 
been brought in a lot cheaper if you people when you were in 
opposition, had not decided to do everything you could to stop 
it. You know how many Battle Creek dams could have been 
built for the legal cost and the slow-down cost that you caused. 
There could have been dams all across southern Saskatchewan 
for what you caused in your opposition days. And that's the 
truth and everybody knows it. 
 
So why don't you come back to this Assembly with how much 
money you wasted by trying to slow that project down. At the 
end of the day, you didn't succeed, thank goodness. And the 
taxpayer, yes, is bearing a burden because of those slow-downs 
that you and your colleagues caused. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is it so unreasonable? Why is it so 
unreasonable for someone in southern Saskatchewan to want to 
try to make a living and have an environment where they have 
access to water instead of being forced to go through drought 
periods like all of us who lived there have had to do in the past. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:50 p.m. 
 
 


