






















































February 27, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 27, 1995 

 

 
443 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
today from the Tompkins and Gull Lake area and I'd be happy 
to read the prayer for those people today: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
And I'd be happy to table these today. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition on behalf of constituents today. 
 
The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the constituents here are from Limerick and Assiniboia and 
McCord area. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm proud to present 
some petitions . . . a petition from petitioners in the north-west 
part of the province — from Neilburg, Maidstone, North 
Battleford. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
I present this on behalf of constituents and the people from the 
north-west area. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan petitioning 

the Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated 
toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 21 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Finance: what was the 

total amount of money borrowed by the province of 
Saskatchewan for the '94-95 fiscal year; (2) what was 
the total amount of money borrowed outside of the 
province for '94-95 fiscal year; provide the name of the 
institution, the location of the institution, and the 
interest rate; (3) what was the total amount of money 
borrowed by the province of Saskatchewan for the '93-
94 fiscal year; and (4) what was the total amount of 
money borrowed outside of the province for the '93-94 
fiscal year; provide the name of the institution, the 
location of the institution, and the interest rate. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the legislature 
a group of grade 7 and 8 students from Davin School, 
accompanied by Mrs. Wynne Edwards and Mrs. Lea Johnson. 
The students will be having a tour of the Legislative Building, 
and afterwards I'll be meeting with them to visit and have a 
photo. 
 
So we'll see you later, and please join me in welcoming to 
students to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with great 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
the members of the Assembly, two students from Lebret who 
are taking a law 30 class, and their teacher, Darlyne Hoberg. I'll 
be meeting with this huge class after question period for a few 
minutes and for a photo opportunity. And I'd like all members 
of the Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce  



February 27, 1995 

 
444 

to you and through you to the other members of the Assembly, 
in the west gallery — and I'll refer to you as Mr. Speaker today 
instead of Mr. Gallery — a constituent of mine, Chris Betker 
from Meadow Lake. Chris, you should have told me; we could 
have travelled down here together today. 
 
So welcome, Chris, and please join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I see in the east gallery a 
former Member of Parliament for Regina East, I believe it was, 
and still a full-time farmer. And I wonder if you could join with 
me to welcome John Burton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Yorkton Speed Skater Wins Four Gold Medals 
 

Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
afternoon I would like to congratulate all the Saskatchewan 
athletes who were participating at the Canada Winter Games in 
Grande Prairie, Alberta. There is one competitor from my riding 
of Yorkton who has done exceptionally well; 19-year-old Jason 
Parker has won four gold medals in speed skating, at the same 
time has set new game records in receiving these top honours at 
the games. Jason was a member of the Saskatchewan speed 
skating team at the 1991 Canada Games and has won 10 medals 
at the Canadian championships since 1989. 
 
Now he can add four more medals to his list. In December, at 
the Games trial Jason made for the 1,500 metres, was the 
second fastest of any Canadian this year in that distance. I know 
that everyone in Yorkton is especially proud of the performance 
Jason has put on at the Canada Winter Games in Alberta and I 
want to congratulate, with all of my colleagues here, his 
accomplishments. If Jason keeps on skating at this level he 
stands a good chance of making the Canadian Olympics team in 
1998 in Japan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also mention that during this 
weekend our Saskatchewan hockey team won the gold medal by 
defeating Alberta 3-1 in the finals. The first half of the Games 
are over and Saskatchewan is in sixth place overall with 18 
medals. 
 
And to all of the participants I want to wish them all the best of 
luck during the remaining days of the competition and a special 
congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. Jason Parker for his 
exceptional accomplishments. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Through-put Elevator in Unity 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
thought I might bring to your attention and through you to the  

rest of the members present here, some of the things that's 
happening out in my constituency which indicates the 
confidence that Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and others have in 
the farming community in our area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they just finished a high through-put elevator in 
the town of Unity. The official opening will be, I think, April 
14, but they have been in business since last fall. Mr. Speaker, 
the elevator capacity is 10,000 metric tonnes, which is 400,000 
bushels, and they have sold condominium storage there to the 
amount of 16,000 metric tonnes, which is another 640 bushels 
capacity. Mr. Speaker, this is the first concrete, high through-
put elevator the Pool has in Saskatchewan tied onto a 
condominium, and it went over very well. They spent in the 
neighbourhood of $5.3 million building this elevator, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It carries a staff of 16, and they have a very, very good farm 
supply there too also. Mr. Speaker, they have shown, as far as 
I'm concerned, a very high rate of confidence in our area. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, there is another one being built, 
will be started in February . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry, but the member's time is up. 
 

Saskatchewan Hockey Team Wins Gold Medal 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know that 
the best hockey players come from Saskatchewan, whether they 
are in the National Hockey League or in the minor hockey 
leagues across the province or right here in the Assembly. And 
to support that view, I am proud to rise today in this Assembly 
to congratulate the Saskatchewan hockey team for winning the 
gold medal at the Canada Winter Games in Grande Prairie, 
Alberta over the weekend. 
 
And to show their strength, our Saskatchewan hockey players 
beat the host team, Alberta, 3 to 1 in the final. This is the first 
time Saskatchewan has won a medal in the Canada Games 
hockey competition since the games started in 1967. And 
rightly so, with a gold medal performance, we are all proud of 
this accomplishment. 
 
These hockey players who fought their way to the gold medal 
came from all across the province. Saskatchewan beat the 
favoured team from Quebec in advance of the gold medal game 
because of the great goal-tending and an overall team effort. 
 
This gold medal in hockey says a lot about the calibre of hockey 
players who train and play in Saskatchewan. Our team was 
ranked sixth heading into the games, but the team didn't let that 
stop them from believing in themselves and showed true grit 
and determination in winning the gold medal. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to all the hockey players 
on Team Saskatchewan, and congratulations to the coaches and 
trainers for the gold medal performance. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
445 

I know everyone in the House today extends his or her 
congratulations to these fine athletes who are now national 
champions — the best in Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shaunavon Kinsmen Telemiracle Fund-raiser 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to comment today on a very worthwhile fund-raising 
event which took place in my home town of Shaunavon this 
past weekend. 
 
As in other towns across Saskatchewan, the Kinsmen service 
club held its annual radiothon and bar night to raise money for 
Telemiracle. Just as they have done in the past, the people of 
Shaunavon and area gave generously, contributing some 
$13,000. And along with the $5,000 they raise each and every 
year from the schools, will bring an amount of some $18,000 to 
this very worthwhile cause. 
 
As one of the founding members of the Shaunavon Kinsmen, it 
gives me great pride to know that money raised will be returned 
to these people in the cities and towns and villages, who are in 
need of this support. 
 
I was privileged to take to the air waves in this year's radiothon, 
and would like members to join me in paying tribute to 
everyone who made this year's event such a terrific success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Semans Telemiracle Fund-raiser Chautauqua '95 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to report 
on a fund-raiser held in my constituency. 
 
I had the pleasure of participating in the opening ceremonies of 
Chautauqua '95 in Semans, Saskatchewan. Even though it has 
been about 65 years since this type of event was held in 
Semans, this one was a huge success in raising over $2,200 for 
the upcoming Telemiracle telethon which will be held this 
weekend in Saskatoon. 
 
It is fitting, as we recently celebrate Heritage Day in 
Saskatchewan, that I am able to speak about this event which 
upheld the philosophy of the original chautauqua which was 
held locally in the 1930s in Semans, Lestock, Ituna, and Elfros, 
and that is to uplift, education, and to entertain. 
 
In the late 1800s the original version of chautauqua was born as 
a program to train church workers and Sunday school teachers 
during the summer, but it eventually included entertainment and 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost 700 people turned out to the last two 
shows which were recently held in Semans, and entertainers 
came from Davidson, Lanigan, Govan, Raymore, Punnichy, 
Wishart, and Semans. All of the participants and volunteers are  

to be congratulated for bringing back a part of our heritage and 
at the same time raising money for a very worthwhile cause. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Misty Valley Farms 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I am pleased 
to report on good news, at a good news event from my riding. 
Given the number of success stories in rural Saskatchewan, I'm 
sure this will be one of the many more items which I report. 
 
Today I wish to congratulate a family in my constituency who 
have made a great success out of their ranching business. The 
Oddan family of Maidstone own and operate Misty Valley 
Farms. They recently held their 19th annual production sale of 
horned Herefords. The sale is always sure to draw a crowd and 
this year was no exception. Buyers were on hand from the four 
western provinces, Ontario, and Wyoming. 
 
The top sale of the day was for a 1994 bull calf which fetched 
$10,400. In total, Mr. Speaker, 46 bulls averaged $2,800; 32 
registered females averaged $2,000; while 49 commercial 
females averaged $1,400. Add it all up, Mr. Speaker, and you 
have a tidy sum of money for Maidstone and for the Oddans. 
For this, they should be commended. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you may have noticed that while I was 
speaking the opposition members have turned green with envy. 
I guess this is because they wish they could collect as much 
money for their bull. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Credit Corporation in Partnership with 
Edenwold School 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in this 
Assembly I reported on a school program sponsored by the Pilot 
Butte Lions Club. One characteristic of this program involved 
students teaching adults how to teach students — as good an 
example of cooperation as you can find, I think. 
 
Today I want to tell you about another school in my 
constituency which is also working cooperatively with an 
outside organization — again, for the mutual benefit of both. 
Edenwold School has recently kicked off a partnership with the 
Regina headquarters of the Farm Credit Corporation. 
Representatives from the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) 
recently came to the school to officially launch the partnership. 
 
For its part, FCC will provide computer hardware and software, 
educational tools that are now as essential as chalk and a 
blackboard. In addition, the FCC will sponsor awards for 
various school contests. Finally, the school will have access to 
FCC staff as resource people. 



February 27, 1995 

 
446 

In return, students will provide art work and project work for 
display at the Regina headquarters. Classes will travel to Regina 
on occasion to provide entertainment for the FCC staff; and the 
school, in turn, will invite FCC staff to its annual Christmas 
concert and other school events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the grand scheme of things this agreement 
perhaps is a small matter, but it is a significant effort I think by 
both parties. It takes students out of the classroom and into the 
outside world they will soon enter, and it reminds 
representatives of that world that the corporate bottom line is 
not all there is. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's extremely disconcerting to have to listen to the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) and the Liberals argue about who 
has done the most to hurt Saskatchewan farmers. The fact is, 
sir, that you are both guilty and you're both trying to deflect 
criticism by blaming the other party. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are the government that gutted GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) and you allowed the Liberals to 
take back hundreds of millions of dollars of GRIP premiums. 
The NDP and the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, have been co-
conspirators in the attack on Saskatchewan farmers. And the 
Liberal-NDP attack on farm families is only going to get worse 
when the Liberal budget is read. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you have any credibility in attacking 
federal Liberal cuts in agriculture when you have set the 
precedent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the 
member opposite for that question and a chance to explain our 
agriculture policy. Mr. Speaker, we have cut in agriculture as 
we have cut in health care and education and other places in 
government. We cut programs where we were not spending our 
money smart. We cut programs to save budget. We cut 
programs to spend our money smarter. 
 
We have maintained a very strong, core support for agriculture. 
In fact with the federal government's StatsCanada numbers, 
we've reduced our ag spending by something like 20 per cent, 
and as I say, we have a plan. We have tried to help farmers 
adjust — 6-year leaseback to help farmers. 
 
What we're seeing from the federal government is 60 per cent 
cuts, and probably greater than that by the time this budget 
clears. Hack and slash and burn with absolutely no vision or  

adjustment or help for Saskatchewan farm families. And that is 
the difference between our policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your total spending 
has not been cut. In fact 19 of your 27 departments have 
increased their spending, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the point that you are refusing to 
acknowledge in your answer is that you are equally responsible 
for the Liberal attack on agriculture because you invited it. You 
invited it by sending a clear signal to Ottawa that it's okay to rip 
up contracts, that it's okay to take away hundreds of millions of 
dollars in GRIP premiums. You set the precedent and the 
Liberals are following, and now you're trying to absolve 
yourself of the blame. 
 
Mr. Minister, according to Agriculture Canada and 
StatsCanada, total net farm income is expected to fall by 44 per 
cent this year, from 795 million down to $445 million. And that 
estimate, sir, was made before today's Liberal budget. How 
much further do you expect net farm income to fall this year as 
a result of the Liberal-NDP attack on agriculture; and how 
many more jobs would you expect will be lost in the 
agricultural sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we expect that 
Saskatchewan agriculture will do better because of our program 
in agriculture. We have a plan to revitalize rural Saskatchewan, 
and we continue to work on that in spite of the cuts we're going 
to get from the federal government, which we will hear later 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both opposition parties would like to go back to 
'91 GRIP. That is their stated agricultural policy. We don't 
believe that that was a smart program. We don't believe that was 
a proper way to spend taxpayers' money. It was not sustainable, 
it was not trade-neutral, and it was not market-neutral. And it 
was not going to help the province, as well witnessed. That 
program was in effect when we took office and thousands of 
farmers were losing their farms with that program in place. And 
I think we have taken the responsible approach with taxpayers' 
money and we are spending it smarter and we are still 
maintaining a strong base of support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I invite the opposition parties to look at the 
safety net that we've negotiated with the federal government 
and see whether or not that is going to be better than the other 
provinces are going to be able to negotiate after this budget 
comes down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
say you're spending smarter. You're spending more, we all 
know that. And you took $189 million out of farmers' pockets  



February 27, 1995 

 
447 

and you cut and you ran with it. That's precisely what happened. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, a story in today's paper speculates that 
$500,000 capital gains exemption for farmers could be cut in 
today's budget. Now I don't know whether it's true or not, but it 
wouldn't surprise me in the wake of the Liberal-NDP attack on 
agriculture. 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, many farmers have no retirement 
savings. All they have is their farm, and the capital gains 
exemption allows them to afford to retire when they sell their 
farm or pass it on to their children. And the thought of 
eliminating this exemption reminds me very much, sir, of your 
old inheritance tax — the death tax — that went after families 
who were trying to leave something for their children or for 
their spouses. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the capital gains exemption for farmers is 
reduced, can you give us a commitment? Will you guarantee 
that farmers will not have to pay any additional provincial taxes 
on capital gains? Could you make that commitment sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we do not yet know 
what is in the federal budget. I can assure the member opposite 
that both myself and the Minister of Finance have made 
submissions to the federal government on behalf of farmers in 
regards to the $500,000 capital gains exemption. I think the 
question should be more aimed at the Liberal Party than at us 
because we certainly have made submissions to defend our 
farmers. And whether or not those cuts are going to come in the 
budget, we do not know. 
 

Federal Taxes 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, our province stands 
to be hurt the most by any federal tax increases. That's because 
you have put us in the precarious position of already having the 
highest tax burden in Canada. 
 
For example, Saskatchewan people pay the highest provincial 
income tax in Canada as a percentage of the federal tax. And 
that is compared to Alberta, where we have 72 per cent and 
Alberta has 49 per cent. What this means, Madam Minister, is 
that any increase in federal income taxes, like reduction in the 
farm capital gains exemption, is going to hit Saskatchewan 
families harder than any other province. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you criticize federal tax increases 
when it is your government tax policies that puts Saskatchewan 
people in the position to be taxed the most? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what we've said consistently to the federal government  

is they have no mandate to increase taxes for two simple 
reasons. First of all, they were elected to eliminate the GST 
(goods and services tax) which led people to believe there 
would be a declining not an increasing tax regime. 
 
The other point that is probably more significant in light of the 
budget is that numerous provinces, various groups across 
Canada, have consistently said to the federal government, 
reform your tax system, overhaul the whole system. Don't send 
somebody like Mr. Peterson across Canada to ask a very narrow 
question: what would you like to happen to the GST? And 
come back with a very narrow answer: we'd like the old Tory 
GST, thank you very much. They needed to lay everything on 
the table, let everybody have their chance to have a shot at the 
tax system. Then they may have been in a position to say listen, 
we can show you all the loopholes are plugged. The system is 
fair. We have been absolutely consistent in our message to the 
federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Madam Minister, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, Saskatchewan people already pay the highest . . . 
second highest provincial gas tax — second only to 
Newfoundland — of 15 cents a litre for tax. In Alberta they 
only pay nine. And it sounds like the Liberals are going to 
increase the federal gas tax later today. This is just one more 
area where our province is at a competitive disadvantage with 
other provinces and it's going to get worse. An increase in gas 
tax is going to hurt every Saskatchewan family. 
 
In fact, Madam Minister, the average farmer, if that one and a 
half cents goes on, is going to increase the tax to farm families 
of $500 per farm. It would be nice if your provincial 
government could speak out against this tax increase, except 
that you have no credibility when you're talking about 
provincial taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, have you let the federal Liberals know what a 
negative effect an increase in gas tax will have on 
Saskatchewan's economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
members question. Yes, what we have said when this issue was 
raised is gas tax increase would be very detrimental to the 
average family, relative to other choices they have at their 
disposal, because it affects the average family. 
 
But I want to say this to the member opposite who's going on 
and on about taxes relative to Alberta. One thing about Alberta. 
When we took over, the debt per capita debt for the province of 
Alberta was $9,000 per person; the per capita debt for this 
province was $14,000 per person. 
 
It's absolutely hilarious the opposition talking about, well we 
wouldn't have balanced the books this way; we wouldn't have 
balanced the books that way. The key thing is we did balance  



February 27, 1995 

 
448 

the books of the province. We did it in a fair way; we did it with 
a plan involved and it's about time that they conceded that 
point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — One of the things that Madam Minister 
doesn't want to talk about is the advantage, the tax advantage, 
of investment in Alberta over Saskatchewan. I agree with your 
conditions and criticisms of the federal Liberals and of the 
Liberals in general, but the problem is though, Madam Minister, 
you condemn them for increasing taxes; you increased taxes. 
You condemned them for downloading; you download. You 
condemn them for attacking agriculture and you attack 
agriculture. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you really stand up for opposing . . . 
or representing Saskatchewan and opposing federal Liberals or 
Liberals in general, when the Liberals are attacking farmers and 
taxpayers the same way you did? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is very selective. Did we increase taxes? Yes. What about the 
Government of Alberta? Here is a Premier that's trotted all 
across Canada lecturing everybody about two things — 
balancing the books, which by the way he hasn't done; and not 
increasing taxes, which by the way he has done, although he 
doesn't quite call them taxes. 
 
If you look at the increase in health care premiums in the 
province of Alberta in the '90s, they are higher than the 
increases in the sales tax in this province. We in this province 
do not charge people to send their children to kindergarten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have balanced the books of the province. This 
is still, in terms of the basic cost of living — taxes, basic 
utilities — this is still the least expensive place for the average 
family to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people should be proud of the fact 
that they faced up to their situation. They balanced the books, 
but they've also sustained a high quality of life in this province. 
I'm proud of it. I know the people of this province are proud of 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Size of Government 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the New Democrats have made a tradition out of 
bashing the federal government. It is unlikely that the 
Saskatchewan Minister of Finance or the Premier will ever be in 
a position to defend or promote the actions of a federal New 
Democratic government. 
 
It's interesting to note their height of hypocrisy as well. It  

doesn't bother them at all to abuse the federal Liberals and then 
to sit in meetings with those very same individuals, Mr. 
Speaker, and pretend to be supportive, hoping for hand-outs. 
 
Federal New Democrats like Svend Robinson are on record and 
they believe that the solution to reducing the deficit is to 
increase the size of government and to hire more people on the 
government payroll. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, 
since the NDP in Saskatchewan seem to be following the same 
approach, do you support the belief that bigger government and 
more program spending in Ottawa is the key to deficit reduction 
and lower unemployment? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I would say this to the 
member opposite. I would say first of all, let's look at the basic 
facts. Since 1991 we have cut the cost of government and 
programs in this province by $275 million. If you take account 
of the fact that in that period of time we have also absorbed a 
quarter of a billion dollars in offloads from the federal 
government, that number would be greater. 
 
I keep saying to the member opposite: please, let's look at basic 
facts. The cost of providing the basic programs and services in 
the province of Saskatchewan is lower than the province of 
Alberta, lower than the Maritime region where all the Liberal 
governments are. And the number of civil servants per capita in 
this province is amongst the lowest in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we run a tight, lean ship and we are committed to 
ensuring that we improve our public services. But I will say this 
to the member opposite. We're not about to take a vampire-like 
approach to finances — each and every year, cut, even if there's 
nothing there but bone to cut; each and every year, cut, even if 
you have sustained a balance in the long term in this province. 
We believe in sustaining balanced budgets. We also believe in 
sustaining a high quality of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
most interesting that this Minister of Finance stands up and says 
that they've done a great job for the people of Saskatchewan. 
The great job is we should look at the number of tax increases 
versus the percentage of expenditure reductions. 
 
We should actually look at the 27 per cent increase in revenues 
overall and the 1 per cent that they did in terms of cutting 
spending, which is now erased with their most current budget. 
 
It will be interesting to note today what the ratio is of spending 
cuts to tax increases in the federal government. Mr. Speaker, the 
eyes of the world are watching today, just as we are, to see if 
the Government of Canada has the courage to make government 
smaller, to reduce the cost of programs rather than putting 
further burden on already burdened taxpayers. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, it's been said earlier, are the most  



February 27, 1995 

 
449 

beleaguered of all, Mr. Speaker, having suffered tax hike after 
tax hike after tax hike from this very NDP administration, 
which has vowed to keep on spending as much on government 
as they ever have and more than in the history of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Finance: your government, 
Madam Minister, is marching one way while the rest of the 
country is going in a different direction. Do you believe that the 
federal government should follow your lead of increased taxes 
and increased government spending? Just answer that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I'm prepared to answer 
a question, but only if the question is properly framed. What 
does the member opposite know that Wood Gundy doesn't 
know, which gives us praise in its recent review for holding 
government spending flat, having government spending under 
control. 
 
What I will say to the member opposite is I hope the federal 
government follows our example. That is, I hope they put in 
place a long-term plan with a vision of what Canada's going to 
look like when they're finished; that is, what social programs, 
what education programs are going to be in place. And I hope 
they approach their task with fairness, so that every region and 
every individual says, I have been treated fairly. 
 
Of course the federal government is going to reduce the cost of 
government because they are going to massively cut programs 
which is what we had to do in this province. But the member 
opposite has to come clean. The only way to significantly 
reduce the cost of government is to dramatically cut programs. 
And I say again, we're committed to sustainable balanced 
budgets; we're also committed to a sustainable high quality of 
life in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, it's very, very interesting how 
there's selective attention in this House all the time. I suggest 
the Minister of Finance read the latest Nesbitt Burns rather than 
quoting Wood Gundy. 
 
It is also interesting to recognize the height of hypocrisy, talking 
about the GST when this very Premier in this House talked 
about eliminating the PST (provincial sales tax) at midnight 
when he slammed his hand down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's deal with one concrete financial example — 
one concrete financial example. Analysts predict today that the 
federal budget may contain an increase in the cost of gasoline. 
Whether there is a federal increase or not, Mr. Speaker, 
residents of Regina this very day are paying 14 cents per litre 
more for gas than the people in Edmonton. They're paying 8.5 
cents per litre more than the individuals in downtown Toronto. 
 
Can the minister explain why Saskatchewan is at such a 
continual disadvantage in gasoline prices, and what her  

government is going to do about it? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to 
the member opposite is you can pick this little tax here . . . 
We're not the highest, by the way, in gas taxes. You can pick 
sales tax and then say, well look it, 9 per cent sales tax. 
Recently I was in Ontario; 7 per cent sales tax rate in Ontario. 
Do they pay more tax? Yes, they do, because their sales tax is 
on a broad range of commodities. 
 
If the member opposite wants to get onto records about 
taxation, I would remind her what she said when the federal 
government proposed to harmonize the GST with provincial 
sales taxes. She said she would be prepared to look at a tax on 
food and medicine. Mr. Speaker, everybody's got to live by their 
record. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, one of the things that 
she can be assured of: this government will never support 
taxing food and medicine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Justice Minister 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, on Friday 
you committed to investigate and report on the misleading and 
false report given to the independent prosecutor by your deputy 
Justice minister regarding the investigation into the former 
Justice minister. 
 
Can you report to this Assembly the results of your internal 
investigations and what remedial and disciplinary actions you 
have taken as a result? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I believe I can, Mr. Speaker. 
The information that was contained in the letter, as it turned 
out, was inaccurate. There had been a charge preferred in that 
case contrary to the information provided. I have asked the 
deputy minister for a written report on this matter. I expect to 
get it. 
 
I think it'll suffice to say for the moment that there was no 
intention to mislead either Mr. McIntyre or anyone else by the 
members of the department. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I guess 
maybe you want . . . you're calling that an honest mistake, and 
there seem to be a number of those occurring lately. 
 

Casino Decision Appeal 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, Crown prosecutors from your department 
announced on Friday that they are proceeding with the appeal 
on the court's decision to acquit the operators of an Indian-run 
casino on the White Bear Reserve. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
450 

Now I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, why they would proceed 
with prosecution given that your government has subsequently 
granted White Bear a licence to operate a casino on the reserve. 
It just doesn't make sense, but then again not much within your 
department recently does make sense. Can you explain the latest 
twist to this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I think . . . just to be 
accurate, I do not think they made an announcement last week 
about the launching of an appeal. I think that was done some 
time ago. I think, rather, the date when the Court of Appeal is 
going to hear the matter became public, and I think that's all that 
happened last Friday, was the date when the Court of Appeal is 
going to hear it became public. 
 
Suffice it to say that there is an important question of law 
involved in the view of the prosecutors. I also want to add, for 
the benefit of the members opposite, that this province — 
unlike some others — this province has a relatively long history 
of having independent prosecutors who make decisions on 
these matters independent of political considerations. It's been 
an important and useful fact of administration of justice in this 
province, and one we want to continue. But I don't want to 
comment endlessly on this matter, but suffice it to say that the 
prosecutors felt it was an important question of law here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, it 
would seem to me that there are a lot of questions to be 
answered here. There's no doubt about that. And it certainly, I 
think, it's very puzzling that we would have prosecutors now 
filing for an appeal after you have already agreed to working 
together with native bands in support of possible casinos on a 
number of reserves across this province. It would seem to me 
that . . . I'm sure only the O. J. Simpson trial could be more 
convoluted than the logic you've presented to us this afternoon. 
 
Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, why your department has decided 
to launch the appeal after you've begun to work with the native 
community in the building of casinos? And can you also tell us 
what the cost will be for this appeal trial. How much more will 
taxpayers have to shell out to prosecute your gambling 
partners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would point out for the benefit of 
the member opposite, as I did just a moment ago, the decision 
to appeal was made within a few days of the time the conviction 
was handed down, as it must be. Long before the agreement 
was entered into, the decision was made to appeal, as by law we 
must make a decision to appeal or not to appeal. That was done 
because there is an important question of law involved. 
 
Again I don't want to get into it extensively, but it's the issue of 
whether or not a mistake of law is a defence, whether or not a 
person must know the law. That will be appealed. And indeed, 
as I understand it, during the negotiations with the native people 
leading up to the agreement, it was made clear to them that they 
may expect to see the appeal to continue because of the 
question of law involved. 

So I don't think the aboriginal people are surprised at this. They 
were told during the negotiations that this appeal might well 
proceed in any event of the negotiations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Another question to the minister. Well I'm glad, 
Mr. Minister, that you agree with the fact that ignorance of the 
law is no excuse. However, Mr. Minister, the taxpayers are 
going to be footing another bill, and you've just been telling us 
that there was . . . under the agreement process you let the 
White Bear . . . the band realize that this appeal may still come 
forward. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, there should have been some discussions 
beforehand, before you sit down and negotiate a deal, when 
you've got a process of law facing you and the cost to taxpayers. 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, why in the world there would be 
such a convoluted twist to this problem that we're facing here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Let me try one more time. The judge, 
Judge Goliath, in acquitting the operators of the casino, did not 
pass upon the constitutionality of it. Whether or not there was a 
right to gamble on reserves — that transcended the provincial 
jurisdiction. None of those issues relating to gambling were part 
of the decision. 
 
What he said in his decision was they thought they had a right 
to establish a casino, and on that basis they weren't guilty. If 
that principle of law were allowed to stand, it would be difficult 
to convict a great many people. If ignorance of the law were a 
defence, a great many people would have a defence, and the 
administration of our justice system would be very, very 
different than it is now. This is an important principle of law 
which far transcends the issues of gambling. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 
of a Bill to establish the Agri-Food Innovation Fund. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a Speaker's 
statement to make in regards to a point of order raised. 
 
On February 23, 1995 the member for Regina Rosemont raised 
a point of order concerning the matter of private members' Bill 
No. 04, The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Amendment Act, 1995, 
and the possible pecuniary interest of those members of the 
Legislative Assembly who are also members of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 



February 27, 1995 

 
451 

Rule 37 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan states that: 
 
 No member is entitled to vote upon any question in 

which he has a direct pecuniary interest, and a vote of 
any Member so interested shall be disallowed. 

 
It is noteworthy that since this rule was adopted from the House 
of Commons standing orders in 1906, it has not been utilized in 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Instances when members have declared a personal interest and 
then voluntarily refrained from voting can be cited, but in no 
case has the vote of any member been questioned. 
 
For this reason it is important to address the point of order by 
outlining the purpose of the rule and the proper procedure by 
which the rule is invoked. 
 
At the outset, it is necessary to establish that rule 37 does not 
apply to a member's participation in the debate. The rule applies 
only to the vote of a member who had declared a pecuniary 
interest or had been found to have a pecuniary interest. 
 
It is demonstrated by the parliamentary authorities and by our 
own practise that when a member declares a personal or a 
pecuniary interest in a question before the Assembly, that 
member is not precluded from participating in debate or even 
from moving amendments. 
 
If members wish, they may refer to May's 21st edition on page 
359 and to a ruling in the Committee of the Whole of this 
Assembly on December 21, 1991. 
 
Whether or not a voluntary declaration of pecuniary interest is 
made, I can find no case of a member being prevented from 
voting at either the House of Commons in Ottawa or at 
Westminster. This is the case even when concern has been 
raised about a member's private interest. 
 
The time to question the entitlement of a member to vote is 
immediately after a recorded division. 
 
The practice in this regard is outlined in both the sixth edition 
of Beauchesne's at paragraph 316, and the 21st edition of 
Erskine May at page 357 where it is stated: 
 
 An objection to a vote on the ground of personal interest 

can only be raised on a substantive motion; (secondly) it 
cannot be brought forward as a point of order. (And 
thirdly) The motion must be made as soon as the 
division is completed and cannot be heard at a later 
stage. 

 
In such matters, I hasten to point out that the Speaker is not in a 
position to determine the pecuniary and personal interest of 
members. It is stated at paragraph 316(1) of Beauchesne's that 
such matters: 
 
  

 . . . must be decided by the House and not by the 
Speaker. 

 
Given that this Assembly has no experience with a vote being 
disallowed under rule 37, and because the same rule has 
remained in use at the House of Commons in Ottawa since 
1867, the usage of the House of Commons will be observed by 
this Assembly pursuant to rule 1 unless the Speaker is otherwise 
directed. 
 
Consequently, proceedings pursuant to rule 37 will be taken up 
by means of a substantive motion moved without notice after 
the vote, and not by a point of order. The debate on the motion 
to disallow a vote provides an opportunity for the member in 
question to explain his or her interest if indeed one exists. 
 
The debate will allow the Assembly to hear the views of any 
member and come to a decision accordingly. A member whose 
vote is questioned may speak in the debate but may not vote. 
 
Secondly, as stated at page 357 of Erskine May, the motion 
must be made as soon as the division in question has been 
decided. This is because the House must assume that any 
member with a personal interest will voluntarily abstain from 
voting. Rule 37 is meant as a mechanism to disqualify a vote 
from being cast, not to prevent a member from voting. 
 
In this regard, I do want to recommend, as it is recommended in 
Erskine May, that members should be guided by their own 
feelings in the matter of their personal interest and should vote 
or abstain as they see fit. 
 
For assistance, members may consult The Members' Conflict of 
Interest Act and the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
Members should also be aware that they run the risk of having 
their vote disallowed by the Assembly. 
 
For the reason cited, I must rule that the point of order by the 
member for Regina Rosemont cannot be accepted by the 
Speaker. Whether or not a member has a pecuniary interest in a 
proposal before the House must be decided by the Assembly 
itself and not by the Speaker. 
 
I thank the member for raising this subject and affording me an 
opportunity to make all members aware of the procedures 
attached to rule 37. 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: —Mr. Speaker, in accordance with this 
government's practice of being open and accountable, we are in 
a position to table answers to all of the written questions, 6 to 9. 
I point out to members as well that there is only one motion for 
debatable. All the others I think have been answered, keeping 
with our custom. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 6, 7, 8, and 9 — answers have been 
tabled. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
452 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to Amend The Crop Insurance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of An Act to Amend The Crop Insurance Act, 1995. 
 
Being presented to the House today are proposed changes to 
The Crop Insurance Act. Mr. Speaker, according to existing 
legislation, the Minister of Finance is responsible for allocating 
grants to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. The 
proposed amendments to the Act change the reference from 
Minister of Finance to minister, reflecting the authority under 
which funds are allocated to the crop insurance program. This 
authority would thus be under the direction of the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the existing administrative structure, an 
order in council is required for each transfer of allocated funds 
from Saskatchewan Ag and Food to the corporation. The 
proposed amendments would allow for the direct transfer of 
funds appropriated by the Legislative Assembly to the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation when the balance in 
the Crop Insurance fund is not sufficient to cover indemnity 
payments in a given year. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Act proposes a change in 
reference from Consolidated Fund to General Revenue Fund to 
make the wording of this section consistent with the wording 
used in The Financial Administration Act. 
 
A further amendment will resolve an inconsistency between the 
Act and the regulations. Currently the Act requires an insurable 
person who desires to obtain crop insurance to apply to the 
corporation in a form prescribed in the regulations. These 
regulations delegate the authority to prescribe the application to 
the corporation. However, Mr. Speaker, the delegation of this 
authority should be made under the Act. The amendment 
accomplishes that objective, eliminating the inconsistency. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, an amendment is proposed regarding 
the payment of funds from the Consolidated Fund to the 
Canada-Saskatchewan waterfowl crop damage compensation 
program fund. The Act currently required an order in council to 
transfer the necessary funds allocated by the Legislative 
Assembly to the waterfowl crop damage compensation 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this amendment, funds that have been 
appropriated by the Legislative Assembly for the waterfowl 
crop damage compensation program will be released to the 
corporation directly without requiring an order in council on an 
annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of this House to support the 
amendments to the Act and I move second reading of The Crop  

Insurance Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move to adjourn debate on An Act to amend 
The Crop Insurance Act. 
 
I understand from the minister's comments that the Act as it 
currently exists basically has the Minister of Finance in the Act 
and that's where . . . the only funding can come from an 
approval by the Minister of Finance. And if I understand the 
minister correctly, he is suggesting the Act now is going to be 
amended to just read minister, which gives the Minister of 
Agriculture, if I hear correctly, the ability to approach Executive 
Council for funding for the operation of the Crop Insurance 
Corporation. 
 
It seems to me that there are some questions here that will 
certainly need to be asked regarding The Crop Insurance Act as 
we get into second reading and certainly debate in the House in 
committee. 
 
The fact of the waterfowl funding released, I guess if this 
money is released directly and it would thereby then be able to 
. . . we're now able to put it in the hands of producers who are 
being affected by waterfowl damage, I would imagine that that 
would be an appropriate form for the waterfowl depredation 
program to be handled. There again we want to have some 
clarification as we get into further debate on this question, and 
then certainly into committee on the issue. 
 
So to allow for the further perusal of the Act and to look 
through it a little more carefully, I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Apiaries Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of The Apiaries Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food works closely 
with producers and industry organizations in preparation of any 
proposed changes to legislation that affects their industry. 
These proposed amendments demonstrate that characteristic. 
 
The Act currently requires authorization for the importation of 
bees into Saskatchewan on comb, brood combs, honeycombs, 
or any used bee-keeping equipment that has been used in any 
apiary outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
When the original Act was written, Mr. Speaker, packaged bees 
were not available from within Canada. This now causes us and 
the industry concern. Federal legislation prevents the 
importation of packaged bees from continental United States to 
prevent the importation of viral mites. The viral mite is  



February 27, 1995 

 
453 

established in other areas of Canada, while to date 
Saskatchewan is free of this serious pest. 
 
However Saskatchewan legislation currently does not prevent 
bee-keepers from importing packages from within Canada. The 
industry has understandably expressed concern with this 
situation and seeks amendments to the Act in the interests of 
prevention of infestation in Saskatchewan from the viral mite. 
 
To address those industries' concerns, this Bill presents an 
amendment to ensure that packaged bees may not be imported 
into the province without authorization. Also of concern to the 
industry is the practice of rob feeding where open containers of 
such things as sugar or syrup are used for feeding bees. This 
practice is of concern to the industry because of the potential to 
spread disease to foraging bees from other apiaries. 
 
The Act currently provides that no person who owns or 
possesses bees, honeycomb, brood comb, honey, or beeswax 
capable of harbouring a disease or any other bee-keeping 
equipment shall allow it, through exposure on their premises or 
elsewhere, to serve as an attractant to bees that might be 
foraging in the area. 
 
These provisions are not clear in the practice of rob feeding. 
The Saskatchewan Beekeepers Association passed a resolution 
requesting the prohibition of the practice of rob feeding. The 
proposed amendment will strengthen the Act in this regard. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, it is proposed that the maximum fine for 
violations under the Act be raised from $500 to $5,000. The 
implications that bee importations alone could have for the 
whole industry warrant this increase in maximum fines for 
violators. 
 
These proposed amendments are based on close contact with 
the industry and an understanding of their concerns and desire 
for amendments to the Act. I ask the members of the Assembly 
to support these amendments and I therefore move second 
reading of Bill No. 7 — The Apiaries Act. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It almost appeared for 
the moment that we had a few bees giving a few problems to 
the minister over there a while ago. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, regarding The Apiaries Act, this question and 
concern that was raised by the minister has been something 
that's been on the minds of bee-keepers across this province for 
a number of years. Certainly it's been an issue that's been raised 
in my area. 
 
And the fact that the control of the importation of bees from the 
States to make sure that there was control on the mite and the 
spread of this mite into the bee populations of the province, it 
was necessary to bring in legislation to maintain control and to 
police the importation of bees. 
 

As I hear the minister saying, the problem is not just a problem 
in the States but is a problem in parts of Canada now. And if I 
gather correctly, this Bill is going to address the importation of 
bees into the province of Saskatchewan from any area, even 
within Canada. 
 
I suppose at the end of the day for the bee-keepers out in rural 
. . . or across Saskatchewan, the individuals who make their 
living from bees, the . . . what we need, and I hope the 
department and the minister is aware of this, that we do have a 
program in this province whereby there will be enough bees or 
breeding stock available within the province to meet the needs 
of the producers who would desire bees. 
 
It seems to me that if we're going to put restrictions or 
limitations or close our borders, that we'd better have a supply 
in place. So I trust that the minister and his officials have 
indeed looked into that. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, the opposition would like more time and 
wish to take a little bit more time to review the legislation that 
we have in front of us so that indeed we can question the 
minister and bring some of the other questions that may come 
forward from the bee-keepers across this province, so that at the 
end of the day the Act indeed meets the needs of the industry 
and provides for those needs. And therefore at this time I move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting Private Vocational Schools 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I'm pleased to rise today to outline the purpose of the new 
Private Vocational Schools Regulation Act which completely 
replaces the existing statute. 
 
The private vocational schools review panel's report of March 
1993 contained 38 recommendations. The proposed Act 
provides the legislative framework for translating the 
recommendations into practice. The proposed legislative and 
regulatory changes will support improved student protection, 
greater emphasis on program quality, and greater industry 
involvement in the development and administration of schools. 
 
The Act will also establish a training completion fund and 
training completion plans to improve student protection. The 
fund will be insurance for our students that they will be able to 
complete their training if a private school closes. Every school 
will develop a training completion plan as part of their annual 
registration. The plans will help ensure a minimal disruption for 
students, should their school close. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, a program approval and review 
committee will be established to develop an appropriate set of 
standards for assessing program quality. The committee will be 
required to approve new programs and review all programs at 
least once every few years. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
454 

The proposed legislation also provides for a school's program to 
be placed on probation and new enrolment suspended until 
approval is reinstated. The changes incorporated in the new Act 
will encourage greater involvement and accountability by 
private vocational schools, the provincial private vocational 
schools association, teachers, and students. All of these groups 
will be part of committees that will oversee the training fund, 
approve and review programs, and deal with ethics and 
complaints. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I introduce this new legislation because there is 
increasing concern with the degree of financial protection and 
quality of education provided for students who attend private 
vocational schools. This situation, Mr. Speaker, is unfortunate 
because it does, in the past, adversely affect students, and 
unfairly tarnish the reputations of good quality private 
vocational schools. 
 
In the past few years, some schools have closed, causing 
disruption to students' studies. My department and our 
government and representatives of the private vocational school 
industry have worked with students and good quality schools to 
minimize this disruption. But I continue to be concerned with 
the level of protection and quality of education offered these 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, others in the public share my concern. Owners of 
successful private vocational schools that offer high quality 
education are concerned with the ramifications of school 
closures and student dissatisfaction. They do in fact consider 
improvements important to the continuation of the private 
vocational school industry. And the private vocational school 
review recommendations clearly identified the need for 
improvements. 
 
We've consulted with the Chair of the Private Vocational 
Schools Review Committee, as well as with ministries of 
education in other provinces, to find out how they deal with 
regulation of private vocational schools. We have found, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan, with this new piece of legislation, 
will once again lead the way in this country when it comes to 
the regulation and control of private vocational schools. When 
these proposals are implemented by regulation, our students 
will receive high quality education and the best consumer 
protection available anywhere in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will appreciate that the proposed 
changes will facilitate the effective administration of a statute 
which governs an important element in the education and 
training that is available to Saskatchewan residents. This 
updating of the legislation, in response to the review chaired by 
Ailsa Watkinson, is a way for us to afford better consumer 
protection and remedies. It will also help to build public 
confidence in private vocational schools. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 10 
— The Private Vocational Schools Regulation Act, 1995 be 
now read a second time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments before moving adjournment of debate on 
the Act here respecting private vocational schools. 
 
As the minister has outlined, private vocational schools have 
certainly created a problem for many people across this 
province for the past number of years. 
 
And I'm sure that many government members, as well as my 
colleagues, have had individuals come to their office with some 
of the problems they've faced, problems that have arisen where 
they have entered a course and part way through the course — 
maybe a third or a half-way through or a little more — they find 
out that all of a sudden the operator pulls the pin on the course 
and they're left out in the cold. 
 
All of a sudden they don't have any recognition for the course 
studies that they've entered into. They don't have the certificate 
that they were hoping to have at the end of the day which . . . 
plus the funding that they've put into that course has now 
disappeared and they're in the hole. 
 
So as I was listening to the minister, it's something that needs to 
be addressed. I notice as well — and we're quite aware of it — 
the fact that there are some good vocational schools operating 
across this province; in fact many good schools that give sound, 
basic, fundamental vocational training. And unfortunately when 
one or two operators shut their program down and bring ill 
repute, I guess, to this industry, the rest of the schools are 
affected by it. The students then begin to wonder, well should I 
enter a vocational program? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that in the changing times we're 
living in, we may find that vocational opportunities and 
vocational schools will be providing more of the fundamental 
education a lot of the young people will be needing in our 
society, rather than everybody being channelled through a 
university program. 
 
And I think it's important that we address this, and I certainly 
commend the minister for having taken the time to sit down and 
discuss this problem — as I indicated earlier, we've all run into 
similar circumstances — so that at the end of the day we do 
have a piece of legislation that sets some guidelines whereby 
vocational schools know what they can operate within, whereby 
students have a knowledge of the fact that when they enter a 
program they're going to be able to complete that program, and 
that the education they receive through that program will lead 
them to a solid and sound job opportunity or job opportunities 
and hopefully within our province — not just outside, but 
within the province. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that there are 
other questions we will raise, and just to converse with the 
minister at a later date, I would move we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



February 27, 1995 

 
455 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed, can I ask the minister to 
please introduce the officials who have joined us here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the officials with me 
are Dan Perrins, deputy minister, on my immediate right. 
Immediately behind me is Mae Boa, the executive director of 
finance and operations. To Ms. Boa's right is Lily Stonehouse, 
assistant deputy minister of Education, Training and 
Employment. To my left is Ernie Cychmistruk, executive 
director educational services branch. And as well with us is 
Brady Salloum, director of student financial assistance; Michael 
Littlewood, director of third party funding and legislative 
services; and Paul Fudge, executive director of operations 
SCN(Saskatchewan Communications Network). 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to 
welcome you here today, Madam Minister, and say welcome to 
your officials also. 
 
Well as we know, education is a very important piece of 
Saskatchewan's fabric, and we have to, in estimates today, find 
out what the government is planning on doing to further that 
fabric and keep it knit in one whole piece. 
 
And that seems to be a great deal of difficulty today in the 
province. I get complaints from across the province of problems 
within the school system, mostly within the K to 12, but also, 
Madam Minister, within post-secondary education. In fact, on 
the Speech from the Throne day I believe it was — or perhaps it 
was budget — I had a presentation given to me by students 
from the University of Saskatchewan who had concerns about 
the direction that funding for education was going in this 
province. 
 
And, Madam Minister, we'll be getting into that in a bit. Madam 
Minister, in the past couple of years, we have sent over to you a 
set of generic questions. And they range from people working 
in your office, the budgets for such, for travel and all of the 
other sundry costs, purchases within the department. 
 
(1445) 
 
Madam Minister, can you give us an assurance that you will 
supply us the answers for that before these estimates are 
completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can give you assurances that the 
packages are currently being developed for the fiscal year '94-
95, and we'll make sure that you get those estimates. I can't 
assure you that they'll be given to you before these estimates  

are dealt with, but I can assure you that you will get them. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. If we 
don't get them while these estimates are on, that raises a bit of a 
problem for us because then we don't have the opportunity to 
review those and then return with more questions in relation to 
that if something is unclear. 
 
Perhaps what we would have to do in that case then is either ask 
the questions on the floor here, go over them one by one by one 
as we go through this today, tomorrow, and the next day, or 
whenever that might be, unless you can give us an assurance 
that we will get them during the estimate process so that we can 
come back and ask you questions on them. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think in the past we have not come up 
for estimates this early in the legislative session. What I can 
assure you, member, is that I will make sure that you get them. I 
just can't assure you you can get them between now and 
whenever we end estimates for the Department of Education, 
Training and Employment. 
 
But I know that it's been very helpful in terms of the process 
that the opposition goes through. It's also helpful for 
government. And I think it's been an effective way of providing 
information. I'll try my best. 
 
But I think nowadays politicians want to be able to keep their 
word. And I just can't assure you that I can do what you want 
me to do. I can assure you, however, that I will get them for 
you, but I just can't tell you when. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I look 
forward to them. But I don't look forward to this, but I'll have to 
stay on my feet asking questions until we get the answers. 
 
Madam Minister, I'd like to start off though with a couple of 
questions that I hope that you can answer today, and that would 
be dealing with your own travel. Where have you travelled in 
the last budgetary year, Madam Minister, and what plans do you 
have for the future that would be affected by this budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Do you want precisely each day and 
where I went . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I'll get that 
for you. 
 
Apparently they don't have that information. I can tell you that 
in terms of out-of-province travel I have been to Calgary this 
summer to meet with the western ministers. It was a one-day 
trip. 
 
I was to two or three ministers of Education meetings. The cost 
of that travel was paid by the council of ministers for Canada. 
 
I also made a trip to Geneva on behalf of the federal 
Government of Canada, paid for by the federal government. 
 
Another trip to Spain, where I represented the ministers of 
Education; also paid for by the federal government. 



February 27, 1995 

 
456 

All of the other travel has been inside the province but we will 
get you that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if for those travel outside the province, if you could inform us 
who travelled with you on those trips? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm going from memory. The trip to 
Calgary to meet with the western ministers, I was accompanied 
by the associate deputy minister, Ken Horsman. The trip to 
Spain, there was no one from the province that accompanied 
me. 
 
In terms of the council of ministers, when they have their 
conferences, I'm usually accompanied by the deputy minister, 
the assistant deputy minister, the associate deputy minister; and 
I think on one occasion, I was accompanied by a ministerial 
assistant. But once again, I will get you that precise 
information. In terms of the trip to Geneva, the deputy minister 
of Education, Training and Employment accompanied me, and 
his expenses were covered by the Government of Canada. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I look 
forward to those responses. I wonder if you could please give 
me the information as to who is presently employed in your 
office here, your ministerial staff here, and their employment, 
when they started? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can tell you that the only new changes 
in my office are Anna McCashin. She's the intermediate 
secretary, and I believe she started today. All other people, 
when we had our last year's estimates, I think I gave you that 
information. There have been no changes in my office with the 
exception of Anna McCashin who started as the intermediate 
secretary this morning. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well I guess this morning, Madam 
Minister, is fairly current. Madam Minister, are there anyone 
within your staff that . . . within your office that are related to 
anyone in this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, my ministerial assistant, the senior 
ministerial assistant, is Janet Mitchell. Janet is the daughter of 
Bob Mitchell. Janet Mitchell . . . that's a well-known fact; that's 
not news to people. She's a highly skilled individual and I think 
most people who deal with her would bear out that observation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The 
people working within your ministerial office. What have been 
the changes in pay scales that have occurred there since 1991? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't have all of that detail since 
1991, but what I can tell you is that all of the people in my 
office are at the bottom of the range — all of them. None of 
them are above the bottom of the range for their various 
positions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder  

if you could please give us the numbers for that range then. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the junior ministerial assistant, the 
range is $3,018; the maximum is $3,563. For the senior 
ministerial secretary, the range is 3,092 to 3,762. The senior 
ministerial assistant, 4,406; maximum 5,171. The junior 
secretary is 2,225, that's the minimum; maximum, 2,579. The 
intermediate ministerial assistant, the bottom is 3,454; 
maximum 4,216. And the intermediate secretary is 2,892; and 
the maximum is 3,381. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Could you please send that over to us, that you read from it. 
Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, when you promote someone within your staff, 
does a salary change normally take place at the time of 
promotion, or does it take place at some other time? 
 
The Chair: — Can we have some understanding that when 
documents are sent across to one opposition party that copies 
also be provided for the other party so that we don't duplicate 
the requests? Is that agreed? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If a person . . . it's not unlike the civil 
service. If you get a promotion you go to the bottom of the 
range and you start at the bottom of the range. So I don't think 
you're going to find anything untoward in terms of what 
happens in my office. You can try your best, but I can assure 
you you won't. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you for that assurance, Madam 
Minister. I have a thing here that says the lady in question, Janet 
Mitchell, became a senior MA (ministerial assistant), dated 
December 1, 1993. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't know. I believe that that's 
probably true, that that's the date, but we don't have that 
information here. You're going back into a year that I don't have 
the information here. We'll get that for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I also 
have a notification of change in monthly rates and fees, 
ministerial assistants, for the same person, that says, calculated 
as and from October 1, 1994, and the salary range. So I'm just 
wondering, when did she get the salary increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We'll have to get you that information; 
we don't have that here. That isn't something we have available 
for you at this moment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome, and welcome to your officials. 
 
A few questions I'd like to bring up, Madam Minister. And 
basically it's going back to a symposium that was held last fall, 
November 17 to 18. It was entitled: working together towards 
sexual and reproductive health in Saskatchewan: an opportunity 
to explore relevant issues regarding sexuality and sexuality  



February 27, 1995 

 
457 

education. And this was held November 17 to 18, 1994 in 
Saskatoon at the Ramada Renaissance Hotel. And I'd like to 
quote the symposium agenda: 
 
 The goals of the symposium are to encourage positive, 

healthy attitudes to sexuality and promote the delivery 
of comprehensive sexual health education and services 
to youth. 

 
And out of this symposium a number of questions have arisen. 
First of all, Madam Minister, as the Minister of Education, did 
you attend this symposium? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, I didn't. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Did any of your department representatives attend 
this symposium? If so, how many and from what divisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The deputy minister was there for part 
of the symposium and we believe we had two curriculum 
people there. But we can get you the precise numbers from the 
department that attended this symposium. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
view of . . . I'm sure you were made aware of this symposium 
and the fact that the symposium was on at the time. And it 
seems to me that must have almost been running in conjunction 
with the NDP convention. It was fairly close to the weekend 
there. 
 
But as you see it, and whether it was brought to your attention, 
what did you understand was the purpose of this symposium or 
was there any involvement on your part or inquiries regarding 
the symposium and the reasoning for the symposium? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the symposium was put on by the 
Minister of Health's Family Planning Advisory Committee and 
the purpose behind this symposium was to look at various 
methods for reducing teen pregnancy in the province, because I 
believe our province has the highest teen pregnancy rate of any 
province or territory in the country. If not the highest, the 
second highest. 
 
As well, there was a study that was done by Queen's University 
that shows that our grade 11 students are the most sexually 
active students in Canada. And as you probably know, we now 
have sexually transmitted viruses that kill people. 
 
And so what we have to do as responsible citizens in this 
province, not only ministers of Education and ministers of 
Health but also parents and members of the opposition, is to 
make sure our young people have all of the information 
available to them so that they can protect themselves against the 
deadly viruses that now are killing young people, not only in 
Canada but across the globe. 
 
And so it is interesting that you raise this question. And I know 
where you're coming from, but let me tell you where I'm  

coming from. And I am obligated as an elected member of the 
public to do everything in my power to make sure that our 
young people are kept safe from deadly viruses. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, after listening to your 
answer to that very simple question, I can see that it's a subject, 
from the letters I've received in my office that have probably 
crossed your desk, that I haven't made you very happy. 
 
I have some straightforward questions here that I'm looking for 
some answers and would like to receive. And we're not really 
getting into a large political debate. We may get into that later 
on, once we get into the meat of the subject. 
 
But you've mentioned that you didn't attend and you're giving 
your reasons why you feel it was important that the symposium 
was held. It was . . . I think you indicated that the Department 
of Health had actually promoted it or it was brought forward on 
that basis. But it also was brought forward with the idea that it's 
an educational process as well. 
 
And I'm wondering if you received a written report from 
department representatives attending the symposium and did 
any of your representatives have anything to say or what did 
they have to say regarding the symposium? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The main role that the department 
played at this symposium was to provide information on what 
the current K to 12 curriculum is regarding this whole area of 
family life education. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I'm wondering if department officials felt that 
there was a lot to have been gained by attending the 
symposium, that it seems to me that this was . . . as I reviewed 
the agenda, there must have been a lot of information made 
available, and I'm sure that the department officials that 
attended would have put an evaluation on the type of 
information. 
 
And did they feel that this was a worthwhile symposium, that 
there were some positive ideas to be gleaned from the different 
topics that were raised at the symposium? And if so, what type 
of report did you receive from your department in that regard, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it, the symposium was 
evaluated by the vast majority of people who attended, and we 
can share those evaluation results with you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, how many teachers would have attended this 
symposium? Would the department have that information? 
How many? At what cost? From which areas of the province? 
From public or separate school systems? Was this a wide-open 
invitation? Was . . . maybe we should be . . . since the Minister 
of Health is sitting here, maybe he can answer some of these  



February 27, 1995 

 
458 

questions for us. 
 
Well it appears to me from the finger-pointing that is coming 
that some of these questions probably should be going to the 
department. At the same time, the concerns that are being raised 
with us is the fact that some of the information that was brought 
forward at the symposium may become part of a curriculum 
down the road in our educational system. And certainly teachers 
are going to be the individuals that are going to have to put 
forward this information. 
 
And maybe you could make a commitment to us to at least get 
us some information as to who attended and whether teachers 
. . . what the broad base was of people who attended that 
symposium. And maybe as well where the cost came from to 
support the symposium. Was it the administration, or was it the 
individual administration, or was it something done on a broad 
basis through a department or whatever? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, our department wasn't 
involved in this symposium. The Family Planning Advisory 
Committee did the arrangements. I understand that this was an 
entirely self-supporting conference; the registration paid for the 
cost of the conference. 
 
In terms of your question about whether or not the information 
garnered from the conference will become part of the K to 12 
curriculum, we don't develop curriculum based on conferences 
or symposiums. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're telling me, Madam Minister, then 
is that . . . My next question was, are any of the materials 
distributed or presentations given at the symposium going to be 
adopted by the school system in our province? If so, which and 
why? 
 
Now you're telling me that you don't adopt them. But somebody 
in the department must be bringing forward recommendations 
that had been . . . it doesn't really come to this House as far as 
school curriculums down the road, and I'm wondering if maybe 
you could just inform us whether or not some of the material 
that was gleaned, or any information that might have been 
brought forward, whether that has a potential of becoming part 
of the educational format in the future. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me say this, that the department has 
curriculum available for school divisions in this subject area. 
What you're really talking about is sex education. 
 
It is up to the local school board, in consultation with parents, 
to determine whether or not they're going to teach the 
department's curriculum. And as you know, there are groups 
that are in schools teaching a viewpoint on this — on sex 
education — that have not received the department's approval 
in terms of curriculum development. But nevertheless they're 
there because the local school division determines what is or is 
not taught, based on local standards and mores. 
 
And what I will tell you is this: that we are presently renewing  

our high school curriculum — grade 10, 11, and 12 — that 
there is not a possibility that we will have compulsory sex 
education for grade 10, 11, and 12 in this province because of 
this problem: we already have a credit crunch for our high 
school students. 
 
There are many pressures on high school students to have a 
whole myriad of subject areas if they're going to go on to post-
secondary education. And it would be impossible, at this stage 
of the game, to change our curriculum. We've already said what 
our curriculum will be for our high schools. That's clearly . . . 
we've enunciated what it is; we did so last May or April I 
believe, and so that's already been determined. 
 
In terms of what sex education is taught in Saskatchewan 
schools, it is up to local school divisions to determine whether 
or not they want to follow the provincially sanctioned 
department curriculum or whether or not they want to vary that 
curriculum to adapt to local customs and mores. And there are 
many communities in this province that have groups into their 
school teaching sex education that are acceptable to the local 
standard of the community. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
you bring an interesting discussion into the discussion we're 
having this afternoon, or the topic we're discussing this 
afternoon. And the fact is that you've indicated it's the local 
boards. Now first of all, might I ask: are we talking unit boards 
or the local individual boards? 
 
Because what I'm hearing from a lot of people is that a lot of 
people, certainly in our area, in other parts of the province, and 
a lady which I had a chance to chat with the other day, are 
saying they really don't have any say whatsoever any more. And 
some of even the local boards feel that their reason for 
existence basically is not there any more. They feel that even if 
they bring things forward, the unit board makes decisions 
contrary to what they feel that they would like to see in their 
local board. 
 
Now as you've explained it, if indeed parents have the ability to 
inquire to their boards as to what there will be in the sex 
education program, where it's going to be taught, whether in the 
health curriculum or whether part of it is in English curriculum 
or part of it may come in the history curriculum, as we've been 
informed, it seems to me that there are many parents out there 
who do not feel that they really have the input. 
 
I can say in our area we've been quite fortunate. We do have a 
school board and we do have . . . at least the school that our 
children attend, where the educators are quite straightforward. 
They send home a note informing us as to what they will be 
teaching in the health program, and especially the sex education 
part of their program, with a little box for the parent to check 
off whether or not they want their child to receive that portion 
of the program. 
 
And we have that privilege. A lot of other communities would 
like to have it. Unfortunately it doesn't appear that seems to be  



February 27, 1995 

 
459 

as consistent, although what you were saying earlier . . . it 
would seem to me that what you're telling us: it's your 
understanding this is what it is, but apparently in a lot of 
schools they don't really understand it or don't have the 
opportunity to have the same input as you're telling we had. 
 
What I'm wondering is, what does the department do? Does the 
department have a policy whereby they reflect what they feel 
should be done and how the course structure is held, and the 
fact that parents are certainly kept informed, whether it's 
through the local board or the unit board or indeed through the 
teachers? I wonder if you could just enlighten us on that, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do not have compulsory sex 
education in the K to 12 system in the province. There are many 
people obviously that hold the view that we should have 
compulsory sex education. There are other people who hold the 
opposite view. So what we have done is leave it up to the local 
division board to determine whether or not they want to follow 
the provincial curriculum when it comes to sex education or 
whether they want to vary the curriculum to deal with local 
customs and mores. And that is why there are various parts of 
the province where certain groups have access to the school and 
teach a particular philosophy when it comes to sex education, 
because that's what the local people have determined they want 
taught. 
 
Now that's not to say that people with that same philosophy are 
not in a minority position in some other school division and the 
school division is going to other, enhanced sex education 
programs within the curriculum. It is up to the school division 
to determine whether they want to follow the provincial 
curriculum or vary the curriculum. 
 
And in many parts of the province they're varying the 
curriculum, and they have Teen-Aid, for instance, in teaching 
the curriculum. In other parts of the province, they have another 
group in with a different perspective, teaching the curriculum. 
But that is entirely a division board decision. We do not have 
compulsory sex education in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, you just said you don't have 
compulsory, but do you have a provincially sanctioned 
curriculum dealing with the sex education in our schools? And 
I'm wondering if you could make that available to us, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do have a provincially sanctioned 
components that deal with the whole issue of sex education. We 
don't have a subject called sex education. What we do is have 
subjects called health or wellness or family life. 
 
I should tell you that the government, not unlike when your 
party was in office, we don't do curriculum development. The 
way we develop curriculum in this province has a history 
behind it, where we have representatives of the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association, representatives of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, representatives of the 
League of Educational Administrators, Directors and  

Superintendents, along with the colleges of education. And they 
serve as advisory committees to the curriculum development 
people. 
 
So this is not something that's cooked up in the minister's 
office. There is a long, proud history in this province for 
curriculum development. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, a 
number of other questions that were directed at me, and for 
sake of not presenting the question as the inquiries may have 
come in, I'd like to raise a few questions with you. 
 
First of all, we've been receiving a great number of letters from 
parents concerned both about the symposium and the concept of 
mandatory sex education in our schools. And a lot of parents 
are seeing the symposium as a stepping-stone for mandatory sex 
education. 
 
A recent call received in our office from a parent opposed to 
mandatory sex education. And she stated that a Lily in your 
office confirmed that sex education will be a mandatory course 
as of September 1995. Is this accurate and does your 
government have a policy regarding sex education in schools? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There's no Lily working in my office, 
so I'm not sure who this is. There is a Lily Stonehouse, who is 
the assistant deputy minister on the post-secondary side and she 
does not deal with K to 12 matters, so I'm not sure who your 
person talked to. There will be no mandatory sex education 
come September of 1995. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Now, Madam Minister, all we have is a name, 
and I'm not exactly sure where. And for a lot of people out 
across Saskatchewan, whether it's in your office, when they call 
the government office, the Department of Education, they're 
thinking they're talking to the minister's office. So you can 
appreciate that. 
 
I understand as well, another question, that the Regina public 
school system has adopted a sex education program. And I'm 
wondering, Madam Minister, if you could let us know if you 
have information regarding the Regina public school sex 
education program. Would that program be available, and do 
you know if it's directed to the whole K to 12 or just to certain 
groups within the school? Is it possible to get that information, 
please? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, I don't think it's a 
compulsory subject because it has to comply with the credit 
allocations that are determined by the Department of Education, 
Training and Employment. 
 
What the Regina School Division Board has done is locally 
determined by them. It's not something that the department 
would be involved in, and it's not something that I would be 
involved in. And no Minister of Education would be involved  



February 27, 1995 

 
460 

in that. We have locally determined options, and they have the 
ability to have sex education as part of their curriculum. But 
we're not aware that there is a subject in the Regina public 
school system called sex education. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying . . . basically the 
department really isn't involved in the sex education program, 
that the Regina public school system may be introducing or may 
be making a part of or maybe they've already got it a part of 
their curriculum. So it's not something that would just . . . 
because it may be taking place here, then it's going to 
automatically fall into other areas of the province. 
 
Madam Minister, if I understand correctly, there is an opting-
out opportunity for parents regarding the sex education 
programs. I understand that parents can take their children out 
of any class or course that they do not want their children to 
take. Can you explain the opting-out process to me, keeping in 
mind you mentioned something about curriculum and credits. 
 
Now I guess the other thing, on the other hand, would parents 
feel that even though they may not like the course that is being 
particularly taught in their school, the fact if there's a credit 
attributed to that class they'd be forced to leave their children in 
that class. And I'm wondering if you could just explain the 
process. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When I referred to credits I'm talking 
about high school: grade 10, 11, and 12. We do not have a 
course in Saskatchewan called sex education. 
 
Now in elementary school there are provisions for division 
boards to determine that they want to teach family life or family 
planning or sex ed as part of a unit in a particular course. And 
parents have the right to take a look at what's going to be taught 
when it comes to sex education. And if they so wish — I'm 
advised by the officials — they have the right to remove their 
child for that particular unit, and the child could be given a 
course or some information that would be appropriate from that 
parent's point of view. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, just coming personally, do you 
think that taking children out of the course is the right thing to 
do? And you did mention that there is a possibility of alternate 
courses, and I'm not sure how widespread this is. Do you 
believe that an alternate course should be offered so that the 
child doesn't feel singled out, for example, especially the sex 
education program? And perhaps parents believe abstinence is 
the best method to teach their children. What happens in this 
instance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think one of the things that you 
should know is that abstinence is taught, and it is part of the 
curriculum that is sanctioned by the province's Department of 
Education, Training and Employment. And I realize that if 
parents decide that they don't want their children to partake in 
the curriculum, i.e., sex education, that it can create some 
difficulties for that young person having to leave to go 
elsewhere. 

But there are other children in the province, particularly those 
children who may be not of a particular religious viewpoint, 
and when religion is being taught, they may go elsewhere. We 
have those kinds of incidents or occasions in the province 
where children go elsewhere because of what's being taught in 
the classroom. And it's not only sex education but it also can be 
in terms of religion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, in regards to abstinence, 
you mention that it is part of the curriculum. I guess one of the 
complaints I hear from parents more than anything is that the 
education system may argue that the abstinence portion 
regarding sex education is there. Unfortunately it's a very . . . 
almost glossed over; that a lot of teachers really don't spend a 
lot of time on. 
 
I remember just before Christmas a couple magazines actually 
did a survey. And it was interesting to note how many teens 
they had surveyed and talked about. And abstinence happened 
to be one of the priorities in their views as far as the wholesome 
nature of the sex education and sex in their lives. And I think 
that's what a lot of parents feel. And some students were even 
led to believe that it isn't appropriate for them to even discuss 
the abstinence model if that's the model they choose. 
 
And I think the feeling that people run into is intimidation 
because we have such a push, as you indicated earlier, because 
of the potential of the spread of certain diseases, that it's 
important that we basically push a certain sex education 
program upon people. And I think people want . . . parents want 
the fact known that they really do have an alternative, that there 
is an alternative out there. And as well, Madam Minister, they 
want to feel that they have a say. 
 
And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, do parents, if they really 
feel and wish to really promote the idea, do they have the ability 
to keep mandatory sex education out of their schools? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all we have a family life 
education component to the health curriculum. And I'm advised 
that it's much more than sex education — much more than sex 
education. That it talks about the notion of self-respect; it talks 
about the notion of responsibility; responsible relationships. It 
talks about how to be assertive so that you can have self-
respect. It talks about personal standards and value and morals. 
It talks about family violence and alcohol and drugs. It talks 
about divorce as part of this whole unit on family life 
education. And it talks about other things, like pregnancy and 
sexually transmitted diseases. 
 
One of the things that troubles me is that we have young 
people, particularly young girls, that somehow can make it 
through grade 7, 8 with their self-concept and self-image intact, 
and something happens when they get to high school. And I've 
seen this so many times, because I used to work with young 
women who found themselves in a position of an unplanned 
pregnancy. And kids go through . . . something happens to 
young people, particularly young girls, when they hit high 
school, in terms of not feeling good about themselves — in  



February 27, 1995 

 
461 

terms of all these things. 
 
Now I don't mean to generalize, but self-image, self-concept, 
respect for one's self — something happens. And so what we 
have to do is not only work on the notion of responsibility and 
abstinence and self-respect, assertiveness — all of those values 
that are important for young people to have — but we also have 
to be very precise about what happens to people at a particular 
age when they've come from that kind of value base and all of a 
sudden they find themselves feeling not very good about 
themselves. 
 
And I think there's a variety of reasons for that. Some people 
have suggested we need to go back to the days of all-girl 
schools so we could promote the notion of leadership amongst 
young women. 
 
And I'm not suggesting that this is a girls' problem only, but the 
whole notion of unplanned pregnancy tends to show up with 
girls. It does in fact show up with girls. And we have the 
problem that is associated with that — children having children. 
And it's worrisome and very troublesome that Saskatchewan has 
the highest teen pregnancy rate in the country. And I think that 
we have . . . second highest teen pregnancy rate in the country. I 
guess we've come a little ways since last year. 
 
But it's troublesome and it's worrisome and I think we need to 
really take a look at that. Because there are many implications 
— implications in terms of putting infant child care centres in 
high schools, and that doesn't come without a cost; implications 
in terms of providing support services for teen mothers and 
fathers; implications in terms of providing added support 
services. And we know that the education of a mother is one of 
the key determining factors of what happens to her children. 
And I think that one particular perspective is not going to solve 
this problem of unplanned pregnancies and sexually transmitted 
diseases. 
 
And I accept your premiss that abstinence is something that 
needs to be taught in our schools, but we also have to realize 
that there are young people who are sexually active. And the 
report showed Saskatchewan has the highest numbers of young 
people sexually active at the age of grade 11, and we have to 
determine how we can keep people safe from sexually 
transmitted diseases and unplanned pregnancies. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Madam Minister, for your 
comments, and I would certainly concur with the fact that there 
are a number of values that we have — and certainly society has 
in general — a number of values that need to be instilled. And 
the fact that people feeling good about themselves, be they male 
or female, it doesn't really matter because boys have problems 
really asserting themselves and really feeling good about 
themselves as well. 
 
But I think at times what we have and what we face in our 
society, especially when we come to the whole discussion and 
debate on sex education, is what's being thrown at us by the 
media. And I think television even more so, as the type of  

programing we are seeing more and more hitting our screens 
during the, what you would call, the family viewing area. 
 
And it just seems to be promoting more and more an explicit 
form of sex, rather than a responsible form of recognizing 
sexuality in its wholesome manner which most of us believe in. 
And I guess one of the questions that continually comes up and 
is continually raised and maybe you have a particular view on 
it, Madam Minister, and that question is: are schools better 
equipped to teach our children sexual values and sex education 
versus the parents? I'm wondering if you have any particular 
feelings regarding that question, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well obviously I think that many 
parents in the province are quite equipped to teach their 
children not only sexual values, but all kinds of values. 
 
But we also know that 40 per cent of our young people are 
coming to school with a variety of problems. And that's one of 
the reasons for the children's action plan. We know that 40 per 
cent of our students come to school with problems in the family 
home and that for many students the family home is not the 
safest place to be. 
 
Now that doesn't mean all homes, but there are a number of 
homes where there are problems. And the school, because of 
the caring and nurturing place that the school is, or certainly has 
been and is in this province, teachers and principals and 
administrators are taking on roles that they have not historically 
had to take on. 
 
And we know that there are many parents in the province that 
are quite equipped to teach their children values and mores and 
give their children advice, and all of those kinds of things. But 
we also know that there are children in the province where their 
parents lack the tools to do that, because their parents are 
damaged or hurting or they have suffered great neglect. 
 
And so the school is taking over the role for many children in 
this province of parent. Now do I like that? No, I don't like that. 
I think that parents should be parents and teachers should be 
teachers. 
 
But one of the things that we never teach each other is how to 
be good parents or what kinds of skills do you need to be a 
good parent. And we know from experience that many parents 
are now taking parent effectiveness training, parenting courses, 
in order that they can equip themselves to deal with the issues 
that their young people are facing and in order to equip 
themselves with the tools that they need to nurture their 
children. And so I guess that's the answer to your question. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I understood some 
of the Liberal members had some questions, but I guess I'll have 
to carry on with the process this afternoon, at least for the time 
being. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
462 

Madam Minister, you raised a few points that I think are 
interesting as well. I think we're quite well aware of the change 
in the demographics in our society. And I'm not sure if it's for 
the good, for the better, when we see the number of single-
parent homes. Yes, there are children that really are affected. 
They don't have . . . in some cases probably they're lacking 
some of the tools, especially if that single parent is away 
working all day. 
 
Mind you, it's not just single-parent homes. There's two-parent 
homes where the parents are both out living . . . I shouldn't say 
living, working and endeavouring and striving. And maybe 
sometimes as parents we're striving to provide more on the 
material side, and on the other hand we're failing or neglecting 
in the area of reaching out and providing some of the emotional 
support that our children need. As well, drug and alcohol abuse 
is quite a serious matter. 
 
So when it comes to even just the sex education course and the 
problems or the concerns that people have, it definitely is a 
broad concern, because yes there are a lot of solid, sound homes 
where children do receive solid leadership in seeing how a 
relationship can be built. And there are other areas where 
children don't see that. They're in abusive situations, and they 
see the, I guess, the absolute horror of what we would consider 
to be a normal process of growing up. And that's unfortunate. 
 
How do you, as minister, deal with people when they come to 
you with real opposing views to mandatory sex education or 
with the content of course material? Will parents have an 
opportunity to preview course content and course materials? 
Now there's two separate questions there. I'm just asking you, 
Madam Minister . . . I'm sure you get a lot of these question on 
many occasions; I'm wondering if you could respond in relation 
to those questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I mean obviously as the Minister 
of Education I do have people that come to see me and write me 
about their views on sex education in schools, and they are 
totally opposed to it — totally opposed to it. They think that 
that is something that should be taught in the home. And once 
you become the Minister of Education, you don't . . . your 
personal opinions don't enter into this. My personal opinions 
are irrelevant as to what I think should or should not be taught 
in school because they're my own personal beliefs, and I have to 
put aside those personal beliefs for the overall good. 
 
And I know that there are many parents that have the tools, the 
skills, the values that you talk about, and they're quite able to 
provide leadership to their young people and determine what is 
right and wrong for those young people, according to that 
family's standards or values. 
 
But I also know, having worked with at-risk young people, 
particularly young girls, young girls on the street, and that's 
quite different I think for those of us who come from rural 
Saskatchewan; what we see in rural Saskatchewan schools is a 
little bit different than what you see in the city. And the whole 
notion of a homogeneous community with shared values and  

shared views of the world is a notion that still exists in rural 
Saskatchewan. And so you can have people coming together 
who share the same values in determining what they want to or 
don't want to have taught in their school. 
 
But when it comes to larger centres, that's a bit different 
because we have people who come to this province from — and 
to our larger centres — from all over Canada, from other parts 
of the world. And they have different views on this matter and 
they come with different issues and different problems. 
 
And so I think that when you asked me, what do I think should 
or should not be taught in these particular schools, I do know 
this: that there are many young people in this province that don't 
share your value or maybe share my values. And I am obligated 
as an educator and as a Minister of Education to make sure that 
those young people are protected as much as we can. 
 
Now it doesn't necessarily mean that they have to listen to the 
information. It doesn't necessarily mean they have to take this 
information into their being and their souls. But I think that we 
not only talk about the values of abstinence, as you talk about, 
but we also say to those young people, if that's not your 
particular value and your standard and your view of yourself, 
then for heaven's sakes make sure that you protect yourself 
against some pretty deadly viruses — viruses that kill, like 
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) — in order that 
we can ensure that you live. 
 
And I think that if you were in this chair, member, you'd be 
taking the same approach. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, there's no doubt that 
we're all concerned about our young people. And it's not just 
young people. Like we're dealing with young people but we 
even get into the little later years of singles and what have you. 
 
And the unfortunate part is statistics are also showing that no 
matter how much we teach, no matter how much protection that 
you bring forward, that some of these diseases still . . . some of 
this protection may not be the protection we really have been 
taught that it is or that we're putting our hopes in, and 
protection can break down too. 
 
Laws are made and unfortunately laws can be broken, and it can 
be very costly and deadly at the same time. So I think it's 
important that people realize that and the total concept of sex 
education is presented. 
 
As you indicated, the abstinence values, yes, they are values. 
And I think it's important that we raise those values and let 
teenagers know that those are values; if they believe in them, 
that they shouldn't feel or succumb to peer pressure to accept 
the fact that maybe a high percentage of students in grade 11 
are sexually active. 
 
But if a person chooses, whether they're a girl or a guy, that they 
should feel that that is still an important value for them to hold 
onto and we need to support them in that. 



February 27, 1995 

 
463 

Madam Minister, a couple of questions regarding parental 
input. Have parents been consulted in the past, or will they be 
continued to be consulted in the future, on the matter of 
compulsory sex education in schools? If so, through 
consultations, what type of consultations have there been? And 
what input has been garnered that you may be aware of or your 
officials aware of that has been adopted and been made or put 
into part of the sanctioned sex education curriculum that we 
presently have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all, we don't have 
compulsory sex education in the province. That's number one. 
 
Number two, it's impossible to have compulsory sex education 
in our high school curriculum, because we simply don't have 
the flexibility, because of the numbers of credits we're 
delivering to students, to have another core subject in our high 
school curriculum. 
 
Now certainly in our health education curriculum K to 9, there 
is a family life component in the curriculum that parents can say 
that they want their children to participate in, or they can 
determine that they don't want their children to participate in 
that particular unit. So parents do have some involvement as to 
the say whether or not their children are in the classroom. That's 
number one. 
 
And number two, many school divisions consult with parents 
about the family life education component of the curriculum to 
see whether or not it has community support — whether or not 
it meets the test of community standards and mores. And that is 
being done in the province. 
 
Now there are some parts of Saskatchewan where the people 
who have a particular view on this subject have not been 
successful. And those people have talked to me and I keep 
saying to them, please continue to work with your school 
division. 
 
I do know this, that abstinence is spoken of and is taught as part 
of the approach to family life education in our curriculum. It is 
a value that is taught. Now that's not to say that all kids are 
going to be abstinent. If they're not going to be abstinent, they 
need to have access to other information, which they do have 
access to. 
 
And I think there's one group of people that don't want children 
to have access to that other information, and I think that's where 
we would disagree. Because I, having taught with high-risk 
young people, I think it's extremely important as an educator 
that you give all of the information. That doesn't mean you don't 
impart values and you don't have a standard that you want those 
young people to meet, but they also need to protect themselves, 
if they're going to be sexually active, against AIDS and 
unwanted pregnancies. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, it's obvious that some parents 
may not have the same opportunities to probably have access to 
or review some of the course curriculum that you're talking of.  

Is there an avenue whereby they can . . . I'm not sure where they 
would go — if they feel that they are not really being given the 
opportunity by their local or the unit school board. 
 
Is there an avenue, or just a matter of continuing to pursue with 
that unit board or with that local board what type of curriculum 
the board has okayed for that unit, and access to the information 
so that they can be informed as to the content of the family life 
or family planning or sex education portion of their family 
planning educational program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think that they should continue 
. . . the parents who have concerns about this should continue to 
work with their teacher, the classroom teacher, the principal for 
that school, the school division board. And they should 
continue to work, as you say, with the local people. 
 
I think it's fair to say that we can't possibly — sitting from our 
seats in Regina — determine what's best for each community 
across the province and that is why we've left this to the local 
people to determine what meets their community standard or 
mores. 
 
So I would suggest that you say to the people that are contacting 
you — just as I have because I've had those people contact me 
as well — that they need to continue to work with their local 
teachers, the local principal, the director of education, the 
school board, in order that they can have a kind of a curriculum 
that they want. 
 
I guess the one thing I would say is that while the people that 
you and I know that have been speaking to us, they need to 
consider that there may be some people in their community that 
don't share their particular viewpoint. And while we have 
incorporated abstinence into our curriculum, there are other 
views incorporated into the curriculum as well. 
 
And maybe if we all work together, all of us who share the 
various perspectives when it comes to this subject matter — I'm 
not convinced that all of the perspectives are right or wrong — 
but if we work together as people are doing in Santa Fe, New 
Mexico where all of the various viewpoints have come together 
and they have, as I understand it, successfully reduced the rate 
of unplanned pregnancy . . . they have reduced the rate of 
therapeutic abortions, and they have a young population that is 
very knowledgeable, has access to the information, and is in 
fact practising good health for young people. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, what you've just laid out I 
think most parents would feel that that's appropriate, and they'd 
appreciate that. And a lot of parents probably feel that they do 
have access to, and that they're talking to a concerned teacher or 
school director or school board that is willing to listen. And not 
only listen, but at least do something to show they're listening 
and keeping them informed. 
 
Unfortunately, I guess probably the ones we hear from many 
times are the individuals who feel that they're talking to a brick 
wall and they're really not getting anywhere. I'm not sure  



February 27, 1995 

 
464 

exactly how we totally change that, but certainly there are those 
problems that exist out there. 
 
I would also say that if we're going to have a wholesome sex 
education program in our society, and if we're going to talk 
about some of the values, I think one of the most important 
aspects is not just establishing some guidelines and setting 
some values, but having a core of support groups out there that 
would be there to help young people, regardless of who they are 
— regardless of race, religion, nationality, colour, creed, male 
or female. 
 
I think maybe that's one of the things that's lacking in our 
society. People don't have someone to really turn to to maybe 
ask questions of and get some support, and maybe bringing 
forward their ideas. And I think as a whole our society has a 
responsibility to, while we're demanding certain guidelines as 
far as sex education and family planning and what have you, if 
we hold to certain values then we should be there to support our 
young people as well when they're facing problems and when 
they have a lot of questions out there. And I would certainly 
agree with that. 
 
A couple more questions I have here. The Minister of Health 
received recommendations from the Advisory Committee on 
Family Planning. And I also realize that the recommendations 
can be found in the document, Toward Sexual and 
Reproductive Health in Saskatchewan. In fact I received one, I 
believe it was either before or after Christmas. 
 
Have you seen this document, Madam Minister? Do you 
endorse the recommendations of the advisory committee? Will 
the recommendations be adopted by the Department of 
Education? If not, which recommendations will you be 
adopting, if any? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The report was sent to our department 
and they are going through the recommendations. And I've not 
yet received any recommendation from the department as to 
which recommendations we should or should not implement. 
So I'm not in a position to respond with any precision to your 
question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister, but as you've 
indicated the department is certainly going through the report to 
come back with some recommendations based on what they see 
coming out of that report. 
 
In 1990 the state of California passed legislation stating that 
along with other methods of sex education, abstinence had to be 
taught as well. This was adopted because abstinence is the only 
method of sex education which 100 per cent guarantees the 
prevention of sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancies. 
Would you, Madam Minister, support similar legislation here in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you're asking, your asking that  

the government bring in legislation that, where specifically 
abstinence would be part of the legislative health education in 
the province, and that it be taught. And what we have done and 
it was — the policy was there long before we came to 
government — is that it's a locally determined option. 
 
I don't think it wise for any Minister of Education to tell Landis, 
Saskatchewan — which is where I come from — or Biggar, 
Saskatchewan, or Perdue, or Asquith, or any rural part of the 
province or city, what their value or standard should be. And 
once you get into the idea of legislating a value on a particular 
perspective, you can get into legislating all kinds of things that I 
would find unacceptable as a principle. 
 
And so I guess I take the view that the policy as it's presently 
constructed allows local people to determine local standards, 
what their values are for their community, and they determine 
what form of sex education is taught in their school. 
 
And I would feel much more comfortable with that notion than 
the possibility of a legislated viewpoint, because once you 
legislate viewpoints, other people can lobby and have their 
viewpoint legislated as well. And I don't think that that is what 
a free and democratic society is all about. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Certainly, to 
legislate changes, really, I'm not exactly sure that legislating 
changes values. And I'll be very frank and very candid. It's 
something that has to come from within. Although certainly 
your government has shown in the past that they have no 
problem in retroactive legislation, but that doesn't necessarily 
quite deal with where we're sitting today, so we won't get totally 
into that. 
 
However, Madam Minister, I've appreciated the discussion that 
has taken place. And if, as you have indicated this afternoon, 
that this is a policy whereby local boards really do have the 
ability to administer the type of family planning program that 
they would like to have instituted in their units, then it would 
seem to me that appearance and . . . I would think just from the 
comments I'm getting from different individuals, there are lots 
of parents out there that really have some strong views on some 
of these issues; that they should be able to, if there are enough 
concerned parents in the school and they feel a certain portion 
of their family planning or sex education program is offensive 
to their way of life, should be able to then sit down with that 
local board, that unit board, plus the teachers and educational 
director to bring their wishes forward. 
 
And I guess at the end of the day, if I could make one 
suggestion to anyone  it's not just coming with an opposing 
view, but bringing something as an alternative along as well  
I think in our society it's easy for us to stand up and complain 
and always oppose without bringing something constructive 
forward. And any time I've chatted with parents on certain 
issues, whether it's family planning or sex education or whether 
it's on justice issues — I think even the whole gun law debate 
that's taking place in Canada right now — I don't think we 
should be just looking at opposing; we should be looking at  



February 27, 1995 

 
465 

alternatives that at the end of the day will meet the needs of our 
society. 
 
And so I want to thank you for the time we've had to address 
this issue and a number of questions that have been raised this 
afternoon. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, as I look through the budget book dealing with 
Education, Training and Employment, I see a number of 
changes, most of which are down but a few of which are up. 
 
And in particular the one I want to deal with at the present time 
is the K to 12 system. That's the system that most of the people 
across the province have the most familiarity with because their 
kids are either in the system or are going into the system or have 
just come out of that system. And, Madam Minister, you have 
dropped that down by $15 million. Now in a time of budgetary 
restraint, most people would say that's good, perhaps. But 
education is one of those very important areas, Madam 
Minister, that needs to be maintained, and you yourself, while 
you were in opposition, demanded that it be maintained and 
indeed increased on a continual basis without regard to the 
budget. 
 
So, Madam Minister, this is your second time that you have 
been part of this budgetary process as a cabinet minister, and 
again we have seen a cut in education in total of $8 million out 
of an $880 million budget. That may not be a large percentage, 
Madam Minister, but depending on the areas it falls into, it can 
have a major impact. 
 
So when you look at the K to 12 system, probably the most 
important portion of that would be the grants to schools, and 
those have been maintained at the current level. There has been 
no change. And I'm sure that the school boards out there are 
thankful, Madam Minister, that there have been no cuts. 
 
But at the same time, while you haven't cut any of the funding 
going to their budgets, you have not provided any assistance to 
make up for the other changes within the whole infrastructure 
of this province that your government has brought forward such 
as gas rates, such as fuel taxes, such as higher costs for 
SaskPower, telephones, all of those costs that the school 
divisions can't get away with. They're trapped because they have 
to deal with the monopolies. They have no other source to go to 
for electricity; they have to buy it from SaskPower. So when 
you increase those costs to them and you correspondingly don't 
increase what they get in their grants, they have either two 
possible solutions: they can either cut programing, close 
schools, drop teachers, or they can raise their mill rates. 
 
And people, no matter whether they live in rural Saskatchewan 
or urban Saskatchewan, are saying: we don't want to pay any 
more school taxes. In fact, Madam Minister, we've discussed 
this at other times  that there are certain people out there that 
are avoiding paying their taxes simply because they feel that 
those property taxes are too high for the services they receive. 
 

So, Madam Minister, what assistance, what recommendations, 
what solutions do you have for the school boards who are 
facing these increased costs put on them by your government 
when you in turn do not provide them any extras? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all what I want to tell you 
is that there were no cuts to school operating grants. 
 
And you talk about a decrease in the education portion of the 
budget. And what I want to tell is this. That in 1994-95 we 
moved millions of dollars in K to 12 capital projects up into 
that budget year and out of the '95-96 year. So in fact with 
educational capital, we will be spending, in 1994-95, millions 
of dollars that we had originally planned on spending in '95-96. 
So in fact there's no cut. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, let's look back at 
where that capital spending that you are talking about . . . Look 
at the year before that and the year before that and the year 
before and you'll see that there was significant amount of 
monies being spent on capital funding because some of the 
schools across this province are not in very good shape and do 
need to be rebuilt. And I can think of a few in my own 
constituency that are in that position, where they're old schools 
that are overcrowded because some of the smaller surrounding 
schools are no longer in a position to remain viable and the 
school boards have closed them. That puts added pressure onto 
those schools. 
 
So it's not a question of whether it's you're being generous in 
rebuilding those schools, Madam Minister; in a lot of cases it's 
a necessity. So when you say you're actually increasing the 
budget because you took some out of this year's budget to do it 
in last year's and so it doesn't show up in this year's, at the end 
of the day, Madam Minister, there's still a decrease. 
 
You mention the capital funding. I believe there's a drop there 
from 36 million to 20 million, a $16 million drop on the K to 12 
system — 22 million, excuse me, is what you're spending this 
year. That's $14 million, Madam Minister, decrease in capital 
funding. 
 
But on the operating grants to schools, you did not make any 
changes, but they have less money with which to operate, 
Madam Minister. And that was the question I asked you about. 
What are you going to do about the added costs, the added 
expenses in operating the schools, the school boards, the school 
divisions, when you provided them no additional funding and 
they have a great deal of difficulty going back to their taxpayers 
and asking for more? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think it's fair to say that 
education and health have contributed greatly to the historic 
fact that Saskatchewan is the first government in all of Canada 
to balance its budget. And we hadn't had a balanced budget in 
this province since the last year we were in power in 1981. 
 
And we were able to balance the budget in the three and a half 
year period, and we didn't do that without a great deal of help  



February 27, 1995 

 
466 

from our education partners and health partners and municipal 
partners and everyone in the province. 
 
We know, and I think school divisions know, that there have 
been funding — well they know — there have been funding 
reductions in the province in the last three years; minus two, 
minus two, and minus four. 
 
But if you look to our neighbours across the country, they are 
— in the fiscal year '95-96 which is the year that we're talking 
about — they are cutting education spending and health 
spending. We're not, because we can now say with precision 
that we have a balanced budget plus a surplus. And we can tell 
our partners what's going to happen in '95-96, so we can tell 
them that there will be a 2 per cent funding increase. 
 
And what I find somewhat difficult to understand is that we 
don't want tax increases. People feel as though they do not want 
tax increases, you just said that. We've had enough here. But if 
we are going to replace all of this funding that was reduced in 
order for us to balance the budget, we would in fact have to 
look at tax increases. 
 
And I think if you look at our balanced budget, we took a 
balanced approach to that budget in that we put a little bit of 
money aside for the long-term debt — $14 billion  put a little 
bit of money into program enhancements like health and 
education; and we put a little money into tax reduction. And I 
think that that is a balanced way to deal with our balanced 
budget. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, it's interesting 
that you talk about the balanced approach, and that the school 
boards, the students, and the teachers, had to take a cut-back so 
that you could balance your budget. 
 
And yet when I look at the staff utilizations for the Department 
of Education, Madam Minister, you didn't take a cut-back. You 
increased the number of staff people working within your 
department. 
 
You talk to the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation); you 
can read in the news clippings that a thousand less teachers 
have jobs. Now they took a cut-back. 
 
You can look at the school boards and how much less money 
they have; how many people are out of their systems; how many 
schools have closed; how many buses are no longer on the 
routes. Madam Minister, they took a cut-back. 
 
Madam Minister, you look at the programs available to 
students. You look at the amount of time each student has 
available to him with the teacher because of the increased class 
sizes. Madam Minister, they have taken a cut-back. 
 
But the Department of Education certainly didn't take a cut-
back. You increased it by 16 people, Madam Minister. Now  

when you start talking about cuts, what people want to see out 
there is you in your department taking a cut, cutting your 
administration, cutting your things that do not directly pertain to 
the teaching of students. That's what they want to see the cuts 
at, Madam Minister. 
 
So, Madam Minister, since I have mentioned the 16 new people 
that you have in your department, I wonder if you'd mind 
explaining to the people of Saskatchewan just what they're there 
to do. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well if you look at the budget book 
you will note that in terms of administration, last year's estimate 
was 4.593 and this year's — and that's millions — and this 
year's estimate is 4.482. There is a reduction. In fact everybody 
who works in the department will know that the department 
over the last three and a half years has taken a major funding 
reduction in terms of the overall administration budget for our 
department — much more than 8 per cent. 
 
This year we can say to our partners there is no funding 
reductions but there is a 4 per cent funding reduction for our 
department. So in fact I think your observation is incorrect. 
 
Now what we do have is some new full-time equivalents. And 
the reason we have that is because we had some contracted 
positions that we have now converted to full-time positions. We 
are doing a new distance education strategy which is really 
important to rural and northern Saskatchewan, and so we will 
have two people in the whole area of the technologies. And they 
are going from a contract position to full-time equivalents, so 
it's up front for the public to see. 
 
As well we have a new Private Vocational Schools Act which 
just received second reading this morning, or this afternoon. In 
order for private vocational schools to be properly regulated we 
need to have some people who can do that so that we won't 
continue to see what's happened to private vocational schools. 
And so there are two positions there. As well there are two 
people in student financial aid. More students are receiving 
student aid. 
 
One person is part of regional services. One person at the 
Teachers' Superannuation Commission, and two people in 
evaluation and assessment because the province is involved in 
developing the testing for the national science test. And those 
two positions are being funded by the federal government. 
 
As well we have seven positions for JobStart, and JobStart is 
the new program that we announced to assist young people 
between the ages of 17 to 25 get a job. Those aren't permanent 
positions, but nevertheless they are positions, and we wanted to 
be fully open with the public with regard to that. 
 
The other thing that you should know is that we have people 
who come from school divisions on secondment, but those 
seconded positions are against a position that is in fact there. 
 
So we're not hiding anything here, sir. We are doing this up  



February 27, 1995 

 
467 

front. The world is rapidly changing. We do have some new 
initiatives in the area of distance ed for rural and northern 
Saskatchewan. We do have a new initiative for young people 
between the ages of 17 and 25 in order for those young people 
to have some hope that they will in fact get a job. And we have 
some people to assist us with our new private vocational school 
Act if we're going to have a properly regulated private 
vocational school industry. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I'm 
glad you brought up the number for administration, the 4.482 
million. Now when you take that money as administrative costs 
and you say that, according to your book here, you've got 500 
people working in the Department of Education, am I then to 
understand, Madam Minister, that they're all working for less 
than $10,000 each . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You were 
arguing that you're only spending $4.482 million on 
administration, and that you have 500 people working for the 
Department of Education. So I have to take that as meaning that 
that is their salaries, so then they're working, each one of them, 
for less than $10,000, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Those are people involved in direct 
service, but there are people involved in various portions of the 
department. What I'm telling you is this year, as directed by the 
Department of Finance, we took $1 million out of the 
administrative operations of the Department of Education, 
Training and Employment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well that's interesting, Madam Minister. 
According to your estimates for the '94-95 year, you had 4.5, 
$4.5 million in administration. You're estimating 4.4 this year 
which is $100,000 less, and you said you took a million out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You're not hearing me. This is the 
support services for the department. But in the other summary 
of expenses, there are also departmental expenses that are the 
department. And what I'm telling you is that overall, we took $1 
million out of the Department of Education, Training and 
Employment — the bureaucracy. We took out $1 million. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm glad 
you clarified that not all of your administrative costs then come 
under administration, that they're all lumped in, in a nebulous 
fashion within all of the other sectors of education. 
 
So, Madam Minister, how much does it cost to run the 
department part of the Department of Education, as opposed to 
supplying education to students? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, the department's total budget is 
$880.7 million. Program services are approximately 3 per cent 
of that overall figure or $27.9 million. Cost breakdowns are 
this: $15.9 million for wages, $8.5 million for operating, $3.5 
million for rental space — for a total of $27.9 million. 
 
The department's administrative costs are 3 per cent or $27.9 
million out of a total budget of 880.7 million. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
why those figures aren't broke out in the budgetary documents 
themselves so that it's clear how much money is being spent on 
the department's operation and how much is being spent on 
supplying education for students. 
 
What would the average salary be for a person within the 
Department of Education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I guess what I will say is take 500.3 
employees and divide it by $15.9 million. My piece of paper 
has disappeared . . . Whatever my last answer was. But that will 
give you your average cost. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. The 
rental that is part of the Department of Education, what are you 
renting? Are you renting office space; are you renting movable 
equipment? Who do you pay this to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, we rent facilities in the North 
because we have regional offices there. We rent facilities in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, I believe Weyburn or 
Yorkton, North Battleford, Prince Albert . . . or not Prince 
Albert, Melfort. We rent facilities all across the province. And 
some of the rental would be paid to SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) and some of the rent would 
be paid to private landlords. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you 
give us a list of those accommodations and the fees for them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, I will. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. Is there any change in that 
rental costs from the last budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It went down slightly because we 
moved from leased space to government-owned space, and we'll 
get you that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, when you're dealing with accommodations 
and central services, again on this one you have taken a small 
decrease from the previous budget. What has changed in that 
area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That is the rent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Under 
teachers' pensions and benefits, there has been a $6 million 
drop in what you have awarded into that area. Madam Minister, 
I'd like to start off first with how much remains in the teachers' 
pension plan that is unfunded? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I am advised that it's $1.87 billion. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — And, Madam Minister, is that an 
increase or a decrease from last year? 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
468 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are waiting for a consulting 
actuarial by the name of William M. Mercer to tell us that. We 
don't yet have that information. But that is our latest 
information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Your latest information, Madam 
Minister, is you don't know, I gather. Okay. 
 
Madam Minister, how long has this unfunded liability been 
there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it's fair to say that the province 
of Saskatchewan isn't unlike every other government across the 
country. There are unfunded liabilities in every province and 
territory; so this is not new. It's always been thus. But what did 
change in 1978 . . . and if you happened to read the Saskatoon 
Sun, which is a Sunday morning newspaper, there's a big profile 
of the former minister of Finance, Wes Robbins, who's now 79 
years old. 
 
When he was the minister of Finance in the late 1970s, he went 
from an unfunded liability pension plan, not only for teachers 
and MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and Crown 
corporation-employed civil servants, to a funded pension, a 
money purchase plan. So this is not a new phenomena. It was a 
phenomena that existed under your administration, Liberal 
administrations, NDP administrations; so it's not new. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
You're saying that this unfunded liability to the province has 
been there for many years, decades in fact now. I'm glad to hear 
that because I was just reading in the paper on the weekend by 
one of our esteemed columnists that all of the debt of the 
province was attributable to the previous administration. So I 
find it enlightening for you to admit that some of it was there 
before 1982. 
 
Madam Minister, there was a program put in place, I believe in 
the late '80s, to start paying down some of this unfunded 
liability, that the government would put some portion of the 
monies away to cover that off. Is that correct? And if so, has 
that program been carried on? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that at one stage the 
government was putting in more than they were supposed to. 
The practice was criticized by the Provincial Auditor, so that 
was stopped. 
 
And now what the government has agreed to do is allow the 
interest of the fund to remain in the fund, so that's how we've 
handled the Provincial Auditor's concern. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if the fund is 
unfunded, how does it generate any interest, if it's a debt? If 
there's no money actually sitting there, how can it generate any 
interest? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is an asset of a billion dollars 
and there is a liability of close to $2 billion. So in fact when I 
say that there's an unfunded liability of 1.8, it's taking the debt 
and the assets, and so the assets do garner interest. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, are you sure that there 
is an unfunded portion of 1.87 sitting there and there's also a $1 
billion asset sitting there? Are those one and the same? Or are 
they two separate programs? 
 
It was my understanding that at some point in time, perhaps 
1978-79, the teachers started paying into a funded program 
where their money went into a separate package and it stayed 
there. And that's separate and distinct from the unfunded 
portion. Is that correct, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is the annuity plan for teachers, I 
think, that came into teaching after 1978 or '79. They pay into a 
money purchase plan. That fund is now administered by the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation. Then there's the group that 
comes before 1978-79, and they are in fact where the unfunded 
liability is. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So that unfunded liability in its section 
has no asset then to offset it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is a $1 billion asset and there is 
nearly a $3 billion liability, and that's how we get the $1.87 
billion unfunded liability. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. That 
wasn't what you had explained earlier. You had missed that 3 
billion part. Well thank you very much. 
 
I find it only reasonable, Madam Minister, that the annuity 
section of the pension plan should retain the interest off of that. 
I realize that the province does pay some of that money into that 
pension plan, but the teachers are also paying into it. So in that 
respect, it should be their money, Madam Minister. 
 
So having said that, what changed in the program to drop the 
amount of money that the province is putting into it, by $6 
million? Is that the number of teachers that are no longer 
employed in the system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The more teachers that retire, the less 
amount of money that's required from general revenue. So in 
fact the reason why it's gone down is because we expect more 
teachers to retire. If you look at the demographics, the teaching 
population is ageing. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Indeed the teaching population is ageing but there's also less 
jobs out there for them, so more of the teachers are moving out 
of the system that would have perhaps stayed in. 
 
Madam Minister, move on to the K to 12 system now. I wonder 
if you can give me a breakdown of all of the school divisions; 
what their increases or decreases will be in funding for this  



February 27, 1995 

 
469 

year; what their student ratio . . . have they changed, gone up 
and down, Madam Minister? 
 
I'll go on to another question then, Madam Minister, while 
you're looking for that. I wonder if you could give me a list of 
what schools will receive capital projects and the costs, and the 
determinations of why that school versus some other. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, on capital, the K to 12 projects 
that will be accelerated into 1994-95 are the T.D. Michel 
School in Big River, of $50,000; the Shaunavon High School, 
of $325,000; the R.J. Humphrey School in Kinistino, of 
$165,000; Esterhazy, they have an air quality problem there, 
225,000; the Consul School, 100,000; the William Grayson, 
Moose Jaw, School, of 900,000; the Pleasantdale, Estevan 
school, of 1.4 million; Davidson Elementary, 570,000; Tisdale 
comprehensive, 3.4 million; William Mason School, 500,000; 
and the North Battleford Comprehensive High School, $2 
million; for a total of $9.635 million. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you could send us a copy of that, if you would please. 
 
Madam Minister, that's nine-point-some million dollars you 
said in capital grants. But you have $22 million listed in the 
budget. Where does the rest of it go to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Sorry. I've been advised by my officials 
that I gave you the wrong information with regard to my staff's 
salary. And I just want to give you the correct information. I 
want to apologize for that. 
 
And if someone could get a copy for the opposition . . . the 
Liberals, they're not here, but that would be helpful. Thanks. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I have another question for you, Madam 
Minister. The $22 million that you have in the K to 12 
education system for school capital, you listed off $9.1 million. 
What happened to the other 13? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Eight million dollars is block funding, 
and $14.1 million is interest on the previous year’s capital debt 
for a total of 22.1 million. And I just talked about the $9.6 
million because we accelerated capital projects into '94-95. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, those projects that 
were moved forward, what was the reasons why those were 
moved forward and why other schools . . . and I know that there 
are a large number of schools that send in B-1's looking for 
financing and funding to upgrade their schools. So why were 
those particular two schools chosen over others that sent in B-
1's? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have a process that is known to all 
school divisions in the province that shows very clearly how 
schools get put on a priority list, and everyone knows what they 
are. So it was quite natural that everyone knew that these are the 
schools that were going to get on the list, and so this isn't news 
for those people who are waiting for a capital project. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, do you have a current 
list of people who have applied with B1's for capital 
construction, and would you supply that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, we'll send it to you. As well, we'll 
send you the school facilities funding guidelines, which show 
very clearly how projects are put on the priority list. There can 
be no political influence. This process is wide open; no one can 
interfere with the process. School divisions know what the 
process is, they see the list, and they know where they stand on 
that list. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I think we have, 
perhaps not with you, but with previous ministers of Education, 
gone through this discussion. And there does seem to be at 
some point in time a bit of leeway in there for making 
determinations that, while you might say that they're not 
political decisions, there is some ministerial discretion in there 
at times. But I'm not going to argue about that, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I asked you if you would also supply the list 
of the schools that you had read off, and you hadn't agreed to 
that. Would you do so? I guess that's an agreement, Madam 
Minister. Thank you. 
 
Madam Minister, on the education development fund, I see 
there's a drop there of $300,000. Has that meant that there has 
been a decrease in programing in that area? Or what has 
happened within that area that would warrant it to take a 
$300,000 decrease? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We advised our education partners last 
year that there would be a phase-out of the program, and this is 
simply carrying through with that advisory of last year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
So what is happening to the EDF (education development fund) 
funding? It's decreasing but nothing is going to take its place to 
carry on with those programs that were being administered by 
that. And I believe some of those things were like resources for 
special education within the schools, new programing for 
kindergarten, etc., all the way up. So those programs will now 
. . . what will happen to that programing, Madam Minister? 
Will they simply be ended in the schools? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously that would be up to the 
individual school divisions, how they want to proceed. We did 
give ample warning that EDF would be phased out. We've now 
completed that process. We have, however, told our school 
divisions and teachers that there will be $4.8 million in 
redirected funding for special education for young people with 
behaviour, social, and emotional disabilities. So some of that 
EDF that went to those kinds of programing will be available 
for those school divisions that have programs for special needs 
children or young people with emotional, social, and 
behavioural problems. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So will the process, Madam Minister,  



February 27, 1995 

 
470 

have changed any to apply for some of that high cost funding 
for students that have those problems, those concerns within the 
system? 
 
Most school divisions have some students within their system 
that are termed high cost. It may be they need wheelchair ramps 
and special hardware on doors. It may mean they need special 
teachers, individual instruction from teachers' aides, and those 
kinds of things. Has the method of supporting that changed at 
all? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we won't be doing is giving 
unconditional funding. The funding will be conditional. I think 
it's fair to say that I was not happy with the way we funded 
special education, and neither were a lot of parents because they 
weren't sure that in fact provincial dollars were going to special 
education programs. 
 
So this will be conditional funding. School divisions will have 
to apply for the funding and it will be very specific to address 
some of the problems that you talk about. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, what direction is 
the department's policy moving on this? Are you moving in a 
direction of integration of people that have these types of 
concerns, or are you carrying on with the education of special 
needs students within their own milieu, within their own 
schools? 
 
In my own division, we have a school that deals with the 
mentally retarded, with the handicapped, and they have their 
own school division even that they deal with. Yes, their own 
school division, the Glenn McGuire School. And the people 
that are attending that school are very happy with that. The 
parents are very happy and the students are happy and they don't 
want it to change. They don't want to be integrated into the 
regular system. 
 
So, Madam Minister, will you be carrying on with funding of 
that type of a school, or will they all be mainstreamed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think that we have some charter 
cases that are very clear that for those parents who want their 
children to be integrated, they're entitled to be integrated into a 
regular classroom. Now there will be parents — and there are 
many of them — that want a more isolated or segregated 
sheltered environment for their young person. And it's not our 
intention to force integration. It's also not our intention to force 
segregation. 
 
What we have to try and do is ensure that we provide young 
people with educational programing that is appropriate to their 
individual circumstances and that we try as much as possible to 
be able to fund that educational program for that young person. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I know that the 
people in my area who have children attending the Glenn  

McGuire School are very concerned with the ongoing operation 
of their facility. They're afraid that their funding will be cut 
back and that they will be forced to go into the mainstream and 
to be integrated into the regular school system. And they would 
like to have some assurance, Madam Minister, that that will not 
happen, that they won't be forced into that situation. Because 
it's their belief that their student is being best served in that 
milieu rather than going into the mainstream system. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously that will be a local decision. 
The local board will decide whether or not they want to 
continue with a segregated setting or an integrated setting. But I 
would hope that that board would work with the parents of the 
individuals that you talk about, the individual students, to 
ensure that we have an educational program that is appropriate 
to those individual students' circumstances. 
 
Not all students do well in an integrated setting. Not all students 
do well in a segregated setting. I think what we have to do is be 
logical and have educational programing that is appropriate for 
each individual student's circumstances. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Indeed, Madam Minister, as you say, not 
each student is well suited to one particular style, and within the 
division not all students attend the Glenn McGuire School; a 
number of them are integrated in the regular system. But those 
that are in Glenn McGuire would like to stay there. 
 
But their concern is, Madam Minister, with the decreasing 
funding for the K to 12 system, with the added costs as I 
pointed out earlier with SaskPower, etc., the utility costs, there 
is more and more pressure on the system, so it's more and more 
difficult to maintain a separate school like that for a small 
number of students, a good number of whom need one-to-one 
instruction. And so it puts a great deal of pressure on the 
system, whereas if they were into the regular stream, some of 
them perhaps would not be as . . . have as much personal 
contact with their instructors as they do have with Glenn 
McGuire. And so those parents are very concerned about that 
and they would like to know that their system could carry on. 
And so I'm just bringing forward those concerns on their behalf. 
 
Madam Minister, in the curriculum and instruction budget you 
have $4.6 million, which is again a decrease of 300,000. Is core 
curriculum still being implemented at the same rate, Madam 
Minister, and nothing has changed on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Much of the curriculum renewal 
process has been accomplished in the last nine or so years. 
What we have listened to is the fact that teachers are saying 
there's a lot of curricula change coming; can you slow this 
down a bit? And so we have. One of the things that we will be 
doing, and we're going to speed it up, is the curriculum renewal 
process for high schools. 
 
Most of the work from K to 9 has now been completed. Not all 
of it has been implemented but most of the curriculum renewal 
has been completed. We are now in the process of renewing all 
of the high school curriculum, particularly the core subjects.  



February 27, 1995 

 
471 

And it's our intention to have all of that work done by 1996 and 
then we will have to pilot that curricula and implement it. 
 
So I guess it's fair to say on the one hand we've sort of slowed 
down the elementary curriculum renewal process, but we're 
speeding up the high school renewal process because things are 
changing in the world, and we have to have curriculum that is 
able to be constantly updated. And so with our curriculum 
renewal process, I think you'll see more computer technology so 
that we can constantly update the curriculum so, we don't wait 
every 25 or 30 years to renew our curriculum. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister. Since 
you got onto computers, I will pick up that idea. As a member 
of the safe driving committee we have toured quite a number of 
schools across the province, and at one of the schools the 
question of the Internet came up. And the person who brought 
that up thought it was a great idea, liked the availability of the 
information, but was very concerned about the costs associated 
with it. 
 
Not the cost of hardware, but the ongoing operating costs, 
Madam Minister, because there was a difference in that 
operating cost between rural and urban. For the same fee, I 
believe, of $20, in an urban setting you received a six-hour 
connection to the Internet; whereas in the rural settings for that 
same money, you received a two-hour connection for your $20. 
And Madam Minister, the people at this particular school were 
concerned that their students were either going to be deprived 
of that extra four hours or that they were going to have to pay a 
substantially higher cost. And across the whole division, that 
would amount up to a fair amount of money on a monthly basis, 
Madam Minister. 
 
So is there any avenues available through the Department of 
Education that would assist, or could you put some more 
pressure on the minister of Telephones to perhaps give 
education a break? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, I don't think it's Education that 
deals with the whole issue of differences between telephone 
rates. I think that there is a difference, if I recall, between rates 
for people living in rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan, and part of that has to do with geography and 
the cost of maintaining and building that infrastructure. 
 
But I do acknowledge your point. It is fundamentally key in 
order to have equity in education, that regardless of where you 
live and work, you should have access to a minimum level of 
service. And that's one of the reasons why it's our intention to 
wire in cable at 100 sites in rural and northern Saskatchewan so 
that our students living in rural and northern Saskatchewan can 
have access to school net Internet so that they are on the same 
footing as their urban counterparts. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. When 
you talk about the changes in curriculum to high schools, I've 
received a number of letters dealing with that particular issue. 
And as you probably remember from the last session, we dealt  

with the English courses in the schools. 
 
I wonder if you would mind telling the Assembly what was 
decided. I believe the High School Review Committee 
recommended four credits, and it was currently six in the 
system at the time, and there was an argument going back and 
forth as to what it should be. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it was last May or June. I can't 
quite recall the exact date. We released our response to the high 
school review. And what the policy of the provincial 
government is, is that beginning I believe in 1996 — well, as 
soon as the curriculum is developed — we will have five 
English language credits in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We're presently renewing that curriculum, and we will 
incorporate reading, writing, speaking skills, along with 
literature. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I see 
you have taken the typical Liberal stand on this issue and 
straddled the fence on it; one foot on four and one foot on six, 
so you took five. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the other issues on the high school 
curriculum that has been brought forward to me is the social 
studies program and that it should be reinforced and carried on. 
These people believed that it was going to be decreased. What 
is happening with social studies within the high school 
curriculum? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Social studies is not being decreased. 
In fact we have now made it compulsory to take Canadian 
studies, Canadian social studies, or Canadian native studies if 
you want to graduate from grade 12. We found it a bit difficult 
to rationalize the notion that a student could go through high 
school and never learn anything about his or her country, and 
we have now made Canadian studies, Canadian social studies, 
and Canadian native studies compulsory subjects. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Madam Minister. We'll 
perhaps get on a pet subject of mine here now, and that's 
dealing with Canadian history prior to Wolfe. Is that part of the 
curriculum now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding — I'm advised by 
the officials — is that it is. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, because 
it's a very interesting part of Canadian history that has been 
missed out in the regular public system, I believe, over the 
years, and I would like to see that included as part of it. 
 
Madam Minister, aboriginal and northern education takes 1.9 
million. What kind of services do you provide for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We deliver services in northern 
Saskatchewan through our regional office in La Ronge. Those 
services, I understand, include the K to 12 system, and they also 
include some support services to post-secondary education  



February 27, 1995 

 
472 

services in northern Saskatchewan. We don't have the precise 
detail here with the officials, but we'll get you that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'd 
appreciate it if you could supply that. 
 
Planning and priorities, Madam Minister, just what do they do? 
I see they've had . . . most of the other areas have taken a 
decrease, but planning and priorities for some reason has taken 
an increase. 
 
So if I look across the province, most people would look at that 
and say, Madam Minister, there's some more bureaucrats. As 
the bureaucrat on our safe driving committee refers to himself 
as . . . is nameless and faceless, so people would wonder just 
what planning and evaluation is all about and why they would 
deserve an increase when most everybody else took a cut. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you may know, Saskatchewan is the 
only province or territory that is not into national testing. We do 
not participate in the Council of Ministers National Testing 
Program called SAIP (school achievement indicators program). 
 
Because we have renewed all of our science curricula in 
elementary school, we were invited and we are participating in 
the design of the national testing instrument for science which 
will come in the spring of 1996. This money is being paid for 
by the federal government, but it's showing up in our budget as 
an increase. And it's an increase because we have two people 
who are involved in designing the test instrument for the 
science tests that will come through the national testing 
program in the spring of 1996. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, since you're 
participating in the national science test development, does that 
mean that you will also be participating in the national science 
tests when they become available? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have not made that decision at all. 
What we wanted to do was be involved in designing the test 
instrument. It's my view that he who controls the test instrument 
often controls the test result. And if you look at the other testing 
that has gone on in the country, Saskatchewan had not 
participated in the design of the test. Because we're now 
participating, we're in a better position to know whether there 
are multicultural biases, whether there are problems with the 
test instrument that would impact upon our students' ability to 
do well. So we will assess whether or not we want to participate 
in the national testing once it becomes clear what the test design 
is going to look like. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, that sounds a 
little bit like, if I don't get to be the pitcher I'm going to take my 
bat and ball home. 
 
You're going to participate in developing the national science 
tests, but at the end of the day you're not going to say whether  

or not you're going to be part of it. So you're going to tell the 
other people who will be using this, this is what we want in it. 
This is the way we want it done, but we're not going to be a part 
of it because we don't want to know what the results are going 
to be that our students may or may not show up on this 
program. 
 
So, Madam Minister, in my mind, you either have to participate 
in developing, fine, but then you participate in the program 
afterwards because you've set the criteria that's in there . . . you 
and the other departments of Education across the country. Or 
else you stay out of it and say, no, we want nothing to do with 
national testing. You can develop your own program and do 
what you want, but we're not going to participate in it. And 
that's what you've said up until now. So if you're in the 
development of the national science tests, then you should also 
be in as far as implementing the tests in the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well if you look at our participation, 
we're not the only province participating in the design of the 
tests. Certainly two of our seconded teachers are participating in 
the design of the test. This is a new participation on the part of 
the province. 
 
We don't know what the final test instrument is going to look 
like. We don't know if there are going to be biases. We don't 
know a lot of things. We're just in the test design stage now. 
We've not yet had a trial run as to the test, whether it works or it 
doesn't work. It's not fully designed, and once it is designed, it 
will be tested to see if it works, and then it'll be redesigned. And 
that's what you do with test instruments. 
 
Saskatchewan is not going to make a decision on whether or not 
we're in or out until we know whether this test design is a valid 
test design. I don't know if you know anything about testing, but 
the way you design the test can often influence the outcome of 
the test, and that can be a good thing, or it can be a bad thing, 
but mostly it's bad. And I know that we're dealing with 
something that you may have no knowledge of, but I do have a 
little bit of knowledge of evaluations and test design. So that's 
number one. 
 
Number two, it is not cheap to participate in national testing; in 
fact, it's expensive. And our province made a decision not to 
participate in national testing, particularly when we were going 
through funding reduction exercise for school division boards. 
 
We didn't like the idea of paying half a million or 600,000 or 
700,000 on testing when we know that there were funding 
reductions in the province and that teachers and others were 
seeing a decline in their numbers and seeing other impacts upon 
our school system. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister. I 
realize that how the tests are written and how they're 
implemented will have a great deal of impact on the results you 
get. It's no different than polling; how you structure the 
question determines on what kind of an answer you get. And so 
it's very important that, depending on what kind of a result you  



February 27, 1995 

 
473 

want to get out of the test . . . determines how the program is 
written. 
 
I find it very interesting, Madam Minister, that you comment 
that on . . . while reducing funding you didn't want to be 
running national tests because of the costs of the tests 
themselves. I would suspect, Madam Minister, that perhaps the 
reason why you didn't want to run national testing while cutting 
funding is because you didn't want to see what the results might 
be from less teachers out in the field teaching. That was perhaps 
as big a factor as the funding cost of it itself. When you talk 
about funding, you're providing funding to participate in the 
structuring of this national science test, but at the end of the day 
you don't know whether you're going to take it. 
 
If all you want to do at the end of the day is provide an 
evaluation of it, you can wait until it’s done and then evaluate it 
to see whether it suits your needs or not. But if you're going to 
be in there designing the program, Madam Minister, you should 
be prepared to participate in it because what you want into that 
testing structure may not be what somebody from 
Newfoundland wants in it. But they're going to have to put up 
with what you put into it, and then you're going to turn around 
and say, we're not interested any more, Madam Minister. 
 
I don't think that's good enough. I think if you're going to be a 
part of the process to develop the test, you need to be part of the 
process when it comes to applying it to the students. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what we decided to do was go to 
our own provincial indicators report, and we released that report 
last year. We have participated in national and international 
testing. 
 
If you look at our participation in English language skills, our 
indicators report shows that our students do very well in 
comparison to their national counterparts. In fact we have 
outstanding English language skills in this province. And I 
think that's borne out by some interesting statistics. 
 
Saskatchewan people, along with British Columbia, have the 
highest literacy rate in the country. Our two big libraries in the 
province, the Saskatoon Public and the Regina Public, are 
number one and four in library usage in all of North America. 
We do very well. So it's not a matter of being afraid of what test 
results will show us. That's not the issue at all. What the issue 
has been is whether or not national testing is going to really tell 
us some things. And I note with some interest  and I've talked 
to my national counterparts about this  that now that they 
have the test results, are they changing the curriculum? Are they 
changing their style of teaching? What are they doing with the 
test results? Is it only to tell us how our kids stack up in 
comparison to the rest of the country? 
 
I think not. We have our indicator's report, and we found that 
our students in grade 5, when we did the testing with science, 
have problems problem solving. We just did some other testing 
that will soon be released. Our kids have difficulty solving 
problems, going through that process. So it's not good enough  

to say, oh well we have difficulty solving problems. What we 
now have to do is determine what do we need to change in 
terms of that curriculum and what do we need to do to address 
teacher strategies, teaching strategies in the classroom? 
 
So I guess my point is that I guess we could pander to those 
people who want us to participate in national testing, but I am 
following with great interest what my counterparts are doing in 
other provinces because I haven't seen them change their 
curriculum yet. I haven't seen them change their teaching styles 
yet. And when we do see those changes, I will then be 
convinced that national testing is about improving the quality of 
the curriculum, improving the quality of the teaching, and not 
simply to talk and get into a little competition about who can 
outdo whom in this country. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


