













































February 10, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 10, 1995 

 

 

91 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) is hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-

laning of Highway No. 1. 

 

 And the petition of the community of Avonlea, citizens 

of the province of Saskatchewan, petitioning against 

unfair treatment and discrimination against the 

community by not giving Mrs. Krieger a licence to build 

a multi-bed personal care home. 

 

 And the petition of citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly 

may be pleased to allocate funding toward the 

maintenance and capital costs of Saskatchewan roads. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and though you to the other members of 

the Assembly, Bernie Juneau and Mike Doherty who are sitting 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bernie lives out at Silton and Mike lives right here in the city. 

And they've come to observe part of the day, I guess just to 

watch what takes place. And I would like to ask everyone to 

welcome them to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, allow me to introduce to you 

and through you to the Assembly a former colleague of ours, a 

member of this Assembly, who is sitting behind the bar, and we 

would like to welcome him — Mr. Joe Saxinger 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

17th Annual Pipe Si-Cana Regional Winter Games 

 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend over 

1,200 participants of all ages gathered in Wolseley and nearby 

communities of Sintaluta and Grenfell for the 17th Annual Pipe 

Si-Cana Regional Winter Games. 

The games were a great success, offering people of all ages the 

opportunity to demonstrate their skills and talents in a variety of 

19 events ranging from darts and cribbage to figure skating and 

slow pitch. Colourful opening ceremonies, pancake breakfasts 

on Saturday and Sunday morning, a cabaret, medal 

presentations, and closing ceremonies, and the passing of the 

torch to Rocanville who will host next year's games, rounded 

out a very busy weekend. 

 

In the usual Saskatchewan spirit, volunteers were the key to the 

successful and enjoyable weekend. Co-chairmen Tim Taylor, 

and Dave Edgar of Wolseley and the dozens of volunteers and 

sponsors who helped out in numerous ways in hosting the 

games are to be congratulated for their many efforts in a job 

well done. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Langenburg Students - International Development Week 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we reflect on 

International Development Week, I would like to add to the list 

of examples of how Saskatchewan residents are having an 

impact in a third-world country. This story has its beginning in 

a community in my riding. 

 

We have all seen the images of the tragedies taking place in 

Rwanda and other dismal African stories presented each night 

on television. It's enough for some people to give up hope. 

Although successes in Ethiopia are just beginning, they have 

had an impact to the farmers there. Damota 1, a project funded 

by 30-hour famine participants from the Langenburg area, is 

one of those success stories. 

 

The Damota region had been stripped of trees for shelter and 

firewood over the years, but through education and village-

organized tree nurseries there are thousands of trees. New soil 

conservation techniques and a practical irrigation project have 

given the farmers the upper hand in fighting droughts which 

plague Africa. The work was done by Ethiopian villagers but 

the funding came from the Langenburg area, right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year students from across Saskatchewan 

raised $92,000 by fasting for 30 hours in this annual fund-raiser 

which was spearheaded by World Vision. This year the 30-hour 

famine will be held across Canada on February 24 and 25. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another example of how a group of students 

in a small Saskatchewan community can make a difference 

around the world. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Heart and Stroke Month 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This member's 

statement is relevant to the constituency of Meadow Lake  



February 10, 1995 

 

92 

because, with possibly the exception of the MLA (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly), everyone there does have a heart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, February is Heart and Stroke Month, 

and activities to promote awareness of this cause are taking 

place in cities and small towns all across Saskatchewan. I just 

came from a breakfast this morning where there were 4 or 500 

people present to kick off the fund-raising campaign here in 

Regina. 

 

There are about 3,200 Saskatchewan residents who die each 

year from heart disease and strokes. And so, Mr. Speaker, the 

work that the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan 

does is vital in trying to decrease these numbers. And there is 

good news: recent statistics show that 40 per cent of all deaths 

in Canada were attributed to these causes. This represents a 

steady decline since the mid-60s when the figure was over 50 

per cent. 

 

Last year, the heart and stroke foundation raised more than $2.1 

million here in Saskatchewan. Fifty-three per cent of that total 

was designated to support research and development projects at 

the University of Saskatchewan and 28 per cent was committed 

to community development and education programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the odds are improving in the fight against heart 

disease and strokes because of the research programs. Over the 

next few days, thousands of volunteers will be giving their time 

and energy during a province-wide canvass to raise funds for 

the heart and stroke foundation. I encourage you, Mr. Speaker, 

and everywhere in Saskatchewan to donate generously. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

North Battleford Citizen of the Year 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the 1994 citizens of the 

year for North Battleford were honoured on February 3 at 

ceremonies which celebrated their contribution to the 

community. Robert Erickson is the citizen of the year, and 

Jennifer Olson the junior citizen of the year. 

 

Both have quite a list of achievements, too numerous to all be 

listed. For the past three years Robert Erickson has been busy 

raising funds and obtaining hockey equipment for 

underprivileged minor hockey players. He spends more than 40 

hours each week driving these young hockey players to and 

from practices and games. When his name was put forward for 

this honour, it was noted that now, in his retirement, Bob 

spends more time volunteering in the community than the 

average person does on the job. He is also involved in 

recruiting swimmers for the 1995 North American Indigenous 

Games to be held in Minnesota. 

 

Jennifer Olson, a grade 12 student at North Battleford 

Comprehensive High School, also has quite an impressive list 

of accomplishments, Mr. Speaker. Jennifer helped organize the 

schools’ food drive for the Salvation Army. She's participated  

in the 30-hour famine to raise funds for starving children in 

third-world countries. She chairs the student Crime Stoppers 

program. She is president of the drama club and president of the 

Students Against Drinking and Driving. 

 

We congratulate both the recipients of the citizen of the year 

honours for making their community a better place in which to 

live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight in Prince 

Albert the people of Prince Albert will honour its citizen of the 

year, Myrna Nagy, at a banquet, Mr. Speaker. Myrna Nagy has a 

long list of achievements, and I'm sure everyone will agree that 

Prince Albert is a better place to live because of her 

involvement in so many activities. 

 

Myrna was born and raised in Prince Albert and has been a 

member of the business community and an active volunteer for 

over 30 years. She is a community leader and is a role model for 

women throughout north central Saskatchewan. Myrna has 

served as president of the Kinette Club of Prince Albert, has 

served on the executive, and was the first life member of the 

Prince Albert Kinette Club. She also served on the board of 

directors of the Kinsmen Foundation in connection with the 

distribution of funds raised through Telemiracle. 

 

Myrna also had a role to play in the 1994 western Canada figure 

skating championships, the 1992 summer games, performing 

arts committee, and served on the United Way board of 

directors. 

 

Other organizations where she has been active include the 

downtown business association, the Prince Albert Chamber of 

Commerce, Waskesiu Chamber of Commerce, the Council on 

Ageing, the YWCA, and a member of the Victoria Union 

Hospital board foundation. 

 

And my colleague, the Minister of Energy, the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote, will be attending the banquet in Prince 

Albert tonight. I want to congratulate the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald for continuing with this very worthwhile event annually. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Seniors Commemorate our 90th Birthday 

 

Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is having its 90th 

birthday this year and activities are continuing to escalate 

province-wide. One of these projects involves one of 

Saskatchewan's great resources — our seniors. 

 

Saskatchewan seniors were recently recognized by The 

Guinness Book of Records for making the world's largest quilt. 

Now throughout the province seniors are attempting to make  



February 10, 1995 

 

93 

the world's largest birthday card. This project is being launched 

by the Saskatchewan Seniors Association and its 350 affiliated 

seniors’ clubs throughout the province. And it's being done to 

commemorate our 90th birthday. 

 

This huge card would be unveiled in June at the annual 

convention in North Battleford. And the finished product will 

include individual cards that are being made by seniors' clubs 

throughout the province. Everyone in the province is being 

asked to contribute by contributing a loonie to have their name 

placed in the card from their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is this project headed for The Guinness 

Book of Records, but a major portion of the money raised will 

be kept in the local community. 

 

Congratulations to the province's seniors on another innovative 

idea which promotes Saskatchewan and enhances the lives of 

thousands of our people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I'm not certain if there are any other 

members who want to make private members' statements. We're 

not finished with private members' statements yet . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . She may ask for leave, but we have not 

finished with private members' statements. If anybody else 

wishes to make a private member statement at this particular 

time, they can do that. If not, I recognize the minister. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm extremely 

pleased today to be able to welcome a number of special guests 

to the legislature. I will introduce a number of chiefs and other 

first nations' members who are here with us today. 

 

If I could ask the chiefs to stand when I call your name and 

remain standing so the members of the legislature can recognize 

you. Chief Harry Lafond, Muskeg Lake Cree Nation; Chief 

Alphonse Bird, Grand Chief, Prince Albert Grand Council; 

Oneill Gladue, Vice-Chief, Meadow Lake Tribal Council; Terry 

Lavallee, Chief, Cowessess Cree Nation; Joe O'Watch, Chief, 

Carry The Kettle First Nation; Edward Bill, Chief, Pelican 

Lake; Tom Bear, Agency Chiefs Tribal Council; Vice-Chief 

Alan Adam, FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations); Vice-Chief Dan Bellegarde; and Chief Louis 

Taypotat, Kahkewistahaw. And I'll now introduce the other 

people: Dorothy Thomas, Hickson Weenie, Herb Fiddler, Don 

Deranger, and of course Chief Blaine Favel, Chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce a group of Regina business people who are with us 

here today. And I want to first introduce Gord Staseson and the 

chairperson of the Regina Economic Development Authority; 

Jim Kilkenny, the president of Regina Tourism; Gerry 

Norbraten, the president of the Regina Market Square; Brian 

Kinder, representing the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

Brian's with us in spirit; he was with us earlier. Michael Phelps, 

the president of Sask Architectural Heritage Society; Larry 

Bird, past president of the Regina hoteliers' association; and 

Mark Hanley, representing the Regina Market Square. 

 

I would like all members of the Assembly to join with us in 

welcoming the group with us today who are here for the 

announcement that will be heard later in the Assembly, I'm sure 

in question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, allow me 

the privilege of, as well, introducing and making welcome our 

native folks from the FSIN and in fact Chief Favel, and 

certainly chief from the area that I represent, have known for a 

number of years, Louis Taypotat and everyone who is here, we 

welcome you on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that 

on behalf of the Liberal caucus I welcome these very 

distinguished guests today, not only from the first nations of 

Saskatchewan, but the business community of Regina as well. 

We're very, very pleased that they are here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, I also ask for leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will introduce the guests 

with due respect to our languages. Mr. Speaker, I will entitle 

you, Otayamiw, meaning Mr. Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Casino Expansion 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I direct 

the question to the Premier and I wish that he could answer. 

Maybe Madam Minister will pick it up. 



February 10, 1995 

 

94 

Mr. Premier, Madam Minister, today your government has 

opened the floodgates for Las Vegas-style casinos, shortly after 

swearing that no more than two casinos would be built. Only 

half an hour ago the opposition learned some of the details of 

that so-called agreement. We contend that your government has 

caved in to the pressures of a pressure lobby group. So now we 

have up to five to six casinos that are going to be built in 

Saskatchewan and that is a betrayal upon the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, or Madam Minister, will you show us the studies 

that you have done that show that up to five or six Las Vegas-

style casinos will be economically viable? Can you, Madam 

Minister, show us your due diligence on this megaproject? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member from 

Rosthern for his question. As you know, any of these 

developments would involve business people and they are not 

going to proceed without due diligence and without study on 

the viability of these projects. 

 

The operating agreement that we have signed today requires 

market study viability. So I would think that neither ourselves 

nor the first nations are interested in getting involved in 

economic development that doesn't fulfil their objectives of 

improving their community circumstance. And I expect that 

they would do everything required to make sure that happens. 

 

In regards to the Las Vegas-style casino, I have never quite 

understood what that was all about anyway. But the agreement 

specifies community, low impact, scaled to what the community 

is able to handle and what seems reasonable for that market and 

that location. So these are low-impact, community-scale 

operations. 

 

As you understand, when the decision was made not to proceed 

with Saskatoon . . . Saskatoon was part of the original 

agreement that was negotiated with the first nations, so what we 

had to do was enter into a renegotiation in order to deal with 

that fact. And what we have done is set out an agreement where 

the total amount of gaming activity would not exceed what 

would have existed under that agreement. 

 

I would say we have not caved in. We have proceeded with an 

agreement that's been negotiated for a considerable time now 

with the replacement provisions for Saskatoon. And although it 

specifies that up to four casinos could be built, those all require 

market study and community approval. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Madam Minister . . . Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. You say that there are some things about the Las 

Vegas-style casinos that you don't understand. Well, Madam 

Minister, I submit to you there's a lot more that you don't 

understand. And more unfortunately, there's a lot more that the 

people of this province don't understand. 

Now I thought for a while that it was dishonourable for the 

Premier not to go to the people of Saskatchewan to talk to them 

and ask them what they thought about these styles of casinos. 

And I thought it was a shameful display of weak leadership that 

the Premier had, in spite of his personal objections to go ahead 

with such a project. 

 

As a result of your agreement, Madam Minister, the money 

generated by these casinos will be spread around. Seventy-five 

per cent of the money from the new reserve casino goes to 

Indian bands, the government 25 per cent, and area charities 

and exhibitions get nothing. They have to go to the FSIN for 

their funding. What's more, the 25 per cent that you gave to 

charities from the Regina casino will be significantly reduced 

because your own studies show that there is only one casino 

that could be economically viable. 

 

So I say to you, and Mr. Premier, people don't want your 

casinos. Charities and exhibition associations are going to be 

devastated. Tell the people of this Assembly, tell the people of 

this Assembly what mandate you have to accomplish this major 

shift and change of direction within the province of 

Saskatchewan where you undertake this . . . when you 

undertake this. Where is your mandate? Where is democracy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the hon. member for his 

question. I'm always amazed at the short memories in this 

House even though we have Hansard to refer to, but bingo 

expanded under your administration by 2,500 per cent. I don't 

remember the community consultations that took place when 

you made that decision. Obviously you had reasons why you 

made that decision and I'm not going to debate today whether 

they were good reasons or not. I know they affected the 

organization that I worked with considerably but we're not here 

to discuss that right now. 

 

The new model in this agreement is based on a partnership 

which includes revenue sharing, so even when a casino is built 

on a reserve, if in fact it passes all the other criteria, there's a 

requirement that those revenues don't go just to that reserve but 

they get shared throughout the reserve community, with the 

government, and with charities, who I might add are desperately 

in need of these kinds of revenues to create the same level of 

service in those communities that we appreciate in our 

communities. 

 

We've had a continuing commitment to protect charities in this 

province and I think our two decisions before Christmas and 

one subsequently have illustrated that we've kept with that 

commitment. 

 

In Regina, the first nations negotiated with the exhibition 

association and the exhibition association's level of revenues 

has been protected. I understand that if they were operating in 

other communities, that would be part of their discussions that 

they would have with the communities that they're interested in 

participating with. 



February 10, 1995 

 

95 

There is a flip in the funding arrangement and once the first 

nation share from reserves . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that a flip or is that a flop? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You might be interested in 

understanding this. If not, okay, we'll answer it next time. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, it's 

our understanding that your government and FSIN are going to 

present the federal government with proposals that give the 

Indians full jurisdiction in relation to all forms of gaming on 

reserves, either through amendments to the Criminal Code of 

Canada or through new federal legislation. 

 

Madam Minister, is this not an admission that the first nations 

do not presently have jurisdiction over gaming on reserves? 

And if this is the case, why are you allowing this casino 

megaproject now to go ahead? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the hon. member for his 

question. It is true that there have been discussions about 

jurisdiction around this issue. There's nobody here, including 

yourself, that isn't familiar with the situation that developed 

around White Bear. Now the problem there was that the 

province and the FSIN had a differing view of how we could do 

this. The FSIN's position is that inherent right enables them to 

regulate gaming. Our position was that we had a responsibility 

under the Criminal Code to do this. Now as you know, 

jurisdiction has been the subject of long discussion in Canada, 

many constitutional rounds, and we feel it will take a while yet 

to sort these things out. 

 

In the meantime, rather than taking an adversarial approach and 

having a great deal of conflict within our communities in 

Saskatchewan, we've decided to work in partnership and to 

agree to a regulatory framework where the province still retains 

responsibility for the Criminal Code, but the Indian first 

nations' licensing authority will take responsibility for 

charitable gaming on reserves. And many municipalities have 

had this same ability to have responsibility for charitable 

licensing. 

 

So I would just say that we see this as a great improvement, and 

the first nations see this as a great improvement, in control and 

regulation. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, your 

government's actions in gambling have been nothing short of 

incompetent since the very beginning. Saskatoon has already 

said no to a casino, and now you're saying they may get one 

whether they want it or not. 

 

Madam Minister, what's the hurry with this casino  

megaproject? Why not support a motion in this legislature 

which would allow a referendum during the next provincial 

election? If you're so proud of this agreement and you're so 

willing to stand up and defend this defenceless position, why 

not put it to the vote of the people of this Saskatchewan? Why 

not allow everyone the opportunity to say yes or no to this 

development? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can see, hon. member opposite, why 

we've had five ministers of Gaming; you just wear them out 

asking the same questions over and over again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll go back to the beginning. We have 

had gaming in this province since 1969. Not any time in that 

time period has this issue seemed to be so pressing to either of 

the parties opposite, and I'm not sure why all of a sudden you've 

decided it is. 

 

We have proceeded with a responsible development that went 

through the proper procedures in Regina, in terms of city 

council. It's been debated to death, both in the media and in this 

House. There's been plenty of opportunity for people's elected 

representatives to question these decisions. We feel it's time to 

get on with it. 

 

However, in recognition of the kind of concerns raised, the only 

casino that's proceeding at this time is Regina. All other 

developments do require community approval. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, with 

answers like that we will likely have a sixth minister before 

very long. No question about it. 

 

Madam Minister, Chief Favel of the FSIN has said, and I quote 

. . . From your very press release, from your government's press 

release, I quote of Chief Favel: it will be the key priority of the 

FSIN to ensure that all people approve of casino developments 

before they begin. Before they begin, everyone will be given the 

chance to have approval. 

 

That's what the chief is allowing his people, Madam Minister. 

Will you also allow the people of Saskatchewan the same 

opportunity, Madam Minister, and have a say in casino 

development across this province? 

 

Will you allow the same thing that the chief is allowing the 

Indian bands across this province — a vote, Madam Minister? 

The people of this province deserve a vote. Will you allow that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To the hon. member opposite, my 

understanding of this legislature is that we are elected to  



February 10, 1995 

 

96 

represent people and to make responsible decisions on behalf of 

all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now obviously it's important to consult. And obviously it's 

important to deal with social impacts. However, we feel that 

Saskatoon has spoken. We feel that Regina has had plenty of 

discussion on the topic. And you do know that nothing will 

proceed without band approval, without approval of the 

municipality in which the casino would be located, without the 

nearest market community, and the agreement of the provincial 

government. So there is a great deal of approval mechanism in 

there. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Social Assistance for the Disabled 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, I 

know that you have received correspondence from a young 

woman named Bernie Juneau regarding her mother, Mrs. 

Genevieve Doherty of Lake Lenore. 

 

She recently sent us a letter with some questions she wanted 

to be asked in the legislature, which are as follows: why is 

it that in Saskatchewan people who are born disabled are 

treated the same as people who are not disabled under the 

social assistance program? People who are permanently 

disabled have no choice but to be on social assistance for 

they are not capable of working, whereas people who are 

not disabled are capable of working but just don't want to 

and they get the same amount of money if not more. Other 

provinces have special income for people who are disabled. 

My mother has cerebral palsy and is unable to work, and 

her total income, Mr. Speaker, is 471.56 per month. 

 

Mr. Minister, the question is: how do you justify how someone 

can live off of that amount of money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I really do appreciate 

the member's question and I know it's an important question. 

But I want to tell him that I would very much appreciate if you 

would share the information. 

 

There's some technical numbers there that I just didn't quite get, 

but if you share that with us I will make the best attempt to get 

the minister in charge of Social Services to respond to you in 

the Assembly when we find out exactly what the situation is. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

thought the question was very specific. The lady is asking how 

do you expect her mother to live on $471.56? How do you 

expect that? At the same time you give as much money or more 

to people who are not disabled. I don't know what you're talking 

about when you're talking about specifics. How more specific 

can the lady get? 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to point out to you, this is exactly 

what Social Services was meant for — to help those that are 

unable to help themselves. That's the whole idea of Social 

Services . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Does the member have a question? I'd like the 

member to get to his question. 

 

Mr. Britton: — And the question is, Mr. Minister, if 

employable people were put back to work, we would actually 

have more money for Mrs. Doherty who has a serious disability 

that she can't help herself. She was born with it. These are the 

people who our programs were meant for, Mr. Minister. And I 

would like to ask you what are you going to do about the 

80,000 people who are on welfare today. What can you do for 

those people that are on welfare, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 

answer that question because it relates directly with a question 

that isn't being asked today and that's the January job numbers, 

that I notice neither of the opposition parties are asking about, 

which clearly show that the number of people working in 

Saskatchewan in January of '95 is 12,000 more than it was in 

January of '94. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

specifically to the members of the opposition and the Leader of 

the Liberal Party, who likes to refer to StatsCanada, that it's 

little wonder that she is not asking a question about jobs today 

when the record of the business community in creating jobs in 

this province is second to none anywhere in Canada for 

November, December, and January. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to, Mr. Speaker, comment on 

the member's comments that welfare rates are too low. I 

understand his concern, I understand his concern, but I want to 

say in light of the huge deficit that we have in this province and 

in light of the fact of what is happening in Alberta with welfare 

recipients under Mr. Klein, where they are being treated in a 

very, very shabby manner, your arguing for higher welfare rates 

or better treatment for welfare recipients flies in the face of 

what is happening to the west of us in Alberta. 

 

And I'd ask you to compare, with people who are handicapped 

or on welfare, what is going on in that province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Mrs. 

Doherty's daughter and son, Bernie and Michael, are here today. 

I know they would appreciate an opportunity to meet with you 

to discuss this. 

 

Could you meet with them this afternoon to see if you could do 

anything to assist these people? Would you meet with them  



February 10, 1995 

 

97 

after question period, Mr. Minister, and see if there's something 

that you could work out for these people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I or one of my 

colleagues will certainly meet with the individuals you mention. 

I say as well that I compliment the member for raising this issue 

and maybe there is one member in that Tory caucus with a 

heart. I wish that he were running again to continue that 

influence, because what I see from other members is a shift to 

the Reform Party and the Ralph Klein style of government. So I 

want to say to you: of course, we will meet with them and do 

our best to deal with the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Responders Program 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the Minister of Health made a comment in the House 

that he had a fear he wouldn't receive any questions during this 

session, so I just want to put those fears to rest. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the past two years you've been part of a process 

that has closed down hospitals, displaced hundreds of health 

care professionals. Now only one-third of the nurses in this 

province are full time and we have lost 50 doctors in the last six 

months — eight in Melfort alone. First responders, as you call 

them, are now expected to take the place of these health care 

professionals. 

 

Mr. Minister, how does having people with one week of 

training responding to life and death emergencies fit into your 

version of wellness? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the member's 

question, in regard to the first responders program, he must be 

one of a handful of people across all of Saskatchewan who does 

not welcome the first responders program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This program was pioneered in and around the districts of 

Regina and Saskatoon. It has now expanded across the 

province. By the end of this year we will have trained 700, Mr. 

Speaker, 700 more first responders. These are neighbours and 

friends in the community given those basic skills to respond 

immediately to an emergency. 

 

Already, because of the first responders program, lives have 

been saved in our province. I can't believe a member would 

stand in this House and criticize the first responders program. I 

can't believe it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

that is the problem. You're replacing doctors and nurses with 

people with very little training. 

 

Mr. Minister, as the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

stated in a letter to you and the last minister of Health, and I'll  

quote: 

 

 Just keep your fingers crossed that when you have a 

heart attack you're standing next to a volunteer who has 

completed his 40-hour course and will help you for free, 

because so many nurses have been fired that you can't 

get any professional help for a long time unless of 

course you live in Regina close . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. We have about 10 

people talking at the same time when the member is trying to 

ask his questions. I wish the members would please give him 

the respect at least to ask the question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I'll finish 

the quote: 

 

 So many nurses have been fired that you can't get any 

professional help for a long time unless of course you 

live in Regina close to the minister. Talk about doing 

things on the cheap. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to table the letter so other members 

can have a copy of this. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you and your colleagues, colleagues in the 

front rows, feel safe having your family and your friends' lives 

in the hands of people with as little as one week of training? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as much as I appreciate the 

member's questions and always will, I do find it passing strange 

— and I'm sure all members of the House find it passing strange 

— that on a day when there is a major casino announcement, on 

a day when the job statistics in Saskatchewan are going straight 

up, the Leader of the Liberal Party does not raise those issues in 

the House, but instead has one of her back-benchers raise a 

variety of other issues which we'll have a whole session to 

debate and discuss. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. There's got to be 

some relevancy from the answer that he's getting to the 

question. 

 

Order, order. The minister can refuse to answer a question. But 

if the minister does answer there has to be some relevancy 

between the answer and the question that is being asked. 

 

Mr. McPherson — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously I'm 

shocked and amazed that the Minister of Health . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member please ask his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question is 

so important to the members of our caucus; it may not be to the 

Minister of Health but, Mr. Minister, the previous minister of 

Health had no understanding of the fear and anxiety created by 

this move. Even a member of your own government could not  



February 10, 1995 

 

98 

support this attack on rural Saskatchewan by further stating: 

God help us, every one. 

 

Mr. Minister, the ball is in your court. You have the ability to 

return to the people of rural Saskatchewan an adequate and safe 

and reliable health care system. Will you commit to doing this 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond very 

directly to the member's question. And I want the member to 

know not only is job creation happening across our province, 

it's happening in the medical profession. 

 

I want the member to note these figures. In December of 1991, 

practising in rural Saskatchewan, we had 221 rural family 

practitioners. Today, as I speak, we have 242. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In addition, we have literally hundreds of 

Saskatchewan people in communities who have volunteered 

their time, volunteered their care for their neighbour to serve as 

first responders, and that is good news for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

Minister of Health has the same problem as the Minister of 

Economic Development with the jobs and numbers that they 

were so confused with, because when you travel throughout 

rural Saskatchewan and you find out that there's one thousand 

displaced health care workers in rural Saskatchewan, and we 

have doctors leaving at an alarming rate, and you stand up and 

say we have a better and more health care in rural 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, what you have done in 

Saskatchewan is created a two-tiered health care system. People 

of rural Saskatchewan are being treated as second-class citizens, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Will you stand in this House and guarantee the people that you 

will give them back what they rightfully deserve — a proper 

health care system? Can't you stand and do that today, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify in the 

member's mind some facts so that he should have the facts. I 

will refer again to the supply of physicians in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. Now listen. In December '93, we had 740 — this is 

province-wide — family practitioners. December '94, 752 

family practitioners, rural and urban. Mr. Speaker, in 1993 at 

December we had 437 specialists in our province. In December 

'94, 455 specialists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he talks about doctors fleeing the province. It's 

simply not true, Mr. Speaker, it is simply not true. These are the 

facts, and I hope now that's clarified the member's mind. 

 

Now I also would want to clarify in his mind, and in the minds 

of all members of his caucus, the opposition caucus, because  

the member in his question talks about jobs. Mr. Speaker, he 

should know that year over year from January 1994 to January 

1995, there are 12,000 more jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to table the 

agreement that we just negotiated today with the first nations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — . . . doesn't need leave . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I don't think it's the opposition that I'm 

concerned about. If the Government House Leader, by pointing 

his finger at me, is threatening me in any way, I will take 

whatever action is necessary. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, I would ask leave of the Assembly to revert to 

condolence motions for Dr. Jack Wolfe. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's with a 

great degree of hardship that I rise today in recognition of a 

former member of this House, Mr. Jack Wolfe. The majority of 

our members were able to pay our last respects to Jack on 

Tuesday. The attendance of ourselves and the whole 

community, Mr. Speaker, at the service indicated just how 

many people admired, respected, and liked Jack Wolfe. Perhaps 

not yet but in time his family will take comfort in the fact that 

hundreds — hundreds — of people attended Jack's funeral in 

support of his family and in respect for Jack himself. 

 

Although I did not have the opportunity to work directly with 

Jack, I was well aware of his reputation of honour and integrity. 

 

Jack Wolfe will be sorely missed by all, but particularly by his 

young wife and family. Pastor Rick Aupperle gave the eulogy 

on Tuesday last, and in it he spoke of the kind, decent, honest 

man that Jack Wolfe was. But probably the comment that 

touched me most was when Pastor Aupperle spoke directly to 

Gail Wolfe and her children when he said to them, Mr. Speaker, 

Jack just made a mistake. He just made a mistake, and we 

should allow him that because we all make mistakes. And I 

think that summed it up very nicely I think for the people at the 

attendance at the service that day. Jack Wolfe just simply made 

a mistake, and we should allow him that. 

 

May our thoughts and our prayers be with Gail and her three 

children at this most difficult time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I move this motion, seconded by the member for Thunder 

Creek: 

 

  



February 10, 1995 

 

99 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and this 

province. 

 

 John Thomas Wolfe who passed away on February 2, 

1995 was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg from 1988 to 

1991. 

 

Seconded by the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

second the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition. And 

I want to do that and join with members of the House, on both 

sides of the House, in expressing our sympathy to the family of 

Jack Wolfe and share with the members here some of the 

contributions that our former colleague made to this Assembly 

and to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I therefore rise, Mr. Speaker, to speak of the tragic death of a 

former colleague and a member of this Assembly, Dr. Jack 

Wolfe, who died suddenly at his home in Rockglen on February 

2. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it needs not be said, but words are hardly 

sufficient to express this Assembly's grief and sympathy for Dr. 

Wolfe's wife Gail and their three young children, Tricia, Katie, 

and Steven. Our hearts also go out to the many other members 

of Dr. Wolfe's family and the community from which he came. 

 

As a member of this Assembly, as a minister of the Crown, Mr. 

Wolfe conducted himself with sincerity and a strong sense of 

duty to his constituents and to the people of Saskatchewan. He 

represented the constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg from 

1988 to 1991 and held several posts in the previous 

administration, including associate minister of Health and 

minister of Urban Affairs and Community Services. 

 

The passing of a friend and colleague at the prime time of his 

life is a tragedy, and his contribution will not be forgotten. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to join in expressing the appreciation of my 

colleagues on my side of the House for his contribution. 

 

I know that the motion will read, and reads: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation for the contribution 

he made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

 John Thomas Wolfe, who passed away on February 2, 

1995, was a member of this Assembly for the 

constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg from 1988 to 

1991. Before that and before he became a veterinarian 

he studied biology at the University of Saskatchewan. 

And in 1979 he graduated with distinction from the  

Western College of Veterinary Medicine. 

 

 He practised as a veterinarian in Alberta for one year 

before returning to Rockglen. There he established a 

veterinary clinic with his wife, Susan Gail Snyder, 

whom he married on January 26, 1980. Mr. Wolfe also 

practised veterinary medicine at the thoroughbred and 

standardbred race tracks in Regina and Saskatoon. Mr. 

Wolfe was extensively involved in community economy 

development projects and was chairman of the first 

Rural Development Corporation in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Mr. Wolfe was first elected to the Legislative Assembly 

in the by-election in 1988. He held the post of associate 

minister of Health from 1989 until his appointment as 

minister of Urban Affairs late in 1990. On January 1, 

1991, Mr. Wolfe was appointed minister of Community 

Services and was also responsible for Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation and Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation. He ran again in the 1991 general 

election but was not successful in retaining his seat. 

Nevertheless Mr. Wolfe's interest in Saskatchewan did 

not diminish, and he remained active in his political 

party. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 

And I want to say personally, Mr. Speaker, that I had the 

privilege of getting to know Mr. Wolfe when I was re-elected to 

this House, and I had a great deal of respect for the contribution 

that he has made. And along with the members of this 

Assembly, I also personally want to join in expressing my 

sympathies to the Wolfe family, his wife and his children, and I 

am pleased to second the motion that has been moved by the 

member from Kindersley. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 

other members in this House as we pay tribute to the former 

member, Dr. Jack Wolfe, who served three years in this 

Assembly as the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

On behalf of my caucus, I extend to the family of Jack Wolfe 

our most sincere and heartfelt sympathy on this very tragic 

occasion. Jack's wife, Gail, is left to raise three young children, 

Tricia, Katie, and Steven, on her own. I know that the members 

of Jack's and Gail's extended families will be of great help to 

her in this lonely and daunting task. But I also know that the 

people of Rockglen will be there to be supportive, caring, and 

helping neighbours, as Saskatchewan people are known to do. 

 

My deepest condolences go out to Gail and her children. Theirs 

will be a long and difficult recovery from this very tragic event. 

 

Although I didn't know Jack well, I had heard many moving 

tributes to this man in this very Chamber throughout the past 

five days. Adjectives such as kind, hard-working, and dedicated  



February 10, 1995 

 

100 

have often been used to describe Jack Wolfe. He has also been 

lauded as someone who left this office the way he came to it: 

unjaded and his priorities intact. 

 

His family, his friends, his colleagues, and his constituents have 

every reason to be proud of his accomplishments and his many 

contributions that he made in his short life. Let the message of 

Dr. Jack Wolfe's service to his province be that he served 

quietly, competently, and diligently. We are all very proud of 

his service. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

never once dreamt that during my service in this legislature that 

I would be standing giving a eulogy to my friend and former 

colleague, Jack Wolfe. Jack and I were very similar in age and 

when one thinks about your late 30's, early 40's, you think about 

the prime of life. Your children are born and growing. You 

have established yourself in your community. You have started 

to build upon your life's dreams. And to have someone removed 

from those dreams and from their family and from their 

community at that age is something, Mr. Speaker, that is almost 

unfathomable to think about. 

 

There was nothing more shocking than to pick up the phone a 

week and a half ago to chat with Jack about some mutual 

concerns and to have Gail have to inform me that Jack had 

passed away. It's not something that you ever wish to happen, 

Mr. Speaker, and I'm amazed at the strength that Mrs. Gail 

Wolfe has shown over the last while. 

 

(1100) 

 

Jack was one of those people that had a tremendous zest, Mr. 

Speaker, for doing things, and one quickly saw that during the 

by-election campaign in 1988 when Jack was first elected to 

this House. By-elections, for anyone that has been through one 

in this province know that they are very stressful because you 

often have the entire attention of the province focused on you. 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, we in this province take our politics 

very seriously. I think one reason that Jack and I felt a 

comradeship very early on was that I had gone through that 

process three years before he had in a by-election represented 

. . . or in a constituency that had been represented by a high-

profile politician, in Jack's case a former member of this House, 

now the Hon. Ralph Goodale; in my case, the former minister 

of Energy, the Hon. Colin Thatcher. 

 

When you're put into that situation, you soon find out about 

politics in this province, and you soon find out about your own 

skills, about your own ability to operate in the public milieu of 

politics in this province. And Jack just shone, Mr. Speaker. It 

was evident right from the minute of his nomination meeting, 

right through to the end when victory was his, that this was a 

man who was born to be in the public eye. 

 

He relished the contact with people; he relished the challenges 

that were brought before him very quickly by the constituents of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And it was no surprise that after a very 

short time in this House, Mr. Speaker, that Jack Wolfe was  

asked to join the cabinet and take on some very major tasks. 

 

Certainly, as we know, Health and that portfolio is one that 

people in this province take an extreme amount of interest in. 

And Jack just delved into it. He immersed himself, Mr. 

Speaker, in his duties, like few others that I've seen in my 

political experience. 

 

And it was nothing to see Jack Wolfe put in a full day in this 

building, being here very early in the morning. The House 

would rise at 10 o'clock at night, and you'd see him actually 

almost running down the hall back to his office. And you'd say, 

where are you going, Jack, in such a hurry? He said, I've got to 

get on the telephone. There's people in my constituency. There 

are people around this province that need to talk to me about 

things. And he would go back to his office and sit on the 

telephone till midnight many times and be back in this building 

again very, very early in the morning. It just amazed me that a 

person could have that kind of constitution that you could be so 

immersed in your duties that you could keep up that regime. 

 

But people in his family and people around Rockglen tell me 

that that wasn't unusual for Dr. Jack Wolfe because as he grew 

up, first in Killdeer, Saskatchewan and then later attending 

school in Rockglen, off to the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan), back to the community of Rockglen in the 

veterinary business, that that was his whole life. That was . . . it 

was achievement, and it was being part of people's lives. 

 

And I think the monuments, if you will, of Jack's endeavour are 

there for people to see. That constituency, Mr. Speaker, had felt 

for a long time that because they were far removed from the 

centres of population and power in this province that they 

perhaps deserved more facilities, and particularly for seniors. 

And it was mentioned at Jack's funeral, Mr. Speaker, by the 

pastor, that there are innumerable people in that riding today 

that will always be reminded of Jack Wolfe and his contribution 

because he listened to those people, and he helped them in their 

communities to build things that serve for generations to come. 

 

So no matter what people may think, Mr. Speaker, about the 

circumstances surrounding Jack's passing, I think for a very 

long time to come, people — certainly in Rockglen and area — 

will understand his passion for achieving and for their lives. 

 

As my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, said, Jack 

probably made a mistake that day. And I know that Gail was the 

one that explained to her children that their dad had made a 

mistake that day. But I think Tricia and Katie and Steven know, 

Mr. Speaker, that if Jack had it to do over again, I'm sure he 

wouldn't have made that mistake because he was an individual 

who didn't make many. He was an individual that strived not to 

make mistakes. 

 

And I don't understand the pressures that he was under because 

only Jack understood. But, Mr. Speaker, it says something to all 

of us in this province that those types of pressures perhaps are 

not acceptable to people in public life. I think we in this 

Assembly, as the pastor said that day, need to really think about  



February 10, 1995 

 

101 

public life and how we relate ourselves to the people we serve 

because it is a true tragedy when someone with so much talent 

and so much to give feels so much pressure that they make that 

one mistake in life that can't be reversed. All of us owe my 

friend Jack Wolfe the opportunity, I guess, to have made that 

mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack's service in this legislature is something that 

I'll always remember, as all of us will I believe. And I think it is 

right and proper that in the years to come when Gail and Tricia 

and Katie and Steven and the baby to be born can review the 

proceedings today and know that their dad, a husband, and a 

colleague of so many of us contributed a lot and really was 

appreciated by the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it's indeed a privilege for me today, Mr. Speaker, to be part 

of this condolence motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I shall be relatively brief. The 

incident surrounding the former member from Assiniboia is a 

reminder of what a terrible price this place extracts upon the 

people who serve in it. It also reminds me that sometimes those 

who care very deeply are the real victims. If there was a fault in 

Jack's character, it was that he cared very deeply. And 

sometimes such people are the victims of this process. 

 

I really rise to my feet not to comment on Mr. Wolfe's 

contribution to the legislature. Although I was here during that 

period, our critic areas never crossed, and our paths did not 

cross much. I really rose to contribute one thing to the debate, 

and that is a comment on his work as a veterinarian. 

 

It's easy to forget but there was a time in my life, Mr. Speaker, 

when I did earn an honest living. At one point in time I was a 

lawyer — and I guess it's all relative. I did practise law. I did go 

down to Coronach, the branch office in Coronach once a week. 

And Coronach and Rockglen are 40 miles distant. I can testify 

to the warmth and respect in which he was held in his 

community. He was thought of as the best veterinarian the 

south country ever had. 

 

Indeed it was kind of ironic; when he decided to run, it was 

assumed in that district that he would win, even by some of us 

who didn't necessarily wish him well in his political career. It 

was assumed he was going to win. That was met with as much 

regret as joy on the part of many of the farmers and ranchers 

down in the south country because they would express the 

comment that politicians, even good ones, are a dime a dozen. 

But good veterinarians are darn hard to find. And they were 

concerned about losing this veterinarian in their community. He 

was respected. He was conscientious, and just a good citizen 

and a good veterinarian. 

 

And I think perhaps, although the events surrounding his death 

are tragic — shockingly so — I suspect in the end he'll be 

remembered as he deserves to be remembered, and that is as the 

best veterinarian that country ever had. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too  

want to join in this morning, and it's with a great deal of pain 

and sadness that I address the legislature this morning and the 

Wolfe family. I want to also express my shock and heartfelt 

sadness on the passing of Jack Wolfe to Gail and to her family 

and to the extended families as well. These events, this tragedy, 

is hard to accept. And I find, Mr. Speaker, that the finality of 

the situation to me is still not comprehendable. 

 

I believe I knew Jack as well as most politicians, even though 

our friendship lasted a relatively short period of time, a few 

years. I met Jack first of all in the fall of 1988, I believe it was, 

during the by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, that by-election has been one of the 

highlights of my political career, namely because I met the 

candidate, our candidate, Jack Wolfe. And it was because of his 

enthusiasm and dynamics and just go-go-go type of an attitude 

that spurred on all the rest of us there that were there politicking 

on his behalf. And it was largely to his credit that we were able 

to squeak out a very thin victory in that by-election, which I 

believe was for the betterment of the entire province that Jack 

got elected at that particular time. 

 

So Jack and I served together as an MLA for a number of years, 

and we also sat shoulder to shoulder around the cabinet table. 

And when I reminisced this morning and tried to determine 

what I should talk about and how I should put my thoughts 

down in writing and then verbalize them, something that came 

to my mind is kind of surprising to me. But the classical 

characters in some Shakespearian tragedies that I used to teach 

about in school came to my mind, like Macbeth and Hamlet, 

where each of these individuals were inexorably drawn to their 

deaths through uncontrollable outside forces and what also 

turned out to be inherent, fatal characteristics and traits from 

within. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, at times I am led to believe that Jack was 

not really meant to be a politician. Bill, a close friend, told me 

after my first election . . . said to me, he says, Bill, you will now 

have to develop a thick skin or a sense of humour to survive. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the ensuing years I have tried to develop 

and maintain both of them. 

 

(1115) 

 

The Jack that I knew did not have a thick skin. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, at times I feel that Jack was too nice a man to be a 

politician. Not that he didn't enjoy politics, not that he didn't 

live it, not that he didn't breathe it, but he was too nice a man to 

be a politician. He was very, very sensitive. He was perhaps too 

caring. He was perhaps too uncompromising on his convictions 

and relentless in his pursuit of perfection, and he was impatient 

of bureaucratic roadblocks to action to solving problems. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's further my opinion that he was totally 

abhorrent of any suggestions that could impute dishonourable 

motivation on any of his actions. That's the Jack that I knew. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, I also sensed that Jack had a very high need 

to be accepted by his peers, in fact by his friends. It was almost  



February 10, 1995 

 

102 

a compulsion of his to have the reassurance that what he said 

and that what he did met with approval of those around him. 

Sitting beside him around the cabinet table for those countless 

hours reaffirms in my mind that Jack was vulnerable — oh, so 

vulnerable, Mr. Speaker — to what people thought of him. 

Nothing but perfection seemed to do. The word I heard most of 

all in any conversation that I had with Jack or any discussion or 

any arguments was: Right? Isn't that right? Don't you agree? 

 

Jack, quite frankly, was so brilliant, so far ahead of me, had 

such a firm grasp on any situation that arose that I just simply 

usually said, yes  not because I understood, but because he 

was probably right anyway. 

 

And I believe deep within our hearts, deep within our hearts, we 

all know that Jack did not do the right thing. As my colleague 

from Thunder Creek has pointed out, Jack made a mistake. And 

I'm sure that now all of us wish that we could have known him 

a little more clearly, a little more fully, understood him a little 

bit more fully so that we could have dissuaded him. 

 

But to Gail and the family, Jack acted out his code of honour. 

That is why I believe he did what he did. But more 

significantly, as opposed to the code of honour I think Jack 

acted out of love — love for you, Gail, love for your family. It 

was his way of protecting those around whom his life revolved 

because honesty, honour, and integrity meant more to him than 

life itself. 

 

Members of this legislature, Gail and her family are going to 

have a rough time ahead. But to Gail, I say, she is fortunate. She 

has a very supportive family. She has the support of the people 

of Saskatchewan, I believe, and certainly she does have the 

support of this caucus in particular. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the pamphlet that 

was handed out at Jack's memorial service because it's poignant 

to me. It's memorable to me, because in this print there is a 

poem entitled Footprints. And it is the same poem that was 

included in my brother's funeral a few years ago, so it is 

especially meaningful to me. And as Gail is going to go and set 

a new direction in her life and get her life into order, this poem 

on Footprints that she has chosen to include in Jack's memorial 

is very meaningful. 

 

Where it is footprints in the sand, two footprints for most of the 

time, occasionally there is only one set of footprints. And when 

this individual who saw this in his vision was before the Lord, 

he said: 

 

I don't understand, Lord, why when I needed you most you 

would leave me and there's only one set of footprints. And the 

Lord replied: "My precious, precious child, I love you and 

would never leave you. During your times of trial and suffering, 

when you see only one set of footprints, it was then that I 

carried you." 

 

And to Gail I say, the Lord's grace is sufficient for you as well. 

Thank you. 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 

opportunity to address the members of the legislature and to 

extend my sincerest sympathies to Gail Wolfe and her children, 

and to the Wolfe family, and to all the friends and relatives of 

Dr. Jack Wolfe. 

 

One thing that I would like to point out — and I'm sure will be 

shared by the members of this legislature — is the fact that I 

believe one of the most tragic consequences of the early passing 

of Dr. Jack Wolfe was the fact that the province, and not just 

his colleagues, won't have Jack Wolfe involved in the 

community and, from my vantage point, in public life . . . 

because of his vision of what Saskatchewan could be. 

 

And I say that because I got to know Jack fairly well, and we 

really liked each other. We had some things in common because 

we grew up on the farm. We went to university for a long time. 

We decided to leave a profession as an academic or as a doctor 

of veterinary medicine, and we'd sit and talk about that. Why 

would you put that behind you? Why run the risk of a tenured 

professor going on to politics or a very, very valuable person in 

the community, as my colleague, Mr. Shillington said, with 

respect to being a doctor of veterinary medicine and very good 

at it? 

 

And we came to the conclusion — and Jack would reinforce it, 

and I just loved to listen to him talk about it — because, he 

said, we honestly believed — and he did — that you can make a 

difference. And this Legislative Assembly and being involved 

in the democratic process was perhaps very risky and very 

difficult, but you could do it. And he really believed that. 

 

And believe me, from what I know, he loved being a doctor of 

veterinary medicine, and he was extremely good at it, but he 

said there's more that I could do. 

 

And you won't find anybody in this Legislative Assembly or in 

the province, Mr. Speaker, that would disagree with that. They 

knew Jack was very good at what he could do, and he stepped 

up to the plate and says, I think I can maybe even do some 

more. And that's the tragedy of taking a man that's 39 years old 

out of Saskatchewan life and Canadian life and preventing that 

full contribution to take place. 

 

Jack loved rural Saskatchewan, and it drove him. I mean he was 

involved, as we all know, with lots of economic projects and in 

health care projects, and he fought politically over them and he 

enjoyed the debate. And for him it was just the tip of the 

iceberg. He believed so strongly in his roots and his family and 

his vision for the province of Saskatchewan that he couldn't 

wait to get onto the next project. And he certainly enjoyed the 

debate whether it was in this Legislative Assembly or in the 

community or with family members. 

 

My wife Chantal will readily admit that Jack Wolfe was one of 

her favourite MLAs. She said she never campaigned with 

anybody quite like him because he would just stop and visit 

with anybody about any of their political problems or anything 

else at the drop of a hat. It was there. He wore his heart on his  



February 10, 1995 

 

103 

sleeve, and you could see it, and he was proud of it, and he 

defended it. And that's the way he was in his community life 

and the way he was in his family life. 

 

We are short enough of really good people in public life across 

Canada as it is, and that's why it's so difficult for members of 

the legislature to acknowledge the fact that we're missing a 

colleague with such intensity and such vision and such interest 

in public life. 

 

A colleague has said that maybe Jack wasn't cut out for public 

life. I think Jack was so close to being perfect for public life 

that in some cases it was to a fault. And as we know, it led to a 

decision that ended his life and indeed his service. 

 

I want to say that when we attended the funeral services in 

Rockglen, I'm not so sure that anybody has seen anything quite 

like it. Had the services in the hall, and they had microphones in 

the Catholic Church and microphones in the United Church, 

and there were people in all three facilities, and there were 

people that were turned away, and there were people that just 

drove into town to pay their respects. And they were coming 

from the South and the North and across the hills and from 

across the province, because they respected this young man to 

such a large extent. 

 

As a husband, and as a father, and as a brother, and as a doctor 

of veterinary medicine, as an MLA, as a cabinet minister, and as 

a friend, he was one of the most respected individuals that I've 

come across. I had the pleasure and indeed the opportunity to 

invite him into politics and invite him into cabinet, and to work 

with him at the cabinet table and watch him grow. I believe I 

was 37 when I was elected and took the chair of the premier's 

office in the province of Saskatchewan. Jack had the potential 

to be a leader in all kinds of things for the next 50 years. And at 

39, it's just an unbelievable tragedy that we have to stand here 

and acknowledge. 

 

He was a decent man, an honest man, trustworthy, 

conscientious, and for those of us in politics who would really 

appreciate it, he was just extremely loyal. He was a loyal friend, 

a loyal husband, loyal to his colleagues, certainly loyal to his 

leader. And he believed in it. He was loving and fun and 

interesting and intelligent and respectful and competitive and 

compassionate and proud, and he had ideals. And to his loved 

ones, and to his parents, his mom and dad, and to his brothers, 

his wife Gail particularly, and to his children Tricia, Katie, and 

Steven, and the child yet to be born, I can only say to you that 

we were and are and will continue to be extremely proud of the 

person, Dr. Jack Wolfe. He was one of the finest young men 

Saskatchewan has ever raised: well educated, well intentioned, 

well respected, and the kind of person that could really make a 

difference. 

 

We will miss him, Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, 

in this province, and I believe jurisdictions across the country 

will acknowledge the kind of contributions a man or a woman 

like this can make and could make are so large if given the 

opportunity. The tragedy here is that it was cut too short, but we  

hope not in vain. For those of us that served, and for those of us 

who plan to serve now and in the future, the vision of what Jack 

Wolfe could be, and was, should be there before us as long as 

we live. 

 

Our sincere sympathies to Mrs. Gail Wolfe and to her family 

and to all the members of the Wolfe family. We so much would 

like to provide the kind of comfort that you need. And all we 

can say is that we loved him dearly, and we will miss him 

dearly. God be with you at this time. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Toth: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm as well 

pleased to be able to stand this morning and just give a few of 

my thoughts about the man, Dr. Jack Wolfe. 

 

As my colleagues have indicated, the attendance at his funeral 

on Tuesday was certainly indicative of the respect Mr. Wolfe 

had gained in his community and certainly across the province. 

I will always remember Mr. Wolfe, my friend Jack, for that 

quick step. I will remember and picture him . . . I can picture 

him walking down the hallways of this Assembly with his 

cowboy boots on, with a broad smile on his face, ready to tackle 

any problem that may come his way, ready to reach out to any 

constituent or any individual, be it in this Legislative Assembly 

or outside or anybody in this province, to indeed attempt to do 

his best to serve their needs. 

 

I will remember Jack as a man of honour, a man of integrity, a 

very intelligent individual, a very vibrant person, full of life, 

ready to face the challenges of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack was a community man. He was not only a 

community man; he was a family man. And having had the 

privilege of just chatting on occasions with Jack and his wife 

Gail and meeting their family, they were indeed a couple that 

you enjoyed being around, a couple that you enjoyed visiting 

with, a couple full of vision, looking to the future. To Tricia and 

Katie and Steven, our hearts go out to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's circumstances such as we have just faced and 

we, facing Dr. Jack Wolfe's life, we will always ask the 

question: why? Why a man with so much for him, so youthful, 

so vibrant; his family needed him. His community needed him. 

Why, at 39, his life is tragically ended? 

 

But I can assure you that the legacy that he has left will live on. 

I believe Gail, her family, and the Wolfe family realize that. I 

believe they saw it, and it was evident at the funeral. And as we 

reflect this morning, that will live on. 

 

We can only speculate as to what we as colleagues or maybe 

even the system we have developed failed to do in offering Jack 

the support he needed before he made that fatal decision. As I 

heard the news, to be honest with you, Mr. Speaker, I had some 

anger in my life, to think that a life was snuffed out so quickly. 

 

I chatted with some constituents, and I think Jack had a bit of  



February 10, 1995 

 

104 

my character. I believe when Jack was elected, Jack came to 

this Assembly to serve the public, based on the view that he felt 

he could do something, not only for his community but for this 

province. And as my colleagues have already indicated, he 

sometimes became frustrated with the red tape of government. 

 

One of my constituents said to me: Don, remember this. You 

may feel and may like to and may desire to change the world, 

and you may feel like you're carrying it on your shoulders, but 

remember this. Do your best but never give up your integrity. 

 

And I believe that's what Jack felt he needed to preserve and 

made a choice that we all regret that we didn't have the chance 

to just sit down and chat with him about. 

 

I appreciated the eulogy and the thoughts the pastor shared with 

us. I can only say to Gail, to Trish, Katie, Steven of the Jack 

Wolfe family, reach down and draw from the strength within. 

As your pastor said, remember that there is a friend that sticketh 

closer than a brother. As I can only say on behalf of myself and 

my wife and my colleagues, as we've indicated, our thoughts 

and prayers are with you at this time in your life. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

acknowledge the fact today that Jack Wolfe was my friend. He 

was my friend as a politician, and as of my friend as a politician 

he was in my view an example to me as a hard worker. He was 

an example to me in integrity. 

 

And what I characterized Jack Wolfe as, as my friend, was that 

he liked to visit with me. We sat in that back corner for the first 

session of the Legislative Assembly. He sat right behind me and 

we visited. And everything that went on here, he had to know 

and understand every detail of it. And so we would visit about 

the content and the context of all of the things that were going 

on in this Assembly. 

 

He not only wanted to know why it was that way, he wanted to 

know the history behind it all. He was a person who was 

extremely pointed and he was extremely detailed in all of the 

things that he did. He wanted to know the history of why this 

was done and why that was done. He wanted to know, he 

wanted to understand it, and he wanted to understand it 

completely. He loved politics. Many times we would talk about 

the things that would develop as a tactic in this Legislative 

Assembly and then he would want to know the history of that. 

Why it was done that way. Why it could be done that way. 

 

He loved to talk politics in every facet of his life. Politics was 

his menu, and as my friend he would sit there and tell me about 

his aunt and an uncle in Swift Current, Mrs. and Mrs. Don 

Krueger. And he would tell me about how they'd discus politics 

because the Krueger family were strong Liberals, and he would 

tell me how he would discuss that with them. And then he 

would say to his aunt Pat, this is what I would say to her. And 

he would do that over and over again. 

 

And for my friend Jack, politics were his life. And then there 

was the other side of Jack that was my friend the veterinarian.  

And Jack and I share a lot of the common kinds of things that 

he did as a veterinarian and that I did as a rancher. And health 

of animals was his life. Health of animals was the thing that my 

friend Jack liked to talk about, and it was in that context that he 

first met me. 

 

I didn't know he was in the crowd. But I stood and talked to the 

exhibition association and the racing associations in Regina 

here, and as I spoke about the various things that Jack was 

interested, he was the veterinarian that did all the testing for all 

the horses in the exhibition association here and in Saskatoon. 

And he loved to do that. And that's the first time I met him, 

although I didn't know that. 

 

When I went down to Rockglen one day to deal with an 

anniversary of an RM (rural municipality) in Rockglen — I was 

asked to speak there — and then this guy sitting right behind 

me tapped me on the shoulder and introduced himself to me, 

and he said, my name is Jack Wolfe. And I said, well I've never 

met you before. He said, I've met you, and then he told me 

about his involvement with the exhibition association in Regina 

here. 

 

He loved to talk about those days and he loved to talk about the 

horses, but his most conscious effort was to talk about the 

people that were involved in that association. He loved to work 

with both of them. And I believe my friend Jack understood 

them both. 

 

And then there is Jack Wolfe, the family man, my friend. He 

had a high regard for his brother. He talked a lot about his 

brother in Regina and he said this about my brother; he said that 

about my brother. He was a family man. He loved his children; 

he loved his wife. 

 

One of the last days that I talked to him, he told me about how 

he had come to Regina here from Rockglen with his father and 

how they had travelled together. His father had just suffered a 

heart attack. And he said, I don't know how we kept him alive, 

but we drove and we drove and I don't even know how we got 

here or how fast we got here. But that was his life. That was his 

involvement with his family, and my friend Jack would do that 

for you and he would do that for me. 

 

And so today, Gail, as you and your family try to bring your life 

together after this tragedy, think about the vision that Jack had. 

Think about the vision that you have for the future and never let 

that die within you; nor as you transfer that to your children, 

never let it die. And we will be careful, very careful, to pray for 

you during this time of bereavement. Thank you very much. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to move this 

motion as well, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the resolution just passed together with the 

transcript of the oral tributes to the memory of the  



February 10, 1995 

 

105 

deceased be communicated to the bereaved family on 

behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I move that myself, the member for Kindersley, seconded 

by the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 

day, I would, by leave, request that we move to motions for 

substituting members on standing committees. I have a series of 

them to make. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Members 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, thank you members opposite. I 

move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That the name of Harold Martens be substituted for that 

of Mr. Gerald Muirhead on the list of members 

composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — The next motion is: I move, seconded by the 

member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Don Toth be substituted for that 

of Mr. Boyd on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I further move, 

seconded by the member from Morse: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Dan D'Autremont be substituted 

for that of Mr. Bill Boyd on the list of members 

composing the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the 

member from Morse: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Don Toth be substituted for that 

of Mr. Bill Boyd on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on the Environment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Rick Swenson be substituted for 

that of Mr. Bill Boyd on the list of members composing 

the Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And lastly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for that 

of Mr. Bill Boyd on the list of members composing the 

Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1145) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley, seconded by Mr. 

Knezacek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to rise in 

response to the 1995 throne speech, this day on February 10. 

Today is of course a historic occasion for us, Mr. Speaker, 

because today we signed a document on casinos with the first 

nations and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to mention that because on the throne 

speech we had talked very strongly about jobs and economic 

development in the province. We had talked about the $1 

billion investment in oil and gas. We had talked about the 10 

per cent rise in retail sales. We had talked about the new mines 

opening up in northern Saskatchewan. We are seeing 

tremendous, tremendous progress, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to therefore say that this government 

does not only talk about it; it does move to quick action. I want 

to move on this idea because on the casino issue we have been 

doing a lot of partnerships and planning for the past two years. 

We have done a lot of consulting. We have done a lot of talk 

with the business level, with communities throughout the 

province. And indeed on this very touchy issue, we have finally 

come out with a positive solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that I was very proud of this 

agreement. I was proud because we see the politics of 

confrontation and conflict throughout the world. In this 

agreement today we see the politics of honour and respect 

between the first nations governments and the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . Because you have only those two choices: 

you either move towards partnership and cooperation, or you 

move to conflict and confrontation. I think that it is a very good  



February 10, 1995 

 

106 

sign for the province of Saskatchewan that we're moving 

towards the politics of honour, respect, and a working together 

between all citizens and of the province. 

 

I want to be able to look at this in context, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to look at this as indeed an opportunity not only for people 

working together, but that it is economically and fiscally sound. 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, because of the experience that I have 

seen. And I will be mentioning this a little bit later on because 

even as I heard the royal commission report last night on 

suicides, a lot of people forget that there have been positive 

examples of building by the businesses of this province and by 

the first nations businesses in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year when we had signed the agreement and 

moved toward the concept of co-management and sustainable 

development in forestry with the Indian and northern 

communities, we saw positive progress. Rather than seeing the 

endless and negative criticism only dealing with welfare cases, 

we saw very positive images of Indian and Metis people 

working in the forestry sector. A lot of these people were very 

proud to work in the forestry sector. They were proud to say 

that we were putting food on the table for our own children. 

They were proud to say that they did not have to rely on the 

welfare system that costs a lot in regards to the tax purse. They 

were proud to say that yes, we are contributing members to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When I look at the mining sector, Mr. Speaker, I saw the 

developments that we were doing in agreements with northern 

businesses. But I'll pinpoint the agreement that we signed in 

regards to Cameco but also from there which flowed the 

tremendous cooperation between Cameco as a corporation and 

the Indian businesses of the North. And I'll give this one 

example. 

 

NRT (Northern Resource Trucking Ltd.) in the area of trucking 

which is owned 51 per cent by the Lac La Ronge Indian first 

nation . . . that indeed it has been a champion of progress in the 

North. Not only are they an effective transportation and the best 

transportation business in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

but indeed they have made their money which they could turn 

back to their citizens so that they could create jobs, further jobs, 

in their community. 

 

They have also, Mr. Speaker, extended the partnership. It was 

not only a partnership between the corporation, but it was a 

partnership between . . . on the first nations it was a partnership 

which flowed from the first nations and the municipalities, 

many of them Metis communities in northern Saskatchewan. 

What they have done, Mr. Speaker, is this. They have joined a 

partnership with communities such as Cumberland House and 

other communities in the North in regards to the share structure 

of their company. 

 

What they were saying, Mr. Speaker, is that when we have 

moved in that one mine from 15 per cent employment to now 

45 per cent employment  Northerners at all the mines  in 

the North, that that was good progress. A lot of people said it  

was good progress. But when this agreement came about on 

partnership with other communities on the share structure of 

ownership, they said yes; we have finally got good jobs, and we 

are also owners of businesses. We are able to manage and own 

businesses as well. And that was indeed an important 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I see this agreement with the first nations 

people today, I see it in that sense. It's a partnership between 

governments, the province and the first nations governments, as 

well as the communities from whence they will have to do 

partnerships with because they will need approval from the 

communities. It is a true partnership looking to the 

consideration of the province, the communities, and the first 

nations. I think that is tremendous progress for the province of 

Saskatchewan, for the first nations, and for the communities. I 

think this is the way to go in many situations as we deal with 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to contrast this with the usual report that 

we hear on the press. These are tremendous examples in 

forestry when Indian people and Metis people are given the 

opportunity for business ownership and for jobs. They become 

successful like anybody else in the world. 

 

When I saw this agreement therefore, Mr. Speaker, it was 

important because this idea of governments working together 

and the partnership of the business sector between Indian and 

Metis and also non-aboriginal people, that was progress. I 

wanted to contrast that to the history of poverty that has been in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we well know the history of poverty in this 

province. Everybody in this province that looks at their children 

that now have their own children well recognize the impact of 

the Dirty Thirties. People know the severe strain people had in 

regards to poverty at that level. A lot of the people know that in 

some cases they took their own lives when they were put under 

tremendous strain. Later on, as we looked at the history of the 

province and we moved forward and we saw some dips and 

turns in the economy, unemployment always affected the 

suicide rates in the province. We saw that when the farm gate 

was struck hard. We saw a tendency for suicides to rise. 

 

When the Canadian Mental Health Association did a complete 

survey by 1982 . . . when the Canadian Mental Health 

Association did a survey, what they found out when they 

examined the history of Canada was this. For every 4 per cent 

rise in unemployment . . . for every 1 per cent, excuse me. For 

every 1 per cent rise in unemployment, there was a 4 per cent 

rise in suicide rates. The suicide rates climbed with the 

unemployment rates. And it was something that a lot of people 

had known before, but now the research, you know, provided 

that proof. 

 

When I listened to the comments by George Erasmus on TV last 

night and he was talking about the report on suicides by the 

royal commission, he reflected what many Canadians knew. 

They recognized that suicides stem from unemployment. They  



February 10, 1995 

 

107 

recognize that suicides stem from social despair. They 

recognize that suicides come from the fact that people do not 

have hope — hope to find jobs and hope for training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the direction we're moving. We're 

challenging this whole concept of despair. We're challenging 

this idea that welfare is the way to go. We're saying no. People 

don't want to see the welfare system climb; they want to get 

jobs. Many people say, we would rather fight for those jobs. 

Many people say, we don't want welfare cheques; we want pay 

cheques, like everybody else in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this 

historic agreement on casinos with first nations people, we have 

to look at the fact that there is tremendous cost in the system 

already in regards to welfare. Everybody, aboriginal and the 

non-aboriginal, says the same thing. We want to get into the job 

side of the equation. This is where we want to be at. 

 

When I looked at the casino agreement, Mr. Speaker, this is 

what it addresses. It addresses that jobs question. We are saying 

on the Regina casino that there will be approximately 400 jobs. 

What we are setting as a standard is the employment of Indian 

and Metis at 50 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that is 200 jobs. 

 

When we look at the casino and the expansion of the casino on 

an equivalent level to the maximum of four in the first nations 

community, what we will be seeing there is approximately 

another 400 jobs. So in total we will be most likely looking at 

600 jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we are looking at 600 jobs, a lot of people 

will say that it is not enough. These same naysayers, who are 

very negative about everything, who preach doom and gloom, 

will say those 600 jobs at $20 an hour in northern 

Saskatchewan are not good enough. 

 

But what I say, Mr. Speaker, is that we have moved from 15 per 

cent employment rate for Northerners, now to 45 per cent. We 

are moving in the area of employment of Indian people and we 

are creating a standard in this agreement that it'll be 50 per cent 

employment. And I think that is an important step forward. 

 

When we look at these 600 jobs, Mr. Speaker, we are not only 

looking at 600 people. When we look at our family, we usually 

have four or five people in a family. When one person works, 

we are usually taking care of four or five other people. In this 

case, Mr. Speaker, we are not only looking at 600 people, we 

are looking at approximately 2,500 to 3,000 people. That is 

what we are talking about when we have made this effective 

type of decision. 

 

We are talking about children. We are talking about babies that 

need proper nutrition. We are talking about our grandparents. 

We are talking about people, people in the same capacity that  

we have learned to exist in proper standards in this province. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I feel very proud indeed about this agreement. 

 

I want to turn back a little bit, Mr. Speaker, because I think that 

I sense a bit in the sphere of politics some negative criticism. 

And I have been in the legislature long enough, since l986; it's 

important for me to tackle that negative criticism. And I want to 

focus on a couple of points that were made yesterday, and I 

want to tackle them head on. 

 

When I heard one of the members from Rosthern — actually, 

yesterday — he said that the decision by the first nations was 

pseudo-legislation, as if saying that it was phoney legislation. 

To me it really hurt me a lot to see that it was the old politics of 

confrontation; it was the politics of disrespect. 

 

How can you expect people to respect you if you do not respect 

them as well? This is the type of politics that we cannot stand 

for. And when I come to the legislature, I will show that that is 

the wrong way to go. If you want Indian first nations to respect 

us, we have to respect them as well. We cannot say only respect 

ourselves. We have to respect them. 

 

The member should recognize that he is part of this legislature, 

part of this respected institution of democracy. He should 

respect not only this institution and the people of the province; 

he should respect those democratic institutions. 

 

The chiefs are elected by their own people. The chiefs are our 

Legislative Assembly that they have agreed to. This is a 

respected institution that has grown. I think it also shows that it 

is a unified position. The chiefs, when they pass something, 

passed it unanimously yesterday. That is true respect. That is the 

way to go. That is 100 per cent consensus. That is the way we 

should be acting in this legislature, not to try and play the old 

politics of divide and rule. This is the old politics of divide and 

rule that I will expose. 

 

I also noticed in a statement by the member of the Liberal Party. 

When I read her and then I listened to her comments yesterday, 

it troubled me. It troubled me because she has been wavering on 

this issue. We know that she owns or owned her racehorses. 

Sometimes we don't know whether she's riding the racehorses 

forward or she's riding them backwards. Sometimes she falls off 

them, and sometimes she dances on the racehorses. 

 

The racehorse of gambling she is very uncertain about. And 

when I looked at the situation, I sensed the dangerous rise of the 

politics of division because she seemed to be saying that when 

the first nations have an equivalent number of machines, the 

same number as Regina, that all of a sudden it would jeopardize 

the Regina casino. She seemed to be saying that indeed the 

viability of Regina casinos . . . the casino would be at stake. 

And I will quote this from the radio and television news service. 

She said: so if there are going to be four besides White Bear 

that are now introduced in the province of Saskatchewan, what 

are the viability of opening up a large casino in Regina? So her 

point was that she was worried about the Regina casino only. 



February 10, 1995 

 

108 

Mr. Speaker, that's the old politics of divide and rule. This side 

of the government is worried not only about the economic 

viability of the Regina casino, but the economic viability of the 

first nations’ casinos. I think we are making sure that the 

community is on side in both cases. We are not saying that it is 

only the viability of the Regina casino. We are saying, look, we 

positively support the Regina casino — the biggest community 

near us properly supported. 

 

There has been plenty of debate in this context. But what I was 

scared of, Mr. Speaker, was the old politics of divide and rule. 

What we are doing in this case is the politics of partnership and 

the politics of respect, the politics of honour, the politics of 

cooperation. This is the essence of democracy in action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, there was an implication too 

that — from the members across — while the Tories talk about 

crime and the slashing of programs, knocking away 

kindergarten just like that, half of it, in Alberta, centralizing the 

control of education by hiring all directors, no concern for 

community or regional control, when I see them really slashing 

in the area of Social Services, what I hear them say on the other 

side is criticizing the fact that the jobs are going to be there. 

They have to make up their mind. Either the 600 jobs that are 

going to be there are going to be good, or they're going to be 

negative. We say on this side of the House that it is better that 

indeed we provide and work with them in partnership on the 

600 jobs. 

 

To us that is the proper strategy. If we don't do that, it expands 

the area of Social Services. We want to get away from Social 

Services and going to the jobs end of the scale. And that is 

exactly what we're doing in this case. 

 

And I see the Liberal member from across saying something. I 

would say this much to the Liberal member. 

 

The Liberals in Ottawa are not very much different than the old 

Tory policies of divide and rule. They talked the great line of 

honour and respect for treaties before the election last year, but 

they continued the old process of offloading, offloading Social 

Services which got $35 million in the province. Definitely, we 

get back half of it through $17 million. But indeed, that type of 

strategy is a safe strategy. They have not changed that strategy. 

 

Notice in the past while, when there's a debate between Martin 

and Axworthy, Axworthy is backing down from social reform. 

Actually, he's chickening out. And I think that in many cases 

they talk a good line before the election, the Liberals, but they 

will give in to other sectors of the community before they work 

positively with Indian and Metis people. And that has been the 

record. 

 

So when I look at the Liberals, I worry about their challenge, 

you know, to the agreement and the Tories. It's the old politics 

of divide and rule. I think that they should take it amongst 

themselves, rethink what they were doing yesterday, re- 

examine their position, re-examine it in the light of the positive 

aspects of the agreement. 

 

Even when I see the first nations' agreement in the area of 

sharing, it shines through. What we are saying is this. When we 

look at the aspect on the sharing, on the Regina casino we get 

50 per cent. On the first nation's casino, they will get the 50 per 

cent. But what is very important is that we have 25 per cent to 

associated entities fund, to the communities of the province, a 

significant aspect in the Regina agreement, 25 per cent going to 

associated entities fund for the province and Metis community. 

 

Now if you look at the agreement on the Indian side, you will 

see that if they have the reserve, when they have their place off-

reserve and they open a casino off-reserve in partnership with 

the community and they get an okay from the community, what 

will happen is that they will provide 25 per cent of the money in 

regard to the associated entities fund. 

 

So I think that's very important that the first nations off-reserve, 

if there is a partnership with the community off-reserve, will 

provide 25 per cent to the associated entities fund. 

 

So they're sharing with the communities at large throughout the 

province. And I thought that was a true reciprocity, the 

principle of reciprocity, truly at hand. I think that there was a 

sense of fairness and balance when they acknowledge, you 

know, that principle, to us. 

 

I wanted to go back a little bit on the history of the province in 

the context of economic development. Whether it was with the 

Potash Corporations during the Liberal years and the 

tremendous amount of what people used to say, give-aways, 

during that period, the large scale, you know, corporations. And 

then later on we had the Tories come in and we weren't talking 

about 5 million or 6 million, which is the essence of this 

agreement on sharing, on the Regina casino and also on the 

associated entities fund. 

 

(1215) 

 

What we were talking about on major agreements when the 

Tories were in power was $250 million agreements, $100 

million agreements, tremendous agreements — no wonder we 

were in debt to the tune of $16 billion in this province. There 

was tremendous amounts, and I'm not only talking about, you 

know, the debates, you know, that we had, the usual debates we 

had, at Joytec and GigaText, I'm talking about major 

agreements. 

 

Some of these have proven to be very positive, but some of 

them have not been. I acknowledge, you know, the fact that 

when positive decisions were made, I would agree with them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Name some of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I would say that . . . I'll give you an 

example. The member says, name something that was positive. 

 



February 10, 1995 

 

109 

We were concerned about the Cameco decision when it was 

privatized, you know, by the Tories. We were worried that . . . 

We saw the trend that the employment rate had dropped from 

about 50 per cent at Key Lake to about 15 per cent. We were 

worried that the considerations of jobs for the communities was 

going to be, you know, pushed to the side. And when the '88 

agreement came, we were worried. 

 

But I'll tell you something. Through the development that we 

did in the '70s there was people within the mining sector that 

were very positive and proactive. We saw the Key Lake mining 

agreement person was like Bernard Michel. You know, working 

very favourably to keep the rates at 50 per cent over there. 

 

There was another operation in Key Lake and that had gone 

down. Bernard Michel took over Cameco and we were very 

happy. Chief Cook, Harry Cook from the Lac La Ronge Indian 

Band, the Lac La Ronge Indian first nation, became part of the 

board of Cameco. Allan Blakeney became part of the board of 

Cameco. In that sense we saw a partnership with the mining 

community and the province, and also the first nations and the 

communities of the North. 

 

Now we see this partnership with the lease agreements in 

northern Saskatchewan. We have the mining companies and the 

businesses of the North getting $25 million worth of the 

contracts. We also get for Northerners 8 to $9 million worth of 

salaries. This is indeed highly positive. 

 

When I compare the tremendous downturn in regards to 

trapping over the many years from 2 million to less than a 

million dollars a year, it is significant that at the time when even 

the fur trap prices are up, we will still make less than a million 

dollars. But in the mining sector for people of northern 

Saskatchewan who make up to around $20 an hour, they will 

indeed be making 8 to $9 million, you know, worth of salary. 

 

So when you ask me a question about what examples, then you 

see that the principle of partnership — which this government 

started when we were first elected in 1991 — has built from the 

areas about 15 per cent employment now to the area of 45 per 

cent employment in northern Saskatchewan. That is true 

partnership, rather than the divide and conquer approach that 

the Tories did. 

 

I remember when I first got elected in 1986. I looked at the 

1986 agreement and they had this highway sign, highway and 

highway map that was shown to all the province. It said, the 

Tories were saying at that time, northern Saskatchewan is full 

of beautiful lakes and rivers but no people. They had the 

gumption to say that there was no people. And of course with 

their policies they treated us as if there was no people. All they 

wanted was extraction of minerals and they didn't see us, you 

know, whatsoever. So we have changed that type of policy to a 

policy of partnership. 

 

And I knew the same thing in regard to the Liberals. When I 

examined the whole government Public Accounts  

documentation, I recognized that during the '60s, when the 

Liberals were in power to 1971, for Indian and Metis people the 

total amount of budgeting that they did for Indian and Metis 

people was approximately 2 per cent. When the Tories come in, 

they dropped that to about 1 per cent. 

 

When we were in power in the '70s, we had that working 

around 4 per cent, which is the basis of where we're working 

today. We had to fight back up to that level basically because 

people did not want the welfare system; they wanted to have 

pay cheques and jobs and businesses like everybody else in this 

province. 

 

I think that is the essence of this agreement. I think that when 

we look into the future and we see those people getting the 

accounting jobs and other jobs that flow through in gaming, we 

will see a positive sight. We will see people being very, very 

proud of their work. We will see them say yes, this is the way to 

go. 

 

Of course the Tories, they want to knock, and the Liberals, they 

want to slash people away, even from the welfare system. They 

want to knock them out of their jobs. It's always a conflict, 

conflict approach. We are sending a true example on the spirit 

of honour and cooperation and respect. And this is the way they 

should go. 

 

In conclusion I would say this: yesterday I heard them in 

regards to these comments. But I didn't enter politics to be 

simply negative or to be critical. I want to present a constructive 

critical argument for the Conservatives and for the Liberals. 

 

I would say to them, why don't you join in partnership with us? 

Why don't you join in partnership with the first nations, the 

communities, the Government of Saskatchewan, in regards to 

the policy that pays to respect in regards to jobs and regards to 

revenue sharing? Why don't you create a partnership? Why 

don't you get away from the divide-and-rule strategy? 

 

Why don't you stand up and say yes, that is a good job; it is 

better than being on welfare. Why don't you say that? Why don't 

you stand up and say that? Why don't you stand up and say yes, 

rather than sending in the police or the army like they did in 

Oka, why? Why, rather than doing that, why don't they join us 

on the area of partnership? 

 

I think this is the way of the future. This the way that we have 

to do things. We see the conflict in Europe; we see the conflict 

elsewhere. We should learn our lesson and we should learn that 

this is the place to go. That is the way of the future — 

cooperation and partnership is the way of the future. 

 

You cannot have true respect unless you respect the others. It is 

the essence of respect. That is how you have to do it. So I 

would say . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I think there is too much 

interruption from the member from Shaunavon when the  



February 10, 1995 

 

110 

member is speaking, and I'd ask him to please refrain from 

doing so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — So, Mr. Speaker, with respect, you know, 

to the agreement on the province of Saskatchewan and the first 

nations, as an aboriginal person, Mr. Speaker, I am truly proud 

to stand up today in this legislature to support that. I think it is a 

sign, and a positive sign, of the future. I certainly hope that the 

tenor of the argumentation that I heard yesterday shifts and 

changes. I hope it does become more positive. 

 

But I didn't enter the legislature just to be simply on the critical 

side. I know and believe that people will work together. I firmly 

believe in democracy and I firmly believe that people in the end 

result will say yes, this was a good agreement; yes, we have 

made business agreements with the business sector which 

turned out to be good. Yes, we can say this could be a good 

agreement when the Indian businesses, when they start their 

own — not only in the casino sector, but in the mining, the 

forestry, and every place else. And I say, Mr. Speaker, as a 

Metis person, I know that we will also, you know, partake in 

this development. And I know that we will make those 

decisions that will also flow with Metis communities as well. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, again I am indeed honoured and 

proud of this agreement. It's a sign that in the throne speech 

when we said jobs and economic development are number one, 

and we see the positive sign in the province that we could 

immediately come out with agreements like this. That this is the 

stuff of government. This is the stuff of respect for jobs. This is 

the stuff of respect for businesses. This is the stuff of respect 

for governments at the community level, also at the first nations 

level, and at the provincial level. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I definitely strongly support the 

throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is not with a 

great deal of pleasure that I rise today to respond to the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Listening to the member from Cumberland, I find that he had 

very little of a positive nature to say in his speech. And I can 

certainly understand that, Mr. Speaker, because with this 

particular government there is very little of a positive nature 

that you can find to speech about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member in the latter part of his speech talked 

about Oka — about the guns, about the police, and about the 

military. Well I'm not sure if he was talking, Mr. Speaker, about 

Oka or if was talking about my own constituency when his very 

government had the police, had the guns drawn, and raided the 

reserve at White Bear. 

 

His own government, Mr. Speaker, did exactly the same things 

that he was criticizing the federal government for. They were 

the ones that dragged Chief Bernard Shepherd to court. It  

wasn't the federal government. It was the members opposite, of 

which that member is a cabinet minister of the government. 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, that government and that member 

have nothing of a positive nature to speak about in this 

province. Because they are the ones that are doing the heinous 

acts that he himself described. 

 

And there are many other things wrong with the government's 

plan, Mr. Speaker, as laid out in this throne speech. But I want 

to be brief. The first issue I want to focus on is one that the 

government speaks a lot about but ignores when it comes to 

doing something, and that is jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than standing here and taking all day and 

taking weeks to discuss the Speech from the Throne, I think we 

as an Assembly would be much better serving the people of 

Saskatchewan if we were to move on from the Speech from the 

Throne and deal with the real issues that face the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that is indeed the lack of jobs in this 

province. As it's been noted before by other members, that it's 

appalling that the government would try to boast of its 

accomplishments in job creation even when the revised 

Canadian StatsCan figures show that the government is off on 

its job projections by over 10,000. 

 

I would like to just repeat that one figure. The new figures, just 

so we all know once and for all that we're reading from the 

same page, StatsCan just recently came out and made a change. 

They admitted that their figures previously were perhaps not as 

accurate as they could have been so they came out with new 

ones. But what did those figures show? What did those figures 

show? 

 

Those figures showed that in 1992, Mr. Speaker, that in the 

province of Saskatchewan we lost 8,000 jobs; 1992 we lost 

8,000 jobs under this administration. In 1993 they gained back 

5,000 of those jobs. In 1994 they gained back another 2,000 of 

those jobs. And the members opposite are agreeing with me. So 

what at the end of the day do we come up with? 

 

We come up with a net loss in Saskatchewan of 1,000 jobs; not 

the increase that the government is promoting of 12,000 jobs. In 

fact is, Mr. Speaker, the government in every throne speech and 

in every budget, has been projecting 16,000 jobs this year; 

5,000 jobs this year; 4,000 jobs this year. In total they've made a 

promise of 30,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan and the net result, 

Mr. Speaker, to which they have admitted from their seats, is a 

loss of 1,000 jobs since 1991 in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In this throne speech they're claiming that they've created 

12,000 jobs in the past year, 12,000. In that same time period, 

Mr. Speaker, in the same time period, the province of Alberta 

has created 36,000 jobs, 36,000. Yes. Alberta is larger than 

Saskatchewan. They also have a different government, but a net 

loss in the three years in this province of 1,000 jobs and a net 

gain in Alberta of 80,000 in a two-year period. 

 

In spite of the government's attempts to paper over the problem  



February 10, 1995 

 

111 

with extravagant statistics and by exaggerating the importance 

of its 2,000 low wage jobs, it's clearer to everyone that there's 

still an employment crisis in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1230) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this problem of lack of jobs in this province 

is at a time when the economy is outstripping the rest of the 

other provinces. This economy is doing better than the other 

provinces, but we're not doing better when it comes to jobs. 

You know, it's the jobless recovery, that's what it is, it's the 

jobless recovery . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I've been listening . . . I don't 

want to point out individual members, but if they don't want to 

listen to a general command of the Speaker, then I'm going to 

have to point out people. And I ask the member from Biggar to 

please quit interrupting. It's been at least a half a dozen times 

since this member has gotten up that you've interrupted loud 

enough to interfere with him giving his address. So I ask, please 

refrain from doing so. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

discussing, as I was saying, that we have here a jobless 

recovery. And in the terms of the ordinary people of 

Saskatchewan, what we have here is an omelette without eggs. 

And it's quite clear to everyone, except for the members 

opposite, what the cause of this crisis is. As Professor Eric 

Howe of the University of Saskatchewan observed in the 

Leader-Post on February 1, and I quote: 

 

 "The NDP is getting us out of our provincial budget 

deficit through higher taxes and higher utility rates," . . . 

"The effect of both of those things is to weaken job 

growth." 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is not ashamed of 

that fact. The fact is they're very proud of it. They love to tell 

everyone who will listen how they have balanced the budget 

without the deep government spending cuts of the Ralph Klein 

has undertaken in Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — I'm glad you like that. I'm glad you like 

that, members. They love to portray the Klein government in 

what they term hard-hearted and uncaring with a slash-and-burn 

policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Again they agree. They especially 

compare that to themselves and their thoughtful preservation of 

the state of over-government in this province. And yet all the 

government's propaganda on this subject . . . Ralph Klein's 

government has created, as I said, 36,000 new jobs in the past 

year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's without legislating or regulating a  

jobs-for-unions-only policy such as the government opposite is 

practising in this province, a policy that is being brought 

forward by an NDP (New Democratic Party) government whose 

Premier is the member from Riversdale who admits that he isn't 

even NDP. You have to say: only in Saskatchewan that you 

would get a leader of a government party who would admit that 

he doesn't belong to that philosophy. 

 

In talking about the humane approach, I would suggest that the 

Premier and his ministers of Finance have a more . . . that it is a 

more humane fiscal policy to reduce the burden of government 

on the taxpayers and thereby creating that 36,000 jobs than it is 

to kill job growth and to throw tens of thousands of people onto 

the welfare rolls by pushing taxes and utilities through the roof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if Alberta has a slash-and-burn policy, then the 

policy of this government is to rob and pillage. 

 

It has been the frequent charge of the government that the 

Tories in both Saskatchewan and Alberta adopt policies only 

out of ideological zeal without regard to the practicalities. In 

looking at the job creation issue, I can easily see that this is a 

case of the pot calling the kettle black. It's not bad enough that 

the members opposite are so ideologically wedded to the idea of 

big government that they will not suffer their bureaucratic 

empire to be diminished in any way, and as an example of 

which was the recent purchase of DirectWest by SaskTel — a 

private corporation that was doing well but now has to be 

owned by the provincial government. Again they're contributing 

to the growth of their infamous family of Crown corporations. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, they're still caught up in their 

socialist ideas of labour reform. They refuse to even consider 

that perhaps during an unemployment crisis it's not the best 

time to be introducing radical new labour reforms that are 

bound to have a chilling effect on job creation in this province. 

 

It took months for the grass roots protests from small and 

medium business owners for the province to back off on the 

most radical aspects of their labour bias. But even after backing 

off, such that we see the sham alienation of their labour friends, 

they still can't get the full support of the business community. 

 

As Joyce Reynolds of the Canadian Restaurant and 

Foodservices Association said in the Star-Phoenix on February 

4: 

 

 We are still very concerned that the legislation will 

ultimately harm more than it will help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of comment that the business 

people have been making from the beginning and which the 

former minister of Labour has sneered at continually. You 

really should have to wonder why this legislation exists. In fact 

we'll be submitting a Bill this session which says it should not 

exist. After all, labour claims it does not like this Bill, no one in 

business favours it either, so just whose interests does this 

particular piece of legislation serve. 



February 10, 1995 

 

112 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as far as I can see, the only reason this Bill 

exists is so that the former minister of Labour can say that he 

didn't back down on his ideological principles. Well the Hon. 

Associate Minister of Finance is no longer the Minister of 

Labour since he so bravely switched portfolios the day the 

legislation was proclaimed. 

 

So now that this member's honour has been upheld, perhaps the 

government can now begin to be a little more reasonable. 

Perhaps they can begin to see that a government that creates 

36,000 jobs is maybe doing something right, something that 

they should try and imitate. 

 

Those policies from Alberta that are creating the environment 

which has created 80,000 jobs in two years, is an environment, 

Mr. Speaker, that we need in this province, not one that has 

created a negative 1,000 jobs in the past three years. 

 

But somehow, Mr. Speaker, I doubt very much that that will 

happen. I doubt that the Associate Minister of Finance is the 

only one over there who has the blinders on about the subjects 

like big government, taxation, job creation and the economy. 

This blindness is reflected in this throne speech which offers 

the province no hope for change in the coming session. 

 

And the Minister of Justice suggests to me I should be talking 

about gun control. Well, Mr. Minister, I am prepared to talk 

about gun control. There's a very particular item, Mr. Speaker, 

missing out of the throne speech, and that is any comment 

about gun control. It's a topic that is very hot throughout 

Saskatchewan at the present time. It has been so for a 

considerable number of months, going back to the previous 

spring, because the previous session we had motions passed 

through this House that talked about gun control. And yet the 

government opposite didn't include it in their throne speech. It 

wasn't important enough or perhaps they couldn't muster the 

courage from some of the members opposite to talk about it. I 

don't know why they didn't include it, Mr. Speaker, but it is a 

glaring error. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the new year, since the new year alone, there 

have been rallies opposed to the federal firearms legislation 

held in Stoughton, in Carlyle, in Milestone, in Yorkton, in 

Prince Albert, and in Raymore on Tuesday night. There are 

more coming up next week, Mr. Speaker, in Meadow Lake on 

Sunday and in Kerrobert on Monday. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people who are attending these rallies are 

not the people that Mr. Rock and the Liberals should be 

concerned about; these are the hard-working, honest farmers, 

hunters, trappers, and sportsmen of this province. They're not 

the criminals; they're the honest people that Mr. Rock and the 

Liberals are trying to turn into criminals. 

 

When the issue first came up last spring, Mr. Speaker, it was 

clear where we stood on the issue; we were opposed to it. Some 

of the members opposite also opposed it. Some of them didn't 

have the courage to stand and vote in this House on the issue, 

so they left. But the government did support the opposition and  

vice versa on that particular issue. The only ones who couldn't 

make up their mind were the Liberal colleagues opposite. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party, when she came back from her 

convention in Toronto after having talked to Allan Rock, 

thought all of this new proposal gun legislation was a great 

idea. We should all — those of us who have firearms — should 

have to stick them in a warehouse some place and have them 

locked up and away from us so that we could only get them on 

special occasions. 

 

But when the Leader of the Third Party returned to 

Saskatchewan she found out the politics was a little different 

here than it was in Toronto. She found out that the people of 

Saskatchewan were not real impressed with her ideas, and so 

she did the traditional Liberal thing — she straddled the fence 

and tried to play both sides. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, she found out that the people of 

Saskatchewan were not prepared to allow her to straddle the 

fence; she was either for or agin it. And so she wilted, and she 

came over to the same side that the official opposition was on 

and the government. 

 

This is an issue, Mr. Speaker, not about guns. This is an issue of 

property rights. And property rights, Mr. Speaker, are a 

provincial jurisdiction and they must remain so. We have a 

tradition in this country of property ownership by individuals 

which is sacrosanct from government confiscation, and if the 

government does indeed need that piece of property, be it land 

or whatever, the government then compensates the owner for it. 

And that is not part of the Liberal proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the gun control issue is but one of the issues that 

the government opposite has left out of their throne speech. 

And they don't endear themselves to the public by doing so, Mr. 

Speaker. And fact is the public again becomes concerned. If 

they're prepared to talk about these issues but avoid the gun 

control one, where does that leave the government's 

commitment on gun control? Their omission, Mr. Speaker, is 

very obvious. 

 

(1245) 

 

The government opposite, Mr. Speaker, has the responsibility to 

the people of Saskatchewan to clearly state their views and to 

clearly state it in this House what they're prepared to do to assist 

the ownership of property in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public will hold the NDP government equally 

responsible for their omissions, just as they hold them 

responsible for their extremely high tax rates, utility rates, and 

the lack of jobs for Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, like the 

member from Souris-Cannington, want to put my comments to 

the Speech from the Throne. I too note there's a great deal of  



February 10, 1995 

 

113 

things that I would say are missing from the throne speech. In 

fact overall it's probably one of or perhaps the most lacklustre 

throne speech that this legislature has heard in some time. Of 

course it has very little substance and the government intends to 

do most of its bragging on the fact that after, I guess it's 13 

years, the deficit of the books of the province are finally going 

to be balanced and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — And I think that's a great thing that's 

happened here, but we'll get into that in a moment. 

 

Also in the throne speech I see some non-controversial 

legislation that I think we'll have to have a chat about. 

 

What was disappointing I think in the overall view of this 

speech was the fact that Saskatchewan, having over 50 per cent 

of the farmers in Canada right here in this provincial 

boundaries, and this government is showing absolutely no 

leadership and no direction in what should happen in the field 

of agriculture. 

 

They have a section on health care in the throne speech, which 

to me tells me that they're still . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask members to please 

abide by the rules. When a member is speaking you simply do 

not cross between the member who is speaking and the Chair. If 

you wish to cross the floor, then go around the member who is 

speaking. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I note the section 

on health care in the throne speech. What it tells me is that this 

government is still hoping that they can at the end of the day, 

fool people into believing that they actually have a health care 

plan. And I guess we'll have to get in and talk about that. 

 

Basically I think this throne speech is, I guess, a lead-up to an 

election. I see no more than that. 

 

I agree with the member from Souris-Cannington, that there's a 

lot of things lacking. In fact one thing that is very evident is 

what this government intends to do with the serious crisis that 

they've created with their gaming policies. The social effects on 

gaming which will be right in front of us now, but especially in 

the next year or two to come while they're trying to make this 

province of Saskatchewan into the province of Las Vegas. And 

I think that's going to come back and be a very big 

embarrassment to this government. And it should be. 

 

Any government that doesn't have enough ideas to make a 

province work, short of having a poor man's tax, raising 

revenues from VLTs (video lottery terminal) to try and balance 

the books of the province, I think that in itself will . . . As the 

people of the province are going to finally say, shame on you. 

 

But when we take a look, Mr. Speaker, at the section on 

financial stability in the throne speech, a few things actually  

stick out that I think are rather disappointing. In fact I've heard 

some of the speeches of the members of the government side 

commenting on the debt and the deficits for some years. 

 

And I agree with them. I don't think the people of Saskatchewan 

are going to forgive or forget what the Conservative 

administration did as far as the financial instability they created 

in the province. But to still, after so many years, to keep 

hanging your hat on this, I want to remind the government 

members of a few things. 

 

I recall back in the 1986 election when many of those members, 

people like the former minister of Health . . . Well I won't get 

into it. Most of those members over there were campaigning. 

And at that time there was only one member who travelled 

around the province trying to put some common sense to what 

was happening in that election. And that was our now current 

federal Minister of Agriculture who was saying, let's not get 

into a bidding war here; let's not try and spend all the money 

that we really and truly don't have. Let's get some financial 

stability to the province. 

 

But the members over there, who are grinning about it now, 

well they were part of that bidding war with the Conservatives 

and the New Democrats, and perhaps the reason for this one 

program that I'm going to mention is because I think there was 

only seven members at that time to sit back and try and make 

the policy of the day, or policy in the election. 

 

But while the Conservatives were coming out with a program, a 

home improvement program, low interest rates paid back over a 

number of years, and which they're basically fixing up rumpus 

rooms, buying hot tubs, we recall all the speeches that were 

given in 1986 by those members. But let's not forget what they 

came out with. The seven members came out with a plan called 

the 7-7-7. All they were doing was bidding. 

 

They talk about bidding wars today on the VLT issue. You were 

bidding for the election in 1986. You were prepared to run this 

province further into debt yourselves. So let's not play these 

games that somehow you're better than everyone else in the 

legislature, somehow that you're financially competent people. 

 

We're going to talk about how you did take care of the books of 

the province and we'll get into this, member. But let's not try 

and fool the people that you weren't in a bidding war in the 

1986 election. 

 

As we said before, it's great to have the books of the province in 

order, but you know, when I take a look at the Report of the 

Provincial Auditor in the fall of 1994 — it just came out — let's 

have a look as to how the government perhaps did do so well, 

you know, with the finances of the province. 

 

Now in the auditor's report on page 12, it goes on here, Mr. 

Speaker, 

 

 the annual deficit is $45 million compared to the 1993 

annual deficit of $793 million, a decrease of 94%. 



February 10, 1995 

 

114 

Well that sounds good. That tells me that the government is 

really bringing the deficit down, the yearly deficit. 

 

But when you take the $793 million and subtract what the 

annual deficit was for this year, what the report is referring to, 

45 million, that leaves you with $748 million that you actually 

reduced the annual deficit. 

 

But it further goes on here; they talk about the revenues  

revenue from user-fee enterprises increased 730 million or 26 

per cent. And on the page previous, the auditor explains: 

 

 User fee enterprises of the Government included 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, SaskTel, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

. . . These enterprises raise revenue through direct 

charges for goods and services. 

 

So it's a tax. What we're talking about here is taxes. 

 

Now these taxes that the Provincial Auditor refers to raised 

$730 million. So out of the 748 million that they've lowered the 

annual deficits, 730 million was raised through taxes in just 

those . . . in some of those Crowns. 

 

But look on here. Now we're talking about expenditures on 

general programs. And by this I mean we're talking about 

programs in health care, perhaps the needs of highways, 

Saskatchewan drug plan. We can go on and on and on. 

 

But things that the people require, things that meets the needs 

of the people of the province, now these expenditures on 

general programs in the 1994 budget year decreased 223 million 

or 4 per cent. What we're looking at here is probably $200 

million of money over and above the amount that was brought 

down in the annual deficit that these people aren't accounting 

for. 

 

So we can talk about how well you've done. Fact of the matter 

is, in the auditor's report it clearly states you've done it by 

raising taxes and cutting programs. And in fact you should have 

done a lot better than what you are today, but you couldn't keep 

your spending in order. 

 

The only way that you could find, Mr. Member from 

Elphinstone, the only way that you could do what you have 

done is through taxes and through cutting unnecessary 

programs, and you're short $200 million . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well it's in the auditor's report. It's not me that's 

going to make this argument, it is the Provincial Auditor that's 

saying, shame on you guys, you couldn't get your act together, 

you couldn't get your act together. 

 

And we look at some of the articles that have been in the paper 

in the last few days. "Playing politics with figures destructive", 

it says. Let me quote a line in here from Ken Juba, business 

editor: 

 

 The provincial government got its budget deficit under  

control — largely because it threw yours and mine into 

disarray and because 1994 was a year of economic 

windfalls. . . 

 

So really when you take a look at these professionals and 

people that are business editors and provincial auditors, what 

they're essentially saying is that there should be a great deal of 

money sitting somewhere in a bank account and I'm not so sure 

there isn't, and if they're putting something away for an election 

they better fess up at this point. 

 

We take a look at . . . keeping with the revenue argument for a 

while, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at some of the things that 

they said in the past about taxes because clearly the auditor is 

saying that you're doing it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I think that was a 

prime example of interference in the House when a member 

almost from the back tries to get another member's attention 20 

feet away when a member is on his feet. We just can't allow that 

in this House. And I wish members would respect that a little 

more. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few 

quotes right out of Hansard in the past few years that I want to 

remind these members of. 

 

And I raise it because of the fact that they are doing as well on 

the deficit as they are because of what they've done, and that's 

to increase their tax. 

 

But let's look at some of their quotes. Roy Romanow, MLA for 

Riversdale. It says here: 

 

 I say to you, Mr. Minister of Finance, and Mr. Premier 

. . . you had a choice to cut back . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I hope the member was using a 

quote and was not mentioning the individual's name. Was that a 

direct quote? If it wasn't, then the member knows that he can't 

use it that way. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order with 

respect to the last speaker's comment about using a name. 

 

The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — I believe the speaker from Shaunavon had 

used one of the member's personal names when he's not given 

that opportunity to do that in the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I think that's the problem we're having in this 

House. There's so much noise in this House that you couldn't 

even hear the Speaker ruling on it. I already ruled on that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I apologize; 

that wasn't in a quote. 



February 10, 1995 

 

115 

But I will give you the quote that was in Hansard on April 12, 

1991: 

 

 I say to you, Mr. Minister of Finance, and Mr. Premier 

(referring to the former government, of course) . . . you 

had a choice to cut back and instead you taxed the 

people and the farmers of Saskatchewan. Shame on you. 

Where are your priorities? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Well the MLA for Riversdale, the Premier 

said that when he was in opposition. 

 

And it's disappointing now when you sit back and you take a 

look at what your government has done to the farmers and to 

what you've done to people in rural Saskatchewan; you should 

be owning up to some of these quotes. 

 

And the member from Elphinstone has made several himself. 

Let me read you another one. Hansard, April 12, 1991: 

 

 . . . where in the world is your priority? Taxing electrical 

bills which affects our people in business and 

elsewhere, and certain medicines; or cutting out the 

waste and the expenditures . . . 

 

We've got lists and lists of them. Hansard, May 2, 1991 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being 1 o'clock, this 

House stands adjourned until 1 o'clock on Monday next. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


