






















































May 8, 1995 Hansard Eveing


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 8, 1995 

 

 
2057 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, coming back to 
a question I think we kind of ended up on, and I'm not sure if I 
got the full answer or I missed it. Regarding the contractual 
employee in that position of 79,000, we were asking for the 
terms of the job, job description, benefits, where this person 
would be, and who the individual is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We went into a fair bit of depth on this 
during the last estimate on this particular area. And that would 
be Faye Rafter. She's on secondment. And I think that you 
probably have that information, although it was awhile ago 
now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And just one clarification. You said she's on 
secondment. Is that . . . did you give a length of period that that 
secondment is for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's to November '95. 
 
Mr. Toth: — As well, in your global estimates you mention 
that there were 10.7 employees — at least that's what I note on 
the globals. But in the Estimates, we note that on page 131 that 
you actually show 12.5 for this year, 13 for next year. I'm 
wondering where the difference comes in. Was it a 
typographical error or what's the difference that you're 
showing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be the actual as opposed to 
the approved. And we actually have less people than we were 
approved to have. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, Madam Minister, then, is 
there's actually 10.7 working. You were approved for 13 but 
you only have 10.7 drawing salary at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be accurate. There are 
some vacancies and some are filled on a temporary basis, so it 
doesn't add up to the full amount. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I think you indicated earlier that the department 
has salaries of 611 for last year and in your globals you're 
showing us a figure of $473,000, and we're just wondering 
where the difference is, if you could explain what the difference 
is. Is it the number of employees not currently working or does 
this call for the . . . 611 would be what it would be if you had 
the 13 employees? And the 473 is what the actual with the 
10.7? Is that what we're looking at? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would be accurate. It goes 
back to the previous explanation. And because there have been 
less people and some vacancies, there's been less expenditure. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And have we got . . . I asked you about travel a 
little earlier. Is this all the travel of the department that was 
listed? Earlier we were talking somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of around $10,000 and I think there were four 
different trips outside of the province. Would that have been all 
the travel at that time listed? Will you check that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would be accurate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Regarding your staff, Madam Minister, this year 
we note, as with last year, no ministerial staff is reported. Is 
there . . . in your office you don't have anyone that actually is 
responsible for the Women's Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of my staff provides liaison, but it 
would be a very minimal function. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically then, that staff person is just covered 
under your normal office expenses. There's no real allocation 
out of the Women's Secretariat for that staff person. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that's right. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I notice under termination and new employees, 
Valda — and I'm not sure if I'm going to say this right — 
Dohlen was terminated as a research officer 3 and rehired as a 
senior policy analyst, her wage going up 664 a month, or 19 per 
cent; the research officer 3 position was not refilled. Given 
these facts I wonder if you could explain how Ms. Dohlen's job 
description differs between her previous and her new position 
and specifically what new work does she do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In her previous position she was 
temporary and that was largely a position that involved 
collecting data and kind of straightforward research work. 
 
There was a competition held. She was the successful applicant 
in the competition for the policy analyst position, and this 
person has a more significant level of involvement both in 
interdepartmental committees and the development and design 
of policy. 
 
Mr. Toth: — You mentioned, Madam Minister, that there was 
a competition held. How many people applied for the position? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll have to provide you with that 
information but I think there was quite a few. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, if there's one item or one 
concern that a lot of people have when they're applying for 
positions, especially positions in government . . . and I realize 
they endeavour to make every position appear to be open and 
available. I find from different individuals who have applied for 
government positions that at the end of the day, while they've  



May 8, 1995 

 
2058 

applied, made application, it seems that the job was already 
filled from within prior to . . . And I'm not sure. I'm not saying 
that this one was, but in many instances would it . . . if there's a 
person within the office or a person who has had a position and 
in this case an individual who had a temporary that would fit 
the bill of a job description that you need, rather than putting in 
a number of individuals within your department . . . or yourself, 
do you feel that this individual would probably just be the 
appropriate person to maintain that job description; wouldn't it 
be more appropriate just to put . . . immediately move that 
person into the position rather than opening up, and then giving 
that position to that individual in the first place? And so a lot of 
people whose hopes were basically lifted when the job 
opportunity came open, they're thinking, well we just wasted 
our time. And I think that's one concern that's out there, and I'm 
wondering what you're views may be on that, in circumstances 
like that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think you're absolutely right that every 
job interview should be a real interview and every ad that's put 
out should be a genuine search for the best candidate. 
 
In this particular instance seven people were interviewed. And 
certainly it wouldn't have been necessary to interview seven 
people to give the appearance of fairness — one could have 
interviewed three people or four people. 
 
The other comment I might make is because this is rather a 
specialized field, you may get people with research background 
but not necessarily research background pertinent to this 
particular area. So it wouldn't surprise me that whatever 
qualified them for the temporary position would have also been 
a factor in their receiving the permanent position. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, you communicated that this 
person had been moved from an office 3 position . . . research 
officer 3 position. Will this position . . . or has this position 
been refilled? Or who has taken over — if it hasn't — who has 
taken over the duties of that past position of research officer 3? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, the position was advertised and 
it's being implemented as a part-time, job-sharing position. So 
the candidate who got the position fills 50 per cent of that 
position and I don't know if there's more information you need 
than that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — You said it's a part-time, and generally when it's 
part-time, shared . . . did I hear you say shared position? Would 
that mean that another person was hired or someone in the 
office is basically picking up the rest of the job description? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the other staff in the office 
opted to work less hours so this is basically a filling of that 
position to full time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I was just going to add, Madam Minister, that I 
think there are individuals who are willing to do part-time work 
and I know there are in our community. Certainly they've 
worked it well in the health care field and maybe that's  

something that Women's Secretariat could also look at. Maybe 
not all women. Some women may want to be part-time 
home-makers, would like to still have a job outside, and 
job-sharing may be an option. 
 
You talked about equal pay for equal work and pay equity and 
all this. And the fact that if there is a job-sharing opportunity 
available, I'm sure that you wouldn't have any trouble at all 
finding individuals who are willing to get involved and take the 
job-sharing position. 
 
Basically what it does is adds that little income to two homes 
rather than one, if there are people willing to do that. So I 
would commend you for having at least . . . if the indication 
was that that person would like to share that job or that's how 
the job came out, for having made that opportunity available. 
 
Regarding your office space, I note from the globals the office 
space is increased by 66 square feet this year, an increase of 16 
per cent. This is in spite of the fact that your staff levels are 
essentially the same as last year. Is there any specific 
explanation for the reason for the increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be the added space for the 
sexual harassment unit. 
 
Mr. Toth: — That's an additional unit that you've now added to 
the department, I take it. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could detail the names and 
purposes of all manuals or other publications of the department 
as of March 31, '95, and also detail the audience for the 
manuals and whether or not it is publicly available through the 
library. And this information, Madam Minister, if it happens to 
be fairly lengthy, could be sent across. It's not necessary that 
you take the time to just read it into Hansard. That would be 
fine with me. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'd be happy to do that, particularly if 
you agree to display it in your constituency office. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, will it arrive before the 
election is called? We might have to display it in our committee 
rooms, I guess. 
 
Regarding committees and reviews. You've listed the 
Saskatchewan Women's Advisory Council is costing 14,400. 
Would you break this down according to per diems, travel 
expenses, and accommodations? Is that available, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The costs are basically a per diem, and 
they cover their own travel and accommodation costs out of 
that. For the chairperson it's 155 a day, and for the members it's 
$110 a day. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What's the mandate of this council? And did it 
address its mandate in this past year? Does it table a report? 
How often would it meet? Where does it meet? Does it have 
any spending authority or control over any grants that the  



May 8, 1995 

 
2059 

secretariat may have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The advisory council has no granting 
powers. They met approximately five times — we'd have to 
check to be exactly sure whether it was four or five, but five — 
tabled a report with recommendations based on meetings that 
they held with women within their geographic areas. 
 
The report that they produced addressed itself to issues like 
stronger involvement of women in economic development, 
more integration of women's history in education curriculums, 
problems of disabled parents who have children, perhaps who 
aren't disabled but the parents are, and the difficulties of parents 
accompanying their children to events and what not and 
participating in the community. And as well the need for more 
mentoring programs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Regarding the questions on advertising and 
communication, I notice your advertising spending more than 
doubled over the last year. I wonder if you could explain the 
dramatic change. Is it a matter of arriving at . . . drawing closer 
to an election and letting more people know about what the 
Women's Secretariat is doing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I regret to say no. This was all related 
to educational work done on implementing new legislative 
initiatives like the sexual harassment under occupational health 
and safety. 
 
So really the work that they do is to advance areas where 
perhaps the rules have changed or further educational work 
needs to be done around a particular item that has been 
recognized as being important. So it would have no political 
content in any partisan sense. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, it just appeared that . . . or 
appears the secretariat, over the last couple of years, has been 
somewhat dormant, and this year we've entered into a number 
of projects. Could you explain why the change? Is it just a 
reflection of the . . . more of the requests and the objectives that 
you're looking at coming to the fore and the secretariat now 
understanding their mandate and moving forward? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess it's not much different for the 
Women's Secretariat as it is for any person who is new to a 
system, in the sense that it takes time to build the linkages and 
the networks throughout the system. And certainly in the time 
that the secretariat has been in place, it's grown in its 
relationship to the government and its agencies in the kinds of 
tasks that it takes on. So I think it would just reflect its growth 
within the whole organization. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, it's noted that the secretariat has 
generally been modest in computer purchases, which is 
appropriate, I believe, given the small staff. This year however 
we see more than a quadrupling of your usual spending by 
shelling out nearly 18,000 for equipment, which works out to  

about l,800 in computer spending for every employee. I wonder 
how you justify this expenditure at this time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The ability to utilize computers as 
they're intended in a modern business environment has 
generally required that all of us upgrade our equipment 
somewhat from what we might have got along with in the past. 
 
Because of the substantial research role of the secretariat, as 
well as the educational role, they quite often have to tailor 
material, where you may have the basic information that's 
computerized, but you're tailoring it to various areas. So quite 
often the information has to be redone to suit particular 
workshops and particular situations. And so the various people 
that are involved in the educational work needed the capacity to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, one of the set of purchases was 
a group of laptops that were noticed. How many were 
purchased? How much did each one cost? Who uses them? 
Why was this deemed necessary? And how does this further the 
mandate of the secretariat? And how does the availability of 
laptops in the secretariat compare to other places in the public 
service or in the private sector? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm not able to compare it to other 
places in the public service, but I am able to say that this 
supports the out-of-city workshops that take place. No doubt 
you've participated in workshops where quite often the 
workshop generates materials which then form the basis for the 
next round of sessions at the workshop and so that would be 
what they would use these for. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So basically what 
you're saying is these laptops are taken and secretaries use them 
in recording information from workshops rather than having to 
lug a major computer with them. 
 
How many new computers were purchased and what equipment 
did they replace in the offices? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There were three computers purchased 
at 2,500 each and monitors at 1,320 each to replace old 
equipment. But if you want us to be more specific than that, we 
would have to put that together for you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Would you mind doing that, Madam Minister, 
and just forwarding that to us through the normal channels 
rather than worrying about that for tonight. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to take a  



May 8, 1995 

 
2060 

moment just to thank the minister and officials for having taken 
the time to come and review these questions and the responses, 
and I thank them for having sent the globals over ahead of time 
so we could review them, rather than trying to go through them 
directly in committee. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, and I'd like to thank the officials 
for providing me with information today and I thank the 
member for his questions. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: — I'll ask the minister to reintroduce his officials to 
the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Today I have with me Ray Clayton, the deputy 
minister of Energy and Mines; Dan McFadyen, assistant deputy 
minister of resource policy and economics; George Patterson, 
executive director of geology and mines; Bruce Wilson, 
executive director of petroleum and natural gas; Lynn Jacobson, 
director of personnel and administration; Doug Koepke, 
manager of accounts. I also have from the Saskatchewan 
Energy Conservation Authority, John Mitchell, the president; 
and Crystal Smudy from the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
wondered if you could take the time to detail the travel 
undertaken by the minister's office. When we're looking at the 
questions and preparations from the globals, perhaps you could 
give me the dates and destinations and purposes of the trip. And 
in Energy and Mines, it probably wasn't you so much as your 
predecessor. But I'm sure you wouldn't mind telling me where 
he went and what he did, what each trip accomplished; the 
names and positions of anyone accompanying the minister on 
the trip — I think you'll probably have the cost of each person 
per trip; the hotel meal and other expenses; the travel agency 
used; the cost of the agency and whether the work was 
tendered; and the total cost of all travel. We'll start with that, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I guess 
I'd just ask the member if he would want us to pass it across to 
him as . . . we can give it to you now. Or do you just want it 
passed across? 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well perhaps you can pass it across so that if 
there's something unique that I see here while we're going 
through the estimates I can ask you more details about it. And 
then I'll have it and you'll have it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We'll pass those across directly. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well while you're digging up those, maybe we 
can give you another one. Mr. Minister, with respect to fees and  

charges in Energy and Mines, there are considerable . . . I 
wonder if you could also get your officials to provide the details 
of your fees, all of your fees and charges, in terms of the type of 
the fee; the amount; the change in any fee since last year; the 
revenue collected from each fee and in total; the date each fee 
was instituted; the purpose of the fees; and who the fee is 
submitted to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, and to 
the member from Estevan, we would be more than willing to 
pass across all of the fees for this that you have requested. You 
will know that there are scores of them and it will take our 
officials some time to put those together but we'll have those 
put together and we'll send them to you as soon as we can have 
them put together. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would the minister, just to give me some 
guidance, would you be . . . do you think you'd have your travel 
data by the end of the evening, or are you expecting that you'd 
need a couple of days? And how about the fees and the charges, 
how long do you think that would take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I've just passed 
on to the Clerk the travel data that you requested. My officials 
tell me that it would take a couple of days to put together the 
fees in the kind of detail that you've asked for. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you. I also have some questions with 
respect to legal actions. I wondered if you could ask your 
officials to pull together the detail of all the legal actions 
against, or taken by, the department in terms of the plaintiff; the 
principal lawyer and firms; according to which it was heard; 
start date of action and appearances made; purpose of the suit; 
settlement or liability, if any; cost, either total or to date, as 
applicable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we will put that all 
together and send that over to you. I'm not sure, can we get that 
tonight or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We could have it for 
you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also in terms of 
contracts and employees, I wonder if you could have your 
officials detail all the 11 contract employees, giving their 
names, terms, job description, benefits, office locations, and 
principal residence locations. 
 
And similarly, with respect to reporting on your personnel, in 
spite of the fact that you lost one in-scope permanent employee, 
your costs for this area rose by nearly $50,000. I wondered if 
you could just take the time to explain that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to 
the member from Estevan, I'll be passing across a list of the 
contract employees that you asked for and the nature of the 
contracts and any comments, and I'll send that across to you 
now. 
 
With respect to personnel and incremental personnel, as the  



May 8, 1995 

 
2061 

member will be aware, we certainly have had a busy year with 
respect to oil and gas activity in the province and the 
incremental personnel that you refer to would be part and parcel 
of being able to provide good service to our clients so that we 
can process their requests in a timely fashion. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Perhaps the minister could tell me, does the 
number of in-scope, temporary employees — we've been given 
42 — represent the total for the year or just coincidentally the 
number who happened to be present on March 31, '95? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that is the number 
as of March 31, 1995. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Does the minister expect any changes in the 
number of in-scope, temporary employees? It happened to be 
the number in March 31, '95. Do you think that it will change, 
particularly given light of the, perhaps, downturn in the oil and 
energy business? It looks like it's kind of slowing up a little bit. 
Would he see any change in the number of employees, either in 
scope or out of scope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can 
say to the member from Estevan that we're not expecting, 
within the next few months, any changes in terms of that 
number. We figure it'll remain fairly constant. 
 
But I would want to say to the member from Estevan that with 
respect to the number of employees that we have and our ability 
to serve our clients, we will have on staff the number of 
employees that it will require in order to ensure that we give 
good service and good, positive service to our clients. Quite 
clearly, if the demand for the number of temporary people 
within the department decreases, we would lay people off, as 
they are temporary. 
 
If we were to find that — as we have — an increase in activity, 
we would hire the number of staff that would be appropriate to 
serve the needs of the people who we do business with. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, your costs for in-scope, 
temporary employees rose nearly $60,000 in spite of the fact 
that it looks as though you only picked up one additional 
employee. Could you explain this increase in cost for one 
employee, and particularly for a temporary employee? 
 
And similarly, your out-of-scope, permanent employees have 
been reduced by one, yet your costs here have risen by 
$102,000. I wondered if you could explain that. 
 
So you have a hundred and sixty-some thousand dollars 
increase in expenditures for a part-time employee and a 
permanent employee that have been let go, yet your 
expenditures increased $160,000. 
 
I wonder if you would explain the one out-of-scope, temporary 
position that you created this year, and what was this person's  

position and what did this person do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if I could just ask 
the member from Estevan what numbers he is comparing here 
so that he could just help us out a bit in order to give him the 
facts. Which numbers are you comparing? 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well maybe this will help. There seemed to be 
some discrepancy in the total number of employees that you've 
provided us. In the answers to the global questions you 
provided to us you say that your total employees for the year 
was 233; however in the budget estimates, your 1994-95 staff 
utilization was reported to be 224. Which is the correct number 
and why the discrepancy? And then if there are some changes 
as a result of laying off and temporary, or adding or subtracting 
a permanent employee, why the significant increase in cost? 
 
And I can go back to give you an example. Your out-of-scope, 
permanent employees have been reduced by one evidently, yet 
your costs have risen by $102,000. That's the information that I 
have before me. Your costs for in-scope employees rose nearly 
$60,000 despite the fact that you only picked up one additional 
employee. Sixty thousand seems like a lot of money, for a 
part-time employee, in additional cost and I just wonder if you 
might just review your staff requirements for the year and 
explain any variation in the increase in costs. And if our 
numbers don't jibe perhaps you could just explain to me why 
the costs have risen. And you did earlier, by saying that you had 
extra work, an extra employee, which is fair enough. That's the 
kind of thing I'm looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I guess in order to 
answer the member, what I would say that, quite clearly, we 
budgeted 224 employees in the budget figures. The demand led 
the staff to determine it was appropriate to hire incremental 
staff which would, quite clearly I guess, suggest an incremental 
cost in terms of the department's budget to have those 
incremental staff on board. 
 
And I would want to say, and the member will know, that with 
part-time employees, temporary employees, they will come and 
they will go. At some point in time there will be more 
employees than perhaps there will be at others. And as I've 
indicated to you, as of March 31, 1995, we had 42 temporary 
employees on staff. I wouldn't expect that that would be the 
number throughout the course of the period you described 
because the demand will create an increase in the number of 
employees, and quite clearly, if we aren't requiring that many 
people on staff, we would let them go. 
 
The numbers though, as I've indicated, are accurate  233  
and the budget forecast was 224. The difference in terms of 
dollars would be the amount as employees come and go. You 
couldn't attribute them to just one employee. It would be an 
aggregate amount, and as you will know, those numbers 
fluctuate up and down. 
 
Mr. Devine: — All right, well that's fair enough, Mr. Minister. 
So if we took the extra nine employees and we look at the extra  



May 8, 1995 

 
2062 

amount spent from your estimation . . . I'll go back and look at 
it. It's just sort of a global picture for nine more employees. So 
if we're looking at increased expenditures we can just attribute 
it to the increase in staff. I assume that's what you're trying to 
say. 
 
Could the minister tell me what positions fall under the "other" 
category of employees and why did this rise $40,000 last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, our officials are 
putting that information together, and if the member wants to 
go on with another question, we can get to that in a few 
minutes. We've made note of that, and our officials will put that 
information together for you. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, evidently your 
in-province departmental travel fell by about $28,000. Your 
out-of-province departmental travel shot up by 34,000 so that 
your overall travel costs are up by $6,000 or about a 32 per cent 
increase in out-of-province travel. 
 
Could you explain this increase, and particularly this dramatic 
increase in out-of-province travel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as you will 
know, a lot of the business done by this department is in 
Calgary, and certainly that will be part of the out-of-province 
travel expenditures. Many of the oil and gas companies are 
headquartered there. And it has been the practice of myself, as 
minister, and previous ministers in this portfolio, that we 
maintain a close connection with the industry, simply because 
we want to encourage them to invest in our province, encourage 
them to develop our resource. And I think that it's most 
appropriate that we maintain a close contact with industry. 
 
One of the . . . I guess one of the comments that I have heard 
from industry players is that they're very much satisfied with the 
way the Department of Energy and Mines does business with 
them. They have open access, and they have free access to the 
department, and when they require meetings, our officials are 
more than willing to attend to business either in Calgary or on 
many occasions they come to our province. 
 
So I would want to say that it's a cost of doing business. I think 
the numbers that you raise, although important to all of us that 
we keep the costs of government down, it's an important aspect, 
an important part of doing business. And I think the industry 
has been very well served by the interaction with the 
department in the past year. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well that's fair enough, Mr. Minister. But it's a 
healthy increase in out-of-province travel, and it certainly wasn't 
all to Calgary. From the information you gave me, you went to 
Manitoba — or one of the ministers did, maybe the minister 
before you, from The Battlefords — went to Victoria, another 
trip to Victoria, trip to north . . . or to New Brunswick, trip to 
Edmonton, another trip to Vancouver, a trip to Toronto. And 
there were one, two, three trips to Vancouver. So he was all 
over the place. And 32 per cent — is that correct? — 34, 32  

per cent increase in out-of-province travel and a whole bunch of 
it, well over half of it, wasn't to Calgary at all. So it had not 
much to do with head office people in Calgary. It was 
everywhere from the Atlantic to the Pacific and everything in 
between. 
 
I just raise it, Mr. Minister, because it seemed to be a dramatic 
increase in out-of-province travel associated with the minister 
from the Battlefords. And unless you've really picked up an 
awful lot in the last month or so . . . it wasn't to Calgary. It was 
almost to every place else but, in terms of the frequency of 
visits to Manitoba; Victoria; Victoria; Bathurst, New 
Brunswick; Edmonton; Vancouver; Toronto, and so forth. So I 
just point out, Mr. Minister, it seemed like a large increase in 
out-of-province travel. 
 
In terms of your reclassifications, there seem to be a fairly large 
number of reclassifications this year. I believe there's about a 
dozen. Could you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I 
guess I would just want to say to the member from Estevan that 
the activity that he probably recognizes and will acknowledge in 
his own riding — the riding of Estevan — in terms of the oil 
and gas activity there, would indicate that the expenditures and 
the work of the department and the minister has been a very 
positive benefit. And I think that might just be experienced by 
the amount of activity, the amount of full hotel rooms and 
restaurants as people are developing that resource in the riding 
of Estevan, would indicate that that in fact has been a very 
positive expenditure. 
 
I want to say that, as the member will know, the Energy 
minister of Saskatchewan has taken, and continues to take, a 
leadership role in the development of the energy industry and 
energy initiatives in Canada, and is the Co-Chair of the council 
. . . or is the Chair of the council for the past year; was the Chair 
of the council of energy ministers, of energy and mines. And I 
think that you will know that some of these trips were due to 
the minister's duties as the chairman of that committee. 
 
You will also know that there has been ongoing dialogue with 
respect to carbon dioxide emissions and our targets as it affects 
global warming. And some of these meetings that took place 
were to deal with that at the ministers' conferences that were 
held throughout the country. With respect to . . . and I want the 
member to know that these were in fact, and will be in fact, 
one-time expenditures just by the nature of the role of the 
chairmanship of that committee. 
 
With respect to the reclassifications, in some instances, as you 
will know, members of the civil service can request a 
reclassification based on the change of their duties, increased 
demands and increased workload. Some will be turned to the 
Public Service Commission for review, and in some cases there 
will be in fact reclassifications. 
 



May 8, 1995 

 
2063 

So basically that's the nature of the reclassifications within the 
department, and certainly I'm of the belief that both the 
department and the Public Service Commission will be very 
diligent in terms of scrutinizing the roles and the duties of 
public service employees, and where reclassification warrants, 
will be approved. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, with respect to 
reclassifications, the cost of those reclassifications, I believe, is 
$14,644 which works out to about $1,220 per position. That's a 
pretty hefty raise or a pretty hefty amount for an average raise. 
Would you care to comment on any justification you'd have for 
that size of an average pay increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told by my 
officials that when a reclassification occurs, there's an 
automatic increase of 8 per cent on an employee's salary, and 
I'm assuming that if this is broken down that that would equate 
to the 8 per cent with respect to the reclassification. Now some 
of the employees may have a larger salary level, some may have 
a smaller salary level, but a reclassification — the end result 
will be that there is an 8 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Devine: — That's standard Public Service Commission 
rules, that when you reclassify, the minimum raise is 8 per cent. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I'm told that's the case unless you 
hit the top of the range. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would you say, Mr. Minister, that that's the 
typical case, that that is . . . that that's the rule? When the Public 
Service Commission, regardless of departments, when you 
reclassify somebody they will at least get 8 per cent increase in 
salary unless they bumped up against the top which is as high as 
they can go unless they get a new job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the 
member from Estevan is correct. 
 
Mr. Devine: — It appears from the terminations that the entire 
ministerial staff last year was . . . well left your office. Could 
you perhaps tell us where they went, and were they paid any 
severance? And in particular, what were the reasons for, and the 
benefits given upon, the departure of, perhaps, Mr. Ian 
McCuaig, an MA (ministerial assistant) who was listed as 
resigning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told by my 
officials that the ministerial assistants' positions that have been 
terminated and are listed — many of them here, as I see, 
accepted a position in different agency — would mean that the 
former minister of Energy and Mines' ministerial assistants 
would be transferred to his new duties, in this case to the 
Department of Labour, and would then be paid as ministerial 
assistants under the Department of Labour. 
 
With respect to terminations, with respect to resignations, I can't 
speak to where in fact those employees may have accepted  

other employment. I don't have that information, and I don't 
believe that the Department of Energy and Mines would have 
that information available. But I can tell you that the 
terminations here would mean transfers, in this case, to the 
Department of Highways . . . I'm sorry, to the Department of 
Labour. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So, Mr. Minister, am to understand this 
correctly, if we wanted to trace this around as ministers move 
from department to department and this takes place, we will 
always go to the minister's new department to find out where 
the people from his last department moved to? And in addition, 
in terms of severances or upgrading or reclassification that 
would take place as he moves employees, is it your advice that 
always we should go to the minister's new department? Because 
if we move onto Labour, for example, and he says, no, no you 
got to get that from Energy, then we've got ourselves a problem. 
So I'm just trying to, best I can, to find out what Energy and 
Mines paid any of these ministerial staff; if there are any 
severances, did it cost you any money. You back-filled with 
new people, obviously. Did you give any of those increases in 
positions, increases in reclassification? How did it wash out, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can tell the 
member from Estevan that all of the information from Energy 
and Mines with respect to the ministerial assistants will, as a 
matter of how they function, be transferred to the new 
department. And in this case all of the records with respect to 
the MAs have been transferred to the Department of Labour. 
That information would be available through the Department of 
Labour. It's a matter of transferring the records with the MAs as 
they go with the minister and with his new duties to a new 
department. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay, so is it fair to say, Mr. Minister, that 
when we're into Labour estimates, I can get all that information 
from the Minister of Labour? You say, yes. All right. 
 
Can you tell me where your people came from in terms of back-
filling all the positions that moved on with him? There was a lot 
of empty spaces. You had to fill those with somebody. I guess 
you're the appropriate person to say, well where did they come 
from, and what did it cost because we can't leave a vacuum 
here. So did you back-fill all of the positions that followed the 
minister of Energy when he went to the Minister of Labour? 
And what has it cost you? What did you pay them? Where there 
any severances paid to people that were let go, etc., etc.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me 
first speak to the ministerial assistants who work in my office. 
They came over from Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. There have been no changes. They're still in their 
same duties as they were doing in Property Management 
Corporation. They're now employed by the Department of 
Energy and Mines in the same positions, and so that process 
continues. 
 
You asked with respect to resignations. I am told that there was,  



May 8, 1995 

 
2064 

in the Department of Energy and Mines, one resignation, a 
ministerial assistant 2, and the severance was, I'm told, two 
months’ salary in lieu of notice for severance. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Two months’ salary in lieu of notice. Was that 
for Mr. Ian McCuaig? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, it was. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Is that a typical severance, two months’ salary? 
Could you tell me what his salary was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I'm told by my officials that that is 
in keeping and in line with the ministerial assistant regulations. 
That is standard practice throughout government. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So Mr. Ian McCuaig was asked to . . . resigned 
his position, or was asked to leave. Perhaps the minister could 
explain the rules there. Is there . . . and he was given two 
months’ salary. Could you tell me as well just to confirm that . . 
. And where did he show up? Is he working in the public 
service or did he follow the minister of . . . former minister of 
Energy over to Labour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told that to the 
best of our knowledge we are not aware that he is working 
within the civil service. To the best of our knowledge he is not. 
And I can only say that the salary in lieu of notice, two months, 
is standard ministerial assistant practice. 
 
I can tell you that Mr. McCuaig had not worked in my office, he 
worked in the former minister's office, and I'm not aware of the 
circumstances under which he left the office. I just have before 
me what I have transmitted to you earlier this evening. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I'm sure it's your responsibility, Mr. 
Minister, but I imagine you have several officials with you that 
were there and are still there. Any information or any light that 
could be shed on the reasons that Mr. McCuaig was asked to 
leave and to pick up this two months’ salary is just of interest to 
the taxpayer. What happened to him, why did he get paid this 
money, and where did he go? Maybe you don't have the 
answers to that but we'll just leave them unanswered. We don't 
know what happened to him, we don't know where he went, and 
we don't know why it happened. Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, I think it's fair to say that the 
arrangement between the employee and his . . . and the minister 
were not working out and for that reason the termination took 
place. So with respect to that there's not much more I can tell 
you. There may be some details that I'm not aware of and that 
you may not become aware of but I think it's fair to say that the 
arrangement that the minister had with his employee didn't 
work out. He was terminated and was paid two months’ salary 
in lieu of notice. 
 
Mr. Devine: — All right, well I guess we can ask the Minister 
of Labour about that. So you're saying, Mr. Minister, all the 
people that you brought in when you became the Minister of  

Energy, your staff, the people brought in, did it fill the full 12 
positions that . . . or maybe it wasn't 12 . . . The full composite 
of ministerial staff that was moved out, terminated, was it 
completely back-filled by your staff? All his staff went out and 
yours came in? The minister is nodding, yes, it was. 
 
And you paid them the same as you had before? No 
reclassifications? Mr. Chairman, we'll assume that when he 
shakes his head that means, no reclassifications. Thank you. 
 
Under the non-permanent employees, there's a listing for an 
Andrea Coulling as a junior secretary in the MA classification 
system. I wonder if you could explain the circumstances around 
the hiring of this employee in your office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can 
say that one of my employees was on sick leave for an extended 
period of time, my senior secretary. She still is on sick leave 
and in her absence, the intermediate secretary and the junior 
secretary were promoted to fill in. And the employee that you 
mentioned was brought in on a temporary basis to back-fill in 
place of the junior secretary. That employee has left my 
employment to pursue other initiatives and in my office right 
now I only have the acting senior and the acting intermediate 
secretary. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you could 
give us some details on your vehicles. Who uses each of the 
department's 16 leased vehicles and the purpose of the vehicle 
and if you could give us the annual cost for each of these leases 
so that we could summarize the use of the vehicles in your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we have, as the 
member has indicated, a total of 16 cars in the department. One 
is used by the field supervisor director in Regina. One is a 
general pool car in Regina. We have three in Kindersley, three 
field cars in Kindersley; those are all assigned to employees. 
We have three in Swift Current. We have one in La Ronge. We 
have two in Lloydminster, and we have five in Estevan — all 
assigned to employees of the department, for a total of 16. 
 
I should mention, Mr. Chairman, that three of these are 1994 
models. Two are '93 models. One is a 1992 model. Four are 
1991 models, and we have six cars that are older than 1991. So 
you can see that we have done everything in our power to 
squeeze as many miles as we can out of the fleet. It becomes, I 
guess at some point, a question as to whether the cost of 
maintenance for an older car are worthwhile continuing and 
whether or not it would be prudent to purchase new vehicles. 
And I would say that this is something that we are looking at 
across government, not only within the Department of Energy 
and Mines. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Are these vehicles leased, and if they are, could 
you give us what's left on the lease, the cost of the leases; who 
they're leased from; the length of the lease; or are they outright  



May 8, 1995 

 
2065 

purchased — that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — These are all CVA (Central Vehicle 
Agency) cars purchased through SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), purchased by SPMC. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You have provided 
us with a list of all the space leased by the department. Could 
you go through each of those and give us the lease cost for both 
last year and this year, also give the total accommodation cost 
of the department for this year and last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would say to the 
member from Estevan, as a matter of policy . . . and I think he 
will know that this situation hasn't changed from the days when 
he was the premier and was ultimately responsible for 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation . . . don't 
divulge the cost per square foot of leases. We can pass to you 
the aggregate amount, and our people are putting that together. 
 
But I think you will agree with me that people do business with 
Property Management Corporation on a confidential basis. 
These are tendered properties. And because of the competitive 
nature of the real estate industry, I'm sure that you will agree 
with me that people doing business with the government would 
rather not have the details of their arrangements with 
government made public. 
 
I can say to you that in the time, the two years, that I was the 
minister in charge of Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, we attempted to deal with people who wanted to 
do business with government on a fair basis. We tendered 
leases and tried to get the best bang for the buck in all of the 
leases, and at the same time still being fair to the people who 
we did business with. 
 
So I would just say to the member, as a matter of policy we 
don't divulge the cost per square foot on individual pieces of 
property. We've given you the aggregate . . . we will give you 
the aggregate amount and we have listed the areas where we 
hold property. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Fair enough, Mr. Minister. If you can put 
together the aggregates, we'll take it from there. 
 
In terms of committees and reviews that you reported to us, 
there were significantly fewer than last year. Could you tell us 
the current status on the following: the management committee 
of the Canada-Saskatchewan Partnership Agreement on Mineral 
Development; the Committee of Provincial Geologists, and the 
National Geological Survey Committee; the Saskatchewan 
Energy Conservation and Development Authority; Energy and 
Mines—Industry Oil and Gas Review Steering Committee; 
Energy and Mines—Industry Fiscal Regime Subcommittee; 
Energy and Mines—Industry Regulatory Administrative 
Subcommittee. If the committee is still active, I wonder if the 
minister might report on its activities and costs during the year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can . . . To the  

member from Estevan, the ones that aren't on the list have 
largely been wound down I am told by my officials. With 
respect to the list that was forwarded to you, the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
different committees that are still in operation, if you want, I 
can read into the record what the responsibility of those 
committees are. Or if you want to take it as read, having given 
the information and passed the information to you, whatever is 
your wish. But the ones that aren't listed, I'm told, have been 
wound down and are no longer functional. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Just so I understand, the list that I read here, 
you're saying that they are wound down? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh everything is wound down, except what I've 
just read. So those that I've read are active. 
 
Well you could send me their objectives, but I wondered if you 
might comment on anything of any particular interest that you 
think noteworthy on any of the committees that are active. I've 
got a couple of questions on some specifics but . . . Have they 
reported? Are they providing you with particular information 
that you think is valuable? Anything new in the industry? Any 
new suggestions from fiscal regimes? Mineral agreements? Just 
anything of note before we look at them in general? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess 
with respect to the committees on the list that have been passed 
on to the member, the Saskatchewan Geological Survey Liaison 
Committee, which is basically to advise geological surveys on 
geoscientific programs, is ongoing. It's a process that continues 
to function. 
 
The Saskatchewan air quality task force has, I am told, a report 
prepared and it will be available shortly. The Saskatchewan 
mining task force has a report done and I'm told as well that it's 
role is ongoing. 
 
Initiatives to secure future viabilities of mining in our province. 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Board, which resolves oil and 
gas issues and disputes, has a role and that continues as well. 
Energy and Mines—Industry Natural Gas Pricing and Reporting 
Committee is a role that is ongoing as well. 
 
We have just recently sent a letter to industry with respect to its 
role and how they interact with the government, with respect to 
simplifying the rules by which industry operates in the 
province. I think that the work has given some clear indication 
to us where there are areas that we may be able to simplify the 
interaction between industry and government. So that role is 
continuing and I think plays a very positive role in terms of 
attracting and welcoming industry to Saskatchewan. I think it's 
created and helped create a good place to do business. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Minister. I expect when you send it 
across that you can give me the costs of running each 
committee that is ongoing, or include that if you will please in 
running the committee. 
 
And for those that are wound down, perhaps you could just 
have a brief explanation when you send it across why it was  



May 8, 1995 

 
2066 

wound down and delineate any wind-down costs and if there 
are any final reports associated with any of those that have 
closed up. And I'm sure that your officials can do that. 
 
You have one new committee reporting to us, the Energy and 
Mines—Industry Natural Gas Pricing and Reporting 
Committee. The only thing is that the start date you have listed 
for this committee is June of '93. In spite of the fact it's been 
around for two years you've never bothered to report it to us 
here in estimates before. I wonder if you could ask your 
officials to be as thorough as possible when you're reporting it 
here. I don't have to perhaps underline the importance of us 
seeing the annual reports of committees. 
 
(2015) 
 
So if it hasn't reported since '93 we'd like to know what it's been 
doing. And maybe your officials could take care to provide us 
with a summary of the costs of the committee, what its mandate 
was, what it's found out, what its activities are, and the current 
status of that committee. Particularly given the gas prices that 
we've looked at and some of the controversy around gas prices. 
 
Gas has been declining and yet natural gas costs to the taxpayer 
here in the province have been going up. I'm sure that the 
committee, if they've been looking at any of that, might have 
some interesting information to provide to the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I will report to the member 
from Estevan that the Industry Natural Gas Pricing and 
Reporting Committee was in fact a subcommittee of a larger 
committee that was put together from government and industry, 
and that was the royalty and administration committee. This 
subcommittee had not completed its work. It was ongoing and it 
was felt then that there was a necessity to complete the work, 
part of which we believe will culminate in a much more simple 
way of reporting and dealing with industry as it pertains to the 
Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
So that role will be ongoing. The work of that committee 
becomes public certainly as we transform the regulations and 
transform the way we do business with the industry. It's a matter 
of ongoing dialogue. 
 
But the reason that it hasn't reported — as it was indicated or as 
it was reported to you in the document that we sent across — is 
simply because it is in fact a subcommittee of the royalty and 
administration committee, which has completed its work, as I've 
indicated, other than the role and the mandate of this 
subcommittee which continues to function. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I suspect that that subcommittee will 
report when it finishes its work and we'll look forward to 
getting the details of their work. 
 
I wonder if the minister could give us a complete list of the 
current committees, in terms of the salaries of those committee 
members, the per diems and expenses associated with the 
ongoing and active committees. And I'm sure that he can and  

I'll just ask him to do that and to send it across. 
 
Also, I wonder if the minister would ask his officials to detail 
all manuals that you have published over the year, including the 
name, the purpose, the intended audience, the costs, and 
whether they've been sent to the Legislative Library. 
 
And the same with publications. I note that you've done quite a 
job on your publications spending. You've managed to spend 
between one and a half to two-thirds less on all your major 
newsletters and publications without cutting the number of 
copies you distributed. I would be interested in how you 
accomplished that efficiency and why the costs were as high as 
they were in the first place and how you managed to cut them. 
 
And as with the committees in review section, there seemed to 
be some publications missing or are the reports for the oil and 
gas revolving fund no longer being published? If they are, what 
were their costs and their distribution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
costs of the committees that were listed, the only one where per 
diems are paid is the Oil and Gas Conservation Board. This is a 
board whose members are paid through the department for the 
work that they do. The costs of the other ones are internal, 
department staff who apply, as part of their working day, their 
knowledge and their expertise to the working of the 
committees. And from the perspective of industry, the 
stakeholders for the most part willingly join at their own cost 
because they're quite comfortable, and want the dialogue, and 
want the work to continue to proceed with the department. 
 
With respect to in-house . . . or with respect to publication 
costs, I am told by my officials that the computer technology, as 
it has been advancing and progressing, has been able to allow 
them to do much more in-house work than was the case prior to 
the equipment that they have, that can now handle the kind and 
the quality of work that they would want to put out. And the 
other aspect is that the tendering process has certainly made 
industry more aware and more competitive and has decreased 
the costs of the publications across the department. So two 
areas. One, in-house computer technology and the ability to do 
the work in house; secondly, the competitive industry of nature, 
as most of this work is now tendered. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well that's fair enough. And it's interesting that 
you would talk about computers, Mr. Minister, because that's 
the next line of questioning, and there's some interesting 
questions to be answered. 
 
Computers are one, or perhaps one, area where you can abuse 
spending in government because it's not real easy to track. It 
seems very easy for departments, perhaps, to mystify superiors 
or ministers into thinking they need a ton of additional 
computer equipment every year. Consequently, this is an area 
that we look at quite seriously at budget time. It seems that your 
department may not take this quite as seriously as it could. 
 
We asked for a detailed list of computer-related purchases,  



May 8, 1995 

 
2067 

including precisely what was purchased for precisely what 
purpose. However this year, like last year, Mr. Minister, we 
received a response from your department that was very vague, 
to say the least. We have here responses like, computer software 
programs to perform specific operations — quote, unquote — 
not detailing what they're for, what operations, targeted for what 
purpose. It just doesn't tell me or my research staff very much. 
So for starters, I'd like your officials to prepare for us a list of 
all computer software purchased, stating exactly, precisely, 
what the software is and exactly what it does. Do you think, Mr. 
Minister, that would be something you could ask your officials 
to do/ 
 
And likewise, everywhere on our question no. 12 where your 
officials have answered "computer equipment" as the 
description of what they've bought, we would like a precise 
description of what they bought and what the purpose is. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could undertake to provide that as 
well. 
 
I would make the positive comment that you have improved this 
department's habits since last year with regards to tendering 
computer purchases, and I think that perhaps the tendering has 
worked and perhaps the tendering of various kinds of 
publications has also worked as well. And I would certainly 
endorse your officials and your policy if that's been the case, 
that it's caused your costs to drop. 
 
Although your computer spending remains stable at around 
$290,000, it still remains one of the highest computer budgets 
outside of the Department of Health. Can you explain why this 
ongoing expense is that necessary and that large? 
 
Last year your department reported 138,000 of its computer 
budget as spent at the last minute, even though they couldn't tell 
us what they spent it on and the supplier they listed was 
"unknown at the time." Could you tell us now what was 
purchased with this money and who the supplier was? 
 
I guess what I'm trying to say, Mr. Minister, on one or two 
occasions, it seems like you've really adopted some significant 
efficiencies, and I would just encourage you to take that a little 
bit farther because it looks like you can make significant 
progress. In the last couple of years it's been very fuzzy and my 
research staff and my caucus colleagues have been, frankly, 
unable to really track what you've been doing with your 
computers. And I'm sure that if we asked them politely, they can 
probably do a better job of providing you the information and 
then providing us. So would you be prepared to answer and 
address those questions and send them across at your earliest 
convenience? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
from Estevan, we will put together the last year's expenditure 
and the details similar to what we have provided. I would say 
that the officials indicate that they were caught in a bit of a time 
bind and had to move on some of these purchases and didn't 
have the information together. 
 

I want to say to the member from Estevan that quite clearly, as 
indicated in the list of purchases — I don't know how many 
pages here, six, eight pages — with respect to computer 
equipment and all of the things that go with computers, you will 
note that they have been tendered. I can't note here an instance 
where they have not been, and I think you're right that it 
probably has created some cost efficiencies within government 
and in particular within the Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
With respect to the workload that the department has, I think as 
you will note there is . . . and you will recall, there is a great 
degree of detail in record keeping. A lot of records have been 
transferred from manual to electronic computer systems. The 
nature of a computer . . . or a portion of a computer purchase 
may not be the same in the beginning of the year as it would be 
in the middle of the year and as it would be in the end of the 
year. 
 
We have tried to cut the costs of our computer purchases by 
maintaining flexibility in terms of the roles and what those 
specific pieces of equipment do. So in order to give you a 
detailed analysis of what a particular computer has done over 
the course of the year, or might do over the course of the next 
year, I think, as you will admit, would require many, many 
hours of work. And I would suggest the fact that they've been 
tendered would mean we've got very cost-effective purchases. 
 
I can say without equivocation that I have seen the Department 
of Energy and Mines to be very fiscally prudent. And in a lot of 
cases even in spite of the fact that they would have wanted to 
see incremental expenditures for pieces of equipment that might 
help them better do their job, they have been very prudent in 
terms of their purchases and their requests to Treasury Board. 
And I can assure you that I would far sooner have the 
employees of the Department of Energy and Mines spending 
time working with industry to determine how we can attract 
incremental investment, more investment, how we can simplify 
record keeping, and I think the purchase of these computers will 
assist in both areas. 
 
And I just say to the member, the information that we've 
supplied I believe to be adequate. Certainly there can always be 
room for more information irrespective of which department, 
but I just say that the amount of work involved, I'm told by the 
officials, would be overwhelming in terms of trying to track 
what computer did, you know, what particular function at the 
beginning of the year, whether it changed to the middle. 
 
I just suffice it to say that we have indicated the purchases, the 
aggregate amount of the purchases, the individual purchases. 
We have indicated that they've been tendered. And I think the 
people of Saskatchewan would be more than pleased with the 
accountability that's been displayed here today. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I don't think 
however it's too much to ask for what the software that you've 
purchased is used for in a general sense. We just got some very 
vague answers on software programs and various software 
components, and I believe that you could . . . It would be much  



May 8, 1995 

 
2068 

more interesting reading as well if you could say, well we 
purchased this, and the software, the latest can give us this, or 
we've tendered that, or we've got this package for these 
particular tasks, recommended by industry. It would be 
interesting to talk about. So I think that if you could give us 
some of the specifics on the software packages, those that know 
a lot about software certainly will be able to tell whether it's 
reasonable or not and feel a little bit more satisfied. The 
minister's shaking his head and I'll let him respond. 
 
With respect to polling, Mr. Minister, you undertook a survey 
regarding mining this year. Could you tell us the results of the 
survey, why it was commissioned, what benefits you got from 
it, and anything that you can share with the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
from Estevan. I will indeed ask the officials to put together in a 
general sense . . . and I have an understand that you're looking 
for . . . I have I guess a better understanding of what you're 
looking for now. And I think, by your request, you're agreeing 
with me that it may not be appropriate to put the amount of 
detail in each individual one. But I think with respect to 
software, we would be willing to put together a response to 
your question so that you would be satisfied that the 
expenditures are of a prudent nature and are there to assist the 
department in doing its work. 
 
My officials are putting together the mining survey. And I 
haven't had the opportunity to look at this. If you want to go on 
with another question, and while you're doing that, I'd have the 
opportunity to have a look at this. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like a little 
bit of information on our royalty structure. And one of the 
questions we were talking about previously was, as you recall, 
Mr. Minister, was upgraders. And I wanted to know about how 
much money in royalties we collect in a barrel of heavy to 
moderate heavy oil. And then if upgraders use 20 million 
barrels, you know, what's the royalty coming in on that much 
oil? 
 
I wonder if your officials could tell us the royalty on a barrel of 
oil, heavy oil, used for upgraders or the combination heavy and 
medium oil that is used in upgraders. What's the typical royalty 
take on a barrel of that oil that would be used in either one of 
the upgraders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 
member from Estevan that I was aware of this previously, and I 
guess I'd forgotten about it. 
 
With respect to polling, it was part of an omnibus poll that was 
done by government. And some of the questions are fairly 
general — asking questions, as an example, what in your 
opinion are the primary benefits that the mining industry brings 
to Saskatchewan? Do you disagree that northern . . . agree or 
disagree that northern contractors should be given priority when  

mining contracts are awarded — those kinds of issues. 
 
I'll pass this across to you so that you can have a closer look at 
it. This is all public information. As you will know, we make 
available to the general public the polling information on a 
regular basis. And I will just ask the Clerk to pass a copy of this 
on to you. 
 
As your question is related to royalties, I can say that the 
aggregate amount in 1994 was 29.8 million in Crown royalties 
and freehold tax, net of the New Grade natural gas royalty tax 
rebate of 1.3 million and 5.7 million in corporation capital tax 
surcharge. I would also say to the member from Estevan that the 
revenue estimates — I'm told by the officials — provided, are 
based on Saskatchewan crude feedstocks of twelve and a half 
million barrels, an average price of $15.37 Canadian, an 
average royalty tax rate of 16.2 per cent, and an average 
corporate capital tax surcharge rate of 3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You're saying that 
you . . . just so I understand it, 12.5 million barrels of oil for 
'95? — '95-96? Is that right? And a price of $15.30 per barrel 
Canadian? And the royalty rate was 16.2 per cent and a 3 per 
cent surcharge? Was that twelve and a half million barrels the 
total, or was that all oil? Could you just elaborate on that, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told that the 
twelve and a half million dollar barrel figure . . . or twelve and a 
half million barrel figure is 1994, and that is Saskatchewan 
crude, net of any Alberta crude and net of any condensate. 
 
I would want to also remind the member, before we get into this 
again, that this is not incremental revenue. This is not 
incremental revenue, and we have to understand this because I 
think I'm already seeing the direction that the member from 
Estevan is taking on this debate. And we've been through this, I 
guess two occasions that I can recall, before. So it's '94 figures, 
and he would want to know, and want to be reminded, that it's 
not incremental revenue. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well fair enough. I just wanted to know if the 
twelve and a half million barrels, '94, was all of the oil, all of 
the Saskatchewan oil. That's the total, that's everything; just to 
confirm that. And number two: how much of Saskatchewan oil 
would go into the upgrader? Could you give me ballpark on 
both of those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the twelve and a 
half million barrels for 1994, that is Saskatchewan crude. That's 
Saskatchewan. That's it. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Pardon me, the next question. How much 
would the upgraders use of Saskatchewan oil? 
 
They use about 50,000 barrels a day apiece — ballpark. In fact 
they're a little more than that. Some comes from Alberta; some 
from Saskatchewan. Is it half? Would half of it come in? 
 



May 8, 1995 

 
2069 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, it's becoming a long 
day and I guess it takes a little while to get my figures together 
here, and I'm trying to subtract 12 from 18 and somehow I get 4 
and my officials tell me it's 6, and they're right, upon reflection. 
 
The total number that goes, as reported by Crown Investments 
Corporation, into NewGrade is around eighteen and a half 
million barrels. The amount of Saskatchewan crude is around 
twelve and a half million, so the differential is 6 million. So in 
terms of Saskatchewan crude, twelve and a half million is what 
I'm told by my officials goes into the NewGrade upgrader. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well it is confusing, Mr. Minister. Fair enough. 
You're saying that twelve and a half million barrels goes into 
NewGrade from Saskatchewan and about the same would go 
into the Husky upgrader? Is that about the same? And then I 
want the total oil that we get royalty on coming from 
Saskatchewan — both upgraders. And then the total, 
non-upgrader and light oil, the whole shebang, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the amount with 
respect to the Bi-Provincial is 7 million barrels of 
Saskatchewan crude, so if you add the twelve and a half million 
that goes into NewGrade and the 7 million that goes into 
Bi-Provincial, you've got somewhere just under 20 million 
barrels last year. 
 
With respect to the total amount that was produced in our 
province, it was around 108 million barrels, 108. 
 
And I want to again, as I've done earlier in these estimates, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to caution the member from Estevan to keep 
in his mind that this is not incremental production, this is not 
. . . or not incremental revenue. And I mean I know where he's 
going and I know what he's trying to do and I just . . . I sat back 
and I thought about the other night when we did estimates and 
how it's so incredible that the member from Estevan can take a 
small thread and he grasps a little thread from here and he puts 
it together and he weaves that one in with the first one and then 
he brings another one in. Before you know it he's got a little 
patch there, and before you know it he's woven a blanket, and 
before you know it the blanket gets bigger to the point where he 
can wrap himself around a little thread and develop that into an 
argument. 
 
And I know what his argument is, as well. His argument is, as 
well, had he not made the massive investment in the two 
provincial upgraders, that we would have lost revenue on some 
20 million barrels of oil, and I say to him he's wrong. I told him 
a couple of weeks ago he was wrong, I tell him tonight he's 
wrong, and I would tell him if we're back in estimates tomorrow 
that he's wrong. And I will also tell him before we get into it 
that I am not going to agree with him that the investment that he 
made in these two projects was prudent, because I don't agree 
with that. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Estevan, before we carry 
on with this debate  and I can already sense where it's going 
 that I want to caution him the people of Saskatchewan don't  

agree with your premiss. And I want to also say that I don't 
want to get into the political debate here but I think it's 
important for the member to know that members on this side of 
the House don't agree that the investment was prudent at the 
time. And we don't agree as well that it has proven to be 
prudent today in 1995. 
 
They were some very risky investments and I want to say that 
we're doing what we can and all we can to work with both 
Husky and with Federated on both of these projects to ensure 
that we can make them successful over a long period of time 
and that we can gain some kind of return on investment, 
although it may not be as much as we would like to see, but that 
we're not going to see the people of Saskatchewan lose 
hundreds of millions of dollars in these projects. 
 
So I only say to the member opposite, I know where he's going. 
You will know that we disagree with your hypothesis and I will 
say to you that I don't think the majority of the people of 
Saskatchewan agree that you were prudent in these investments. 
 
And I think that was evidenced in the election in October of 
1991. So I don't want to rehash old business deals, and I know 
you want to leave this House after this term of government 
feeling comfortable with what you've done, and I understand 
that. But I want to say to you, member from Estevan, that you 
can't expect me to agree with you. I didn't agree with you when 
you made the investments. I didn't agree with you when you 
campaigned on the investments in 1991 and I don't agree with 
you now. 
 
(2045) 
 
So in spite of the fact that I know you're a master at weaving 
this little thread, and through this little thread putting together a 
few more, and finally and ultimately building yourself a blanket 
that you can cloak around you  it might give you a feeling of 
well-being, and I recognize that that's your prerogative as a 
member of this House  but I just say to you, don't expect 
members on this side of the House to agree with you. And I can 
tell you that you wouldn't want to expect me to agree with your 
arguments because I didn't buy them before, I don't buy them 
now, and I won't buy them next year. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I appreciate the compliment coming from 
the member from Prince Albert. His bouquets are gratefully 
received. What I want to know is maybe his . . . I don't have a 
calculator with me but his officials might have. You would 
have . . . I think that you were kind enough to give it to me 
before, the amount of royalties that we had on the type of oil. 
Sure. Yes I do. I've got it here. The amount of money associated 
. . . I wonder if you could just calculate for me the amount of 
money associated with 20 million barrels of oil that would go 
into these upgraders. 
 
It's about 20 million barrels. You said about 13 and 7 million. 
The royalty . . . the price you're saying is about fifteen thirty and 
the royalty on that is about 3 per cent, so that's about three fifty 
a barrel. Is that about right? Times 20 million barrels. Is  



May 8, 1995 

 
2070 

that 60, $70 million that you would get out of the oil that is into 
the upgraders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, let me say to the 
member from Estevan, with respect to the Bi-Provincial 
upgrader, we generated $1.003 million in Crown royalty and 
freehold taxes. That was $1.003 million. So put that into 
perspective and take that across the board in terms of the 
feedstock that went in and the amount of Saskatchewan oil that 
went in. We generated $1.003 million in revenue. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well it used 7 million barrels and the 
NewGrade used 12, so that would be about twice that, 13. So 
you're looking at over $3 million in royalties. And money, if it's 
$1.3 million in royalties that would go to Husky or with the 
Bi-Provincial Husky upgrader, then it would be what, a couple 
of million dollars go into the NewGrade. I thought I said 
between 3 and $4 million. Is that correct in terms of the 
royalties on 20 million barrels of oil? I mean you must be able 
to calculate it. What's 17 — 16.2 — per cent of 15.30 per barrel 
times 20 million barrels. You must have a calculator there and 
I'm sure you could provide that number for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me go through, as I 
know it, the agreement that you cut when you were the premier 
in terms of the agreement with Bi-Provincial. We put in . . . 
there were $7 million of feedstocks. The royalty tax rate that 
you agreed to was 1 per cent, which generated revenue of 
$1.003 million on Crown royalty and freehold tax. That's what 
was generated. That's out of 7 million barrels of oil. Now this is 
your agreement that we have lived up to. The spirit of this 
agreement — the taxation rate of this agreement — it's what it 
generated in revenues, 1 per cent, $1.003 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Fair enough, Mr. Minister, I just want to 
complete it. The royalty on Bi-Provincial you said is a million 
dollars; what's the royalty we're picking up on NewGrade? It 
looks like about twice as much oil, so probably what, a couple 
of million dollars. That's what I'm saying — what's the royalty 
on 20 million barrels of oil that's used by these two upgraders? 
And ballpark, it's got to be 3 to $4 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, out of Bi-Provincial, 
as I've indicated, there's a revenue of $1.003 million. Out of 
NewGrade, there's revenue of $29.8 million with respect to 
Crown royalty and freehold production tax which, I guess, 
speaks for itself  in the neighbourhood of $30 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — There's $30 million in revenue from the oil that 
is used in NewGrade? Just so I understand that — $30 million 
in revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the figure in 
NewGrade is $29.8 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — It's fair to say that we have over $30 million in 
royalty revenue coming to the province, through to the 
Department of Energy and Mines, as a result of oil that is  

pumped and goes into the upgraders. And if that's accurate, 
would the minister describe . . . is that '94-95 or 1994? Or 
what's the time frame for those figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that is the estimate 
for 1994. But I want to take the member back. You can't 
discuss, in isolation, the amount of revenue from these two 
initiatives without also involving in the debate the amount of 
investment that was made. Because they're not one in isolation 
from the other. And I know you like to do that. 
 
You like to do that with respect to the sale of Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and what was returned and what 
was written off — like to forget the write-offs. But I want to say 
to you that I ask you not to forget the investment that the people 
of Saskatchewan have put into these projects. Crown 
Investments Corporation has invested a total of $293.8 million 
in the NewGrade Energy upgrader. 
 
So I think what you need to do is you need to understand that 
the revenue that's generated is not without cost because we've 
had massive investments in both of those. We've got a massive 
amount of dollars at risk in both of those projects. But I also 
want you to remember that this is not an incremental revenue. 
It's not right to say that had the upgraders not been in existence 
that no heavy crude would have been sold. That's not proper. It's 
not correct. 
 
Now you may buy that and this may be part of what you're 
weaving, but I want to remind you that you've got a massive 
investment in both of these projects. And if you looked at the 
return on investment — very minimal in both instances, and a 
fairly major gamble in both instances — and you've got to 
remind yourself that you made that big investment and it's going 
to have to be paid off one way or the other. 
 
I want you also to remind yourself that of the one upgrader we 
have a return on royalties and taxation of $1 million on 7 
million barrels of oil. So, Mr. Chairman, I ask the member to 
have a look at all of the facts when we're discussing this issue 
because you can't isolate the revenue that comes as a result of 
the royalties from these two initiatives without looking at and 
building in the fact that you've made one heck of a big 
investment and you put a heck of a lot of government money, 
people's money, at risk in terms of the both projects. 
 
Mr. Devine: — That's fine, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 
That's precisely the point that I was trying to make here a week 
or two ago, that they are . . . You can't look at them in isolation; 
you have to look at them together. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, I think you were here that night. 
This minister kept saying that you can't look at them together; 
you have to look at them in isolation. This minister has just 
finished saying, you got to look at them together. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I agree with you. Finally you have agreed with me that 
you have to look at them in the total package. 
 
And I think that's only fair. I would never expect to have you  



May 8, 1995 

 
2071 

admit that I did anything that you particularly liked. So I mean 
we're not kidding ourselves politically here that you say, well 
now that was a pretty fair idea, although I have heard you 
whisper in the halls, I think, that you think the fertilizer project 
with Cargill is profitable and it looks pretty good  and even 
some members have admitted that  or maybe Crown Life's all 
right, or a few others. 
 
I'm just asking you questions about what the royalty is going 
into the upgraders and we're finally getting somewhere. It's 
about $30 million forecast for 1994. Now that's a lot of money. 
That's a lot of money. And 30 million coming back can 
probably generate, at 10 per cent, a $300 million investment, 
which is kind of interesting when you look at the numbers we 
have to deal with. 
 
So I appreciate the information that you've given me, that the 
royalties for the province generate something in the 
neighbourhood of 108 million total. I assume that's '94-95, 108 
million. Twelve million barrels going into the NewGrade 
upgrader, 7 million barrels going into the Bi-Provincial, and our 
royalty structure price is 15.30 a barrel, royalty 16.2 per cent 
plus 3 per cent. And you can find the $1 million or 300,000 to 
the Bi-Provincial and the larger 29 million and whatever to the 
NewGrade upgrader. But those are large numbers. 
 
Now you obviously, politically, wouldn't want to connect the oil 
going into the upgrader . . . being associated with the upgrader. 
I mean I can understand that because that's kind of a long 
stretch. Oil going into a processing thing shouldn't be linked to 
something that's processing. I mean it's quite logical for me to 
understand why you wouldn't want to do that. 
 
But it's like canola crushing, and it's like a lot of other things we 
have been encouraging. And I know — and I say this 
respectfully — some politicians on your side of the House have 
had it difficult in terms of really appreciating value added, and 
what value added does for not only adding value to the industry 
but what it does for production. And as we see in fertilizer use 
and as we see in now paper manufacturing and as we see in 
synthetic crude and refined crude and as we see in process 
products — and in many, many products now in Saskatchewan 
— it makes a significant amount of difference and particularly 
if you can take raw product and use it in there. 
 
The minister might not want to call it incremental. I know 
exactly what it is, and I know the amount of oil that you can 
pump and the amount of product that you can make without 
having paper mills and pulp mills and without having 
upgraders. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I appreciate the information you've given me, 
and obviously you can do whatever you like with the 
information. And I will just say, the oil going into the upgraders 
generates a lot of royalties. It's there. And if it isn't there, it's 
associated with some water pump then some place else because 
it obviously can't be linked to the upgraders. But maybe it's 
being used by the upgraders. Maybe that's something that might 
be relevant. 

Mr. Minister, could you tell me the amount of gas — and I'm 
sure that you know the natural gas . . . and I know it can't be 
seen as incremental, Mr. Minister, according to you — but the 
amount of gas that a fertilizer plant the size of Cargill might use 
and what the royalties might be on that kind of gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, let me say to the 
member from Estevan, as it relates to the use of natural gas, I'm 
told by department officials that they use very little 
Saskatchewan natural gas. Most of it is purchased elsewhere. 
And as you will know, deregulation has allowed that. TransGas, 
SaskEnergy, has become a distributor and has a distribution 
system, but I'm told that the upgrader buys very little 
Saskatchewan gas. Most of it is purchased from outside the 
province. 
 
So in terms of Saskferco, most of the gas is purchased outside 
of the province, so we have no idea of determining exactly how 
much that would be. 
 
Mr. Devine: — And so you don't know the amount of natural 
gas that is, number one, used by the fertilizer plant; and number 
two, how much it is used here in Saskatchewan, or how much 
Saskatchewan gas goes into that plant? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told by my 
official that the specific amounts are confidential, and I'm sure 
he will understand that we would want to maintain 
confidentiality as it relates to Saskferco or any other 
corporation. I am told that they use in the neighbourhood of 
about 15 bcf (billion cubic feet) on an annual basis. And as I've 
indicated, the vast majority of that is not Saskatchewan gas. 
And I think it's important to keep that in mind; the vast majority 
is not Saskatchewan gas. 
 
The figures, as I indicated, are confidential, and it would not be 
appropriate for us to release them at this point. It may be that 
you would have access to that information through some other 
sources. I can't speak to that. I can only say that it would be 
inappropriate for us to release those figures tonight. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would the minister advise me and the public 
on whether the project, the fertilizer project, is profitable and 
paying any dividends to the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that information 
would not be information that we would have within our 
department. That would come from Crown Investments 
Corporation. That would be the best place to determine that 
information, through the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) estimates. We don't have that information. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, you've commented quite freely 
on whether or not you'd invest in upgraders, and I think that's in 
CIC. Would you personally consider the fertilizer project a 
good project? 
 



May 8, 1995 

 
2072 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I would want to say, Mr. Chairman, 
that I would view any investment based on the return. I would 
base any investment, and whether or not I felt it was a good 
investment, based on the degree of risk. And those calculations, 
I would suggest, would be and should be done. And those 
would be done at the time, certainly, of purchase or a decision 
to make investment. And I certainly am not going to comment 
on a hypothetical scenario. I can only say to the member from 
Estevan that I think if I had been one of his advisers around the 
cabinet table when he was making the decision on some of the 
investments that he made in the 1980s, I would have been one 
who would have asked the premier to be much more prudent 
and much more cautious with public funds. 
 
And I guess the example that I can use is with respect to 
NewGrade, and I just go back to it briefly. We've amassed total 
losses since it was opened in 1989 on through 1994 — losses 
 of $433.4 million. The people of Saskatchewan, through 
CIC, have invested $300 million. And we've seen a return of 
$30 million in royalties. So hopefully some of these 
investments will improve, but I want to say, Mr. Chairman, and 
to the member, through you, that I really do wish that he would 
have had some people sitting around his cabinet in the 1980s to 
give him different advice than was delivered to him when he 
was the premier of the province. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not here to pick a fight 
with you or anything. I just notice how freely you seem to have 
the numbers, Mr. Minister, on  when you want to  on a 
particular project that has difficult start-up costs like an 
upgrader; you've got all the numbers from CIC. And I just 
correspondingly asked you if you had the numbers, because 
you're the Minister of Energy, on something that uses natural 
gas like the fertilizer project. 
 
And I wondered if you had a comment on whether it's making 
money or not, if it's profitable, and if it's paying a dividend to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Because I think it's only fair, if you 
could comment on two or three of them, you can comment on 
all of them. And I think the public watching would think it just 
a tad, perhaps small, of you not to be able to be man enough to 
comment on all of the . . . on everything. 
 
So I'm just politely asking if you know whether it's profitable, 
and if it is, could you just be man enough to say yes it is 
profitable; it's contributing to the province; I happen to have the 
numbers for the upgraders and I happen to have them for the 
fertilizer plant. 
 
Now I don't think that's too much to ask. I'm not getting . . . 
trying to get you to agree with me. I mean I know you won't 
agree with me. Some projects paid faster than others. Some paid 
handsomely. Some stock went way up. Some projects take 
longer. But I'm . . . I asked you again, couldn't you tell me 
whether you know if the fertilizer project is profitable and what 
kind of money's coming in. You seem to know all about the 
upgraders and that is not your portfolio. You're not the minister 
of CIC; you're the Minister of Energy. 
 

Don't you have any numbers before you on the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers' investment in a project that uses natural gas  which 
is energy  in your department? I just respectfully ask, would 
you have any of those numbers? Could you let us know whether 
it's profitable or not and your opinion on the investment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not certainly 
in a position to give the member from Estevan the numbers. I've 
indicated that quite clearly, that those would be better served 
and questions better served by referring those to the minister in 
charge of Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
With respect to the amount of money that has been lost by 
NewGrade and with respect to the investment, those are figures 
that have been around this province and are public knowledge 
and have been published by Crown Investments Corporation 
over the years since 1989. They're public knowledge. 
 
I say to the member that we don't have the numbers here and 
you can persist on asking. I can only persist on answering the 
only one answer that I know and that is that we don't have these 
figures, and that you would be better served by questioning the 
minister in charge of Crown Investments Corporation when his 
estimates are before this House. 
 
You have asked many questions this evening and previous 
evenings and I would want to say to the member from Estevan 
that we have been very forthcoming in terms of figures and 
documents and numbers that are under the purview of 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. But I can't be standing here in 
the legislature tonight answering questions to which I have no 
answers. The minister of Crown Investments Corporation I'm 
sure will be more than willing to respond to this question when 
you come before him for estimates. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, that's fair enough. I just 
think that you should be big enough to respond to sincere 
questions that the taxpayers would like to know. Do I have to 
tell them that the Cargill energy project is returning handsome 
profits to the people of Saskatchewan and the Minister of 
Energy and Mines won't admit it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
and the member from Swift Current says I should tell them. 
 
Well they're not big enough to tell them . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . yes, well then, Mr. Minister, your colleague 
from Swift Current could tell us then what are the numbers. 
He's ashamed to admit it. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to Cameco, would the minister make 
any comments with respect to the success or failure of the 
privatization of Cameco; similarly with respect to Wascana; 
similarly with respect to the Potash Corporation. Does he have 
any comments about those? 
 
I notice that . . . I think they're associated with CIC as well but 
he has commented on them in the past. Cameco is a company 
that you have shares in. I think you still have some shares in 
Wascana, at least you did, and you probably have some shares  



May 8, 1995 

 
2073 

left in PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.), 
although you may have put them on the market. Would he 
comment on those three companies in terms of how they're 
doing, whether he has any observations about their success or 
failure in terms of the privatization, which means taking it to 
the public market. Then I'll . . . after that I'd like to ask him a 
few questions about co-generation and about AECL (Atomic 
Energy of Canada Ltd.). 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess let me 
say to the member from Estevan, with respect to Cameco, 
Potash Corporation  PCS  and Wascana, they're all doing 
very well financially. 
 
Mr. Devine: — But I take that as an indication that the minister 
would say that they have been not only financially successful 
but good for the province of Saskatchewan and good for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, let me say that with 
the . . . Firstly, with respect to the uranium resource that we 
have in this province, I think there's no secret that we welcome 
investment into the province to develop those particular 
initiatives that are happening in the northern part of the 
province. The expansions and the new mines that are coming on 
stream will create many jobs for Saskatchewan people and it's 
an initiative that this administration has supported. 
 
With respect to the potash industry and the potash resource, 
quite clearly over the past years people of Saskatchewan have 
been able to generate revenues through royalties, taxation, jobs, 
directly and indirectly, in terms of that resource and the 
development of that resource, and with respect to Wascana and 
how, as it relates to the oil industry as well, there are many jobs 
in this province that are created by oil and natural gas. 
 
Many companies are doing business and are headquartered here 
in Saskatchewan. Many bring their corporate expertise from 
outside of the province. So I guess what it would be fair to say 
and fair to assume, that we very much are a resource-rich 
province. Whether it be uranium, potash, oil and gas, whether it 
be the new gold mining that comes on stream and the 
exploration that will create those opportunities for 
Saskatchewan men and women, we certainly welcome the 
development of those resources. 
 
We share the goal that job opportunities and profits can be 
generated through development of those resources, so certainly 
we're supportive of the mining industry. The role of Energy and 
Mines is to help facilitate the development; to help to regulate; 
set royalty structures that are fair, both for the people of 
Saskatchewan and for industry. And it's a process that we'll 
continue to monitor and we'll continue to be part of. And we 
certainly will continue to encourage development in this 
province in all three of the resource sectors that you have 
indicated. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you say then 
you're generally happy with the fact that these industries have  

publicly traded companies from Saskatchewan — with their 
head offices in Saskatchewan — publicly traded in Toronto and 
on the New York exchange and the NASDAQ (National 
Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations) 
exchange? Would the minister say that that's a positive thing for 
the industry here in Saskatchewan? And is he happy with the 
privatization of those three companies? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say that 
one can only speculate what may or may not have happened. I 
guess I tend to deal in the world of reality. And the world of 
reality right now is that these are publicly traded corporations. 
The other reality is that the minister . . . as minister in charge of 
Energy and Mines, I intend to work with them to create 
employment opportunities, to generate royalty revenues for the 
people of Saskatchewan, so that we can begin to — as we have 
by shedding ourselves of deficit budgeting — so that we can 
begin to use some of that wealth to pay down the debt of this 
province which now has accumulated to some $15 billion. 
 
So quite clearly, I can't speculate, nor will I, as to what may or 
might not have happened if privatization hadn't occurred in 
terms of some of these corporations which you raise. I think 
probably the most appropriate position and appropriate role that 
we, and the Premier and this cabinet and this government can 
take, is to deal with reality. What's the reality? The reality is we 
have corporations doing business in this province and investing. 
That's reality and it's positive. We want to create an 
environment where that can continue to happen. 
 
I would think rather than looking back, we would want to look 
forward. We would want to look to future advantages that may 
take place with respect to development of our resources. We 
want to maintain the pragmatic approach that we have taken 
since October of 1991, and we want to continue to work with 
industry to ensure job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
So I guess what is more important is not my personal opinion 
vis-a-vis privatization, what's more important is that we 
recognize the environment that we're doing business in. We 
recognize the corporations who want to do business in this 
province, and we help to facilitate positive opportunities for 
them and for their shareholders. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm happy that 
you're happy with the fact that, as a result of these 
privatizations, the share values have increased several, 
severalfold. I believe that if we look at PCS, it's moved from 
$18 a share to something like $72 a share. Is that right, Mr. 
Minister? That's severalfold increase, so it's quite exciting when 
we look at the size of that company now. It's tripled its size. Its 
share value for all those Saskatchewan people who've bought 
shares in it have gone from $18 a share to over $70 a share. 
 
Similarly Cameco is around $40 a share and is publicly traded 
and attracting industry from all over the world and investment. 
And Wascana Energy is successful. And you say you just deal  



May 8, 1995 

 
2074 

with realities. I couldn't agree more with you, Mr. Minister, that 
the reality is these privatizations have been extremely 
successful and are very successful in the market. And as you as 
a businessman would know, the market speaks for itself. 
 
I would comment, Mr. Minister, that I think initially I heard you 
— maybe not you, maybe somebody else — criticize the fact 
that the value of the PCS at the time that it was put on the 
market was something like 31 million shares and at $18 that 
was, you know, 4 or $500 million. I would just point out to the 
minister — and he can acknowledge this — that 31 million 
shares at $72 a share is a lot of money, and that's several billion 
dollars, over $2 billion, and obviously that's the market that has 
done that. 
 
So those people that had bonds, those that had bought the 
shares and those that participated had multiple increases in their 
value, and any of these people that were put on the market . . . 
obviously the market judged it when you put it on there. And as 
a businessman, I'm sure you'd say the market is always right. So 
the market price at $18 a share in the market is priced at now 
$72 a share. So all those Saskatchewan people who had first 
choice on Power bonds or first choice, pardon me, on potash 
bonds could see the benefit of their money go from $18 a share 
all the way through to 70-some dollars a share. And obviously, 
Mr. Minister, the success of the market replacing debt with 
equity has caused an awful lot of economic activity and 
involvement that, frankly, couldn't be here before because it 
was all in government. 
 
And I'm happy that you're dealing with reality, and I like to see 
that with respect to the Cargill fertilizer plant. I like to see it 
with the Weyerhaeuser paper mill. I like to see it with Wascana. 
I certainly like to see it with the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And I like to see it with Cameco and the 
uranium industry because . . . 
 
I will say, Mr. Minister, the interest in the uranium business, not 
only in northern Saskatchewan but across Saskatchewan . . . 
and, Mr. Minister, even as a result of your polling . . . and I'll go 
back and you asked the question whether people were 
concerned about the environmental impacts of uranium. And 
you know, Mr. Minister, they're more concerned about the 
environmental impacts of forestry than they are uranium. Well I 
want to congratulate your administration for picking up on this 
new attitude of openness for mining and public involvement 
and investor involvement in uranium, because as a result, your 
surveys that you just gave me show that people are not worried 
about environmental impacts of uranium, not nearly as much as 
they might be for forestry and some other areas like oil and gas. 
Which is very interesting, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I guess that would lead me to a question. Would you 
entertain the possibility of more public share offerings in the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . strictly like you wanted to look to 
the future? You said, well the past is fair enough. The past as 
you look at it today shows some really interesting, successful, 
profitable privatizations. 
 

I wonder if the Minister of Energy for the New Democratic 
government would entertain the possibility, as he looks to the 
future, some more opportunities for some of this exciting share 
offerings to increase investment and return the profit that we've 
seen in these other corporations. Would he entertain that in any 
of his areas — whether it's in mining, or oil, or gas, or anything 
like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess if we're 
dealing in hypothetical issues here, let me give a hypothetical 
answer. And I guess what I would want to say is if the member 
had — hypothetically of course — maintained government for 
the next four years, we would not only have no assets; my guess 
would be we would have the biggest debt load per capita 
probably anywhere, not only in Canada but in the world at the 
rate he was going. We would have, I would suggest, a province 
in the state of bankruptcy. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I guess 
that is the hypothetical scenario that I could have foreseen if in 
fact this member had been re-elected in October of 1991. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to say to the member from Estevan, 
you can believe what you want with respect to your 
administration, your privatization initiatives, and your 
management of the economy, and the management of this 
province. But I want to say to you, Mr. Chairman, what is more 
important to me and what is more important to members of this 
government is what the general public thought of your 
administration of the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I say to the member from Estevan 
— and I'm not sure how long these estimates will continue and 
I'm not sure how long this session will continue, but I want to 
say to the member from Estevan, I will never stand in my place 
and agree to the kind of incompetence and the kind of 
mismanagement that your administration displayed. And I want 
to say, Mr. Chairman, I am looking forward to the day when 
there isn't one Tory sitting in this House because you don't 
deserve to be here, none of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, 
over the course of hours that we've been debating the Energy 
and Mines estimates, I have done my level best to attempt to 
maintain a state of calmness, allow the member to fade off 
silently into the woodwork in the dying days of his political 
career — thank goodness — allow him to create his own little 
picture and his own little analysis of the great and wonderful 
things he did for the people of Saskatchewan. But I want to say, 
Mr. Chairman, I know that he knows in his heart of hearts that 
his administration was an absolute disaster. 
 
And I want to say that the new member, the new Leader of the 
Opposition, the new Leader of the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party has probably the biggest challenge that's 
going to be faced by any politician ever in North America, and 
that's trying to reinstate credibility in a political party that has 
none. You have none here in Saskatchewan. You have none in 
Ottawa. 



May 8, 1995 

 
2075 

And I would suggest to you that there won't be a Tory member 
sitting after this term of government because the people of 
Saskatchewan have seen through you. They're fed up with you; 
they're fed up with your fairy tale world; and they're fed up with 
incompetent politicians of which you were the epitome. You, 
sir, were number one. There will be no one, no one in this 
province, that will ever surpass the kind of incompetence that 
you have displayed in 10 years of a Tory administration. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that it wasn't enough in 
October of '91 when the people of Saskatchewan turfed his 
government from this side of the House and put them in 
opposition. You would have thought over a period of three 
years that they would have had a little bit of an opportunity to 
reflect on the 10 years of mismanagement. But not this member, 
not the member from Estevan. He stands in this House, without 
remorse, speaking in glowing terms of some of the initiatives 
that he embarked upon. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Estevan, you can rant 
and you can continue on, but nobody believes you. Nobody 
believes you. There is a lack of credibility there. And I want to 
say, you can bury your head in the sand and believe that the 
1980s never took place, and you can believe that you didn't 
increase the debt and build a massive debt load on your children 
and on my children. But I want to say to you, Mr. Chairman, 
that the people of Saskatchewan don't believe you. They don't 
believe you because they see through you. You're as transparent 
as Saran Wrap and I want to say, you've got all the substance as 
Saran Wrap as well. So if you want to stand up in this House 
and try and create an argument to . . . that flies in the face of 
reality, you go ahead. Because I'll tell you, I've got all night, and 
I've got tomorrow night, and I've got as long as you want to try 
and watch you paint a picture that will never stand the test of 
time because the people have already passed judgement on you. 
 
So I say if you want to scrutinize the expenditures of this 
government, and if you want to talk about the budget that we've 
put together and what we propose to spend and what we have 
spent, you can do the most analytical critique that any member 
has done, and I welcome that. But I tell you what, don't — 
member from Estevan — expect me to stand in this place and 
agree to the kind of government and the kind of misfortune that 
you've put on the people of Saskatchewan because it ain't on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I must 
have hit a sore spot there. Mr. Chairman, I must have hit a sore 
spot when I listed all the profits by these privatized companies 
because the minister went on here for 10 minutes, and he got all 
excited, and his NDP (New Democratic Party) colleagues were 
all getting lathered up and trying to make believe that his reality 
. . . his reality check wasn't valid. 
 
But, Minister, I was just pointing out — as you said — you deal 
with reality. And I asked how the share prices of the privatized 
companies were doing and he has to admit that the shares have  

gone way up. Cargill fertilizer plant has done really well. All 
the Crown corporations and the private investments are creating 
$600 million net profit to the province of Saskatchewan. And 
that's half the debt in Saskatchewan, which is self-liquidating 
now. 
 
And the members don't want to know, don't want to hear about 
it. They don't want to talk about it. The report of the Provincial 
Auditor . . . the summary of all the projects and all the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Minister, the summary of the fall of 1994, a 
few months ago, $600 million net. That's above the debt. Those 
are investments — just like SaskPower, like SaskTel, like 
Cargill; it includes the upgraders, and it includes all of those 
things. 
 
And the member opposite says, well he doesn't deal with me 
talking about it. Well I think it's fair that he deals with reality. 
The auditor's numbers are reality. Potash shares are $72 a share; 
that's reality. Cameco's are $40 a share; that's reality. Wascana's 
doing really well; Cargill's doing really well. The province is 
doing well and all those major investments . . . and obviously 
you campaigned against them. But those privatizations have 
done well. All I asked you, would you consider, Mr. Minister 
— we don't have to banter back and forth — would you 
consider the strategy, as a person in the political middle, the 
new political middle, would you consider as a strategy, at least 
consider the possibility, of examining public share offerings in 
other areas of Energy and Mines? Would you consider it? 
 
I would think you would say, well yes, maybe I will. Maybe I 
won't. I'm not obliged to say yes or no. But I'm just asking 
whether you, in the light of the reality of these that have gone 
on . . . and as you know and certainly your investment 
counsellors will tell you, anybody who would have invested in 
those three companies in the last four years would have done 
better than any mutual fund anywhere in the world — 
anywhere. If you started four years ago, invested in that, it's 
better than any mutual fund any place. In the light of that reality 
— and you like to deal with reality — would you consider the 
possibility of additional issues that you could take to the market 
to get that kind of response? 
 
Or — I don't want to be unfair — but you wouldn't be so 
hidebound politically that you'd say no, never, I wouldn't 
consider it. You see the success, and you say, I deal in reality. 
And you want to deal in the future. Would you consider taking 
that success and perhaps applying it in the future for various 
kinds of places in Energy and Mines? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
what this government does consider. This government 
considers, in every instance, whether or not the initiatives make 
economic sense, whether they make good social policy, whether 
they make sound fiscal policy. Those are the things that we look 
at. And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I think that's a 
reasonable approach. 
 



May 8, 1995 

 
2076 

And would we look at all of our options? The answer is of 
course we do. Of course we do because that's the only way you 
can make sound business sense. It can't be done either with 
being hidebound on public ownership nor hidebound on 
privatization. And I want to say to the member from Estevan, 
we knew where you were, and we saw the results of 
privatization. You and I will disagree as to whether they were 
positive for the shareholders of the people of Saskatchewan, the 
people who invested in them. I can make an argument that 
many of your initiatives were bad business and bad social 
policy. You won't agree with that, but that's fine. 
 
So let me talk about the approach that this government takes. 
We take a pragmatic view to doing business. There's got to be 
such a thing as, first of all, a responsible approach to any 
business initiative, whether or not it makes sense for the 
shareholders. Who are the shareholders? A million people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, not just the small few who may 
have the opportunity to invest and who may have the cash to 
invest and to reap big profits. We think there needs to be a view 
to all of the people of the province when you're making a 
decision, and that's what we intend to do. 
 
So I just want to say, Mr. Chairman, this debate, I think, is 
really quite academic because in our mind it's not a matter of 
public or private ownership. It's a matter of doing what's right 
and what makes economic sense for the times; and times 
change. This isn't the 1960s. This is the 1990s. Things are 
different than they were in the 1960s, and they'll be different 
next decade from what they are now. So what we intend to do is 
take a common sense approach to any business decision we 
make. And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I think that's what 
the people of Saskatchewan are looking for. And certainly we 
have shown that that's our direction, and that's not likely to 
change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — That's very good, Mr. Minister, and I do 
appreciate your candid response. I like to hear that an NDP 
minister will at least consider public share offerings. And you 
said you would not just categorically discard them. I'm sure you 
buy shares. You take your investment money. All of us take our 
pensions . . . our teachers . . . our retirement funds, and we go to 
stockbrokers and mutual funds and we invest them in the 
market. So I like to think that an NDP cabinet minister would 
say, well I would consider the market. And if it made money, 
then it might be reasonable. 
 
And I think we've come a long ways in moving the political 
spectrum of Saskatchewan from way over to the left to middle 
of the road, in some cases even a little bit to the right side. And 
I congratulate the minister for at least considering the 
privatization of . . . as an option in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you consider encouraging more 
manufacturing in AECL? We have AECL here in 
Saskatchewan, the Atomic Energy Corporation of Canada. It's  

moved some of its offices to Saskatchewan, and I think it's been 
successful enough. There is the market for nuclear generators 
around the world. Mr. Minister, if it was profitable to 
manufacture generators and market them internationally, would 
you be opposed to that? Or do you think your colleagues would 
be opposed to that in the province of Saskatchewan, in that 
AECL is here? We can design them. If there was a market, 
could we manufacture them and could we market them 
internationally from Saskatchewan? We can do the design 
work. There are markets for them. AECL sells them all over the 
world. Could they be made here? 
 
Now I'm not saying that you would have to endorse using them 
here, but could they be made here and marketed internationally 
if it was profitable for AECL and, of course, people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Terrific, Mr. Minister. We've come a long 
ways. I'm happy to hear that not only in your polling now — 
and I'm sure that the member from Athabasca would like to hear 
this — that uranium doesn't even hardly rank there as a worry 
on the environment, but now cabinet colleagues will consider 
manufacturing of nuclear generators in the province of 
Saskatchewan in cooperation with AECL. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you considered any co-generation projects 
associated with gas, energy, nuclear, or anything else in your 
portfolio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if co-generation 
makes economic sense, why wouldn't it happen? If there's a 
need for the product, if there's a need for the electricity, why 
wouldn't it happen? But I think it's got to be based on need. Is 
there a need for it? Is it a cost-effective way of producing it? Is 
it something that reflects what the market will pay? 
 
As you will know, very shortly and over the next months and in 
a few short years, our energy utilities are going to be dealing 
with the results of deregulation. Deregulation means that we're 
going to have to be competitive with other markets. Being 
competitive with other markets means that any electricity or 
electrical energy that we take on stream has got to be 
competitive and cost-effective. 
 
Those are the criteria that we would look at. Is there a need? 
One. Secondly, is it cost-effective? And I think those are 
important things that we would look at. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, your predecessor had kind 
of a difficult time with co-generation and some of us might 
believe it even ended up him moving portfolios. But there were 
several applications for co-generation and they just didn't work 
out. People spent a lot of money. 
 
But the minister did leave by saying, there will be one 
announced before the next election. Are you close to 
announcing a co-generation project with any of the people that  



May 8, 1995 

 
2077 

spent a lot of money in putting together applications for 
co-generation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going 
to take the member at his word with respect to what the former 
member may have or may have not said. What I will say to you 
is that when and if there is a need for incremental energy, 
whether it be base load or whether it be peaking, we will look at 
what our options are. When that reality comes to face us, we'll 
deal with how we deliver the energy. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess what I'm asking is: 
do you have applications before you, or do you have plans 
before you now for a co-generation project? I would have to 
believe — and I could dig it up in Hansard when the former 
minister said there will be one announced  you must have 
some that are kind of at the top of the pail. Can you talk to us 
about any possible co-generation projects that you're seriously 
looking at, or a range of projects and what they have to do with 
oil, gas, or what combination thereof? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would want to say to the 
member from Estevan that first of all if there is any incremental 
energy to be brought on stream, it'll be done by the energy 
utility, not the Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe it was the 
Minister of Energy that received — and maybe I'm mistaken 
here — received the applications for the co-generation. But if 
I'm not accurate in that and it was the minister in charge of 
SaskEnergy that did it . . . and you're not in charge of 
SaskEnergy? Is that what you're saying? You're not in charge of 
SaskPower or any of the co-generation projects? 
 
I mean who do we go to for your best estimate of where we are 
in co-generation? Is it Sask Energy and Mines? Is it your 
Crowns that you're responsible for? Or where might it be so that 
we could pursue this with a line of questioning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say 
first of all that if any comments were made with respect to 
co-generation and proposals that would have been put forth to 
any arm of government, it would have been to the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and I'm sure you're well 
aware of that. That's our energy utility, our power utility in the 
province. And if the former minister made any comments with 
respect to co-generation and a specific application to the 
corporation, it would have been done as his role of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
As you will know, there were proposals put forth with respect 
to co-generation. It was determined by the Power Corporation 
— and I'm speaking now as my role as the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation — and any decision to take 
co-generation on was deferred. I can say that before the 
Department of Energy and Mines there are no proposals and 
there have been no proposals. 
 
I can also say to you that I would see, frankly, no reason to be  

buying energy if you don't have a market for it. I would see no 
reason to be buying incremental energy if you have internal 
capacity or existing capacity to generate the same. 
 
And I would want to also say to the member from Estevan that 
whatever initiatives that are taken with respect to development 
of energy options in this province, we will ensure that we are 
concerned and will be concerned with environment. We will be 
concerned with the cost-effectiveness of the production of 
electrical energy that is brought on stream. 
 
But what's more, certainly we are trying to, through economic 
development initiatives, increase the demand for electrical 
energy in this province. I think that's fair enough. But on the 
other hand what we are trying to do is ensure that we have a 
cost-effective source for the consumers, for the people in 
Saskatchewan. And that's what we would intend to do. 
 
So I would want to say to you right now, with respect to 
bringing on stream incremental electrical energy, that there 
would have to be a lot of internal work done by the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation in terms of the long-term 
plan for both base load and peaking, and we monitor this on a 
regular basis. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, it makes one wonder what 
the former minister of Energy was, number one, doing, and 
number two, talking about. What was he doing in asking for all 
these applications for co-generation that cost people a lot of 
money, when you say there is just no demand for the energy? 
What was going on? Why were you doing that? Why was 
SaskPower doing it? 
 
And secondly, he said for sure — and I'll make sure I look it up 
and have our research people look it up — that there would be a 
project announced. Now there's no project is there? There is no 
project, after all of this and the fiasco of him going through it 
and asking for it all. And now you're the Minister of Power as 
well as the Minister of Energy, and there is no co-generation 
project at all. The whole thing was without merit. You have no 
demand for energy. You shouldn't have done it at all. The 
minister's promise that there would be a project is a false 
promise, and we're going to hold him to that. Certainly in his 
riding, we're going to describe . . . I mean what is this? 
 
So, Mr. Minister, just confirm for me there is no co-generation 
project under way; and (2) there's no demand and that's the 
reason; and (3) probably the whole sham of asking for all these 
applications was just a costly exercise because there was no 
demand to start with. Is that an accurate description? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it's fair to say 
that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation . . . and although 
we're not in Saskatchewan Power estimates, I will answer this 
one. 
 
We looked at a number of proposals from different proponents 
throughout the province. There were a number of proponents 
who indicated that they could produce low cost,  



May 8, 1995 

 
2078 

environmentally effective electrical energy. The Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation made the decision to have a look at the 
proposals. They did that, reviewed them. And after review of 
the proposals, it was determined not to proceed with the 25 
megawatt pilot project at this time. 
 
I can say to the member from Estevan that I think it's important 
that you look at the different options. There were a number of 
initiatives put together by proponents from many different areas 
of the province. There are some who are proponents of 
co-generation who have not put forth any proposals to 
SaskPower or any other entity within government, many of 
whom believe they have a very cost effective, environmentally 
friendly initiative that they would like to see developed. But I 
think frankly it's very important that we proceed with some 
caution in terms of our infrastructure. 
 
And I want to say to the member, you know you were one of the 
proponents of deregulation. You were one of the proponents of 
removal of trade barriers and putting the boundaries aside. 
 
(2145) 
 
It was part of privatization, deregulation. This was all part and 
parcel of your philosophical belief. This is all part and parcel of 
how you governed, how your federal counterpart, Mr. 
Mulroney, in the 1980s governed. It was part of Madsen Pirie 
and Maggie Thatcher from Great Britain. It was part of the 
Ronald Reagan school of economics. And I say, fair and fine. 
No one can argue that you don't have the right to your particular 
philosophical viewpoint. 
 
But what I find very interesting, as the members were 
embarking on this same initiative, they put many public utilities 
in a position where they had to change the way they were doing 
business. You built some massive debt load by some of the 
decisions that you made. And I want to say that if some of the 
deals that you made when you were the premier, and some of 
the deals that you made and some of the agreements that you 
tied SaskPower to . . . we may have some options that we may 
not have now. And I want to say the member knows specifically 
and very well what I'm talking about. 
 
And I don't want to get into Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
estimates here tonight. For one reason I don't have my officials, 
and all of the data that I would like to have here when we do 
Crown Corporation Committee estimates at which the Power 
Corporation will be available . . . be more than glad to answer 
some of the questions and some of the reasons behind perhaps 
some of the decisions that we're having to make now as it 
pertains to what you've done in the 1980s when you were the 
premier of the province. 
 
As I said, the world is changing. Quite clearly what we had as 
opportunities in the 1970s may not be available to us. The fact 
is what we're dealing with now is a Crown corporation that has 
a big, large amount of capital debt and you know that because 
you were part of building it. And what we also have is a 
situation where this corporation is going to be competing with  

some very low-priced hydroelectricity coming from perhaps our 
neighbours in Manitoba. And you know that as well. 
 
And what we're saying is that the rules are changing and we 
aren't in the same position as we may have been. It's looking 
very much like deregulation is going to turn the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, in some part, into a transmission line where 
other utilities will be able to put electrical energy onto our grid 
system and our distribution system and sell it to some of our 
larger companies. That's changing and it's not the same as the 
years before we were facing deregulation. And in light of that, 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has to deal with those 
realities. They've got to compete. You can't compete with five 
and a half cents a kilowatt-hour electricity when you're going to 
have neighbouring corporations who can deliver the same for 
three and a half cents. 
 
So I think these are all important things that we, as a 
government, are looking at. We're being very cognizant of the 
fact that this competition is going to take place, and it's just not 
as simplistic as the former premier would like to portray it. It's 
becoming a very complex world and we intend to ensure that 
we will be monitoring these and other initiatives very closely as 
the months and the years carry on. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I find a little bit 
difficult and that you could help the public with is that why 
your previous minister . . . And you talk about the 1970s, things 
have changed since then. That's fair enough, since the '70s and 
maybe even since the '80s, but this was last year. We had all 
these co-generation applications. What's changed in the last 
year that has caused all of this turnaround where none of the 
co-generation projects are acceptable? There's now no demand 
and all of a sudden anybody that thought they could produce 
energy can't come anywhere close to what you think that they 
can. And you're talking about the implications of deregulation 
and international trade. 
 
Well of course. Last year we had free trade. Last year we had 
deregulation, but you still had all these applications. 
 
Mr. Minister, what has changed in the last year to deny the 
former minister his successful co-generation project? Because 
he obviously won't have one. What is it in the last year that's 
changed so much that would have SaskPower, I assume, not 
even ask for co-generation applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say to the member 
opposite that I think it's fair to say that co-generation is a viable 
option and it is an initiative that we believe will in fact be a 
reality in Saskatchewan. I can't say that that will be the case 
now because the officials whom I deal with and the analysis 
that is ongoing and will continue to be ongoing would require a 
reason to put more energy on stream. 
 
Now what may be the case this month may not be the case in 
three months from now. It may not be the case in six months 
from now. And there may be proposals that would make it 
advantageous to change the base load and to look at different  



May 8, 1995 

 
2079 

ways of delivering that. I can't speculate what's going to happen 
six months from now. I can only say to you that I believe 
co-generation is going to be a reality in Saskatchewan, and if 
the requirement is there it'll be done sooner rather than later. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 23 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to express 
appreciation on behalf of my colleague, to the minister and his 
officials for the time they spent in the Assembly addressing a 
number of questions regarding expenditures of Energy and 
Mines. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to thank members of the opposition for their questions. I 
know that these are interesting times, and I certainly do 
appreciate the thought that was put behind their questions. 
 
I'd also like to thank my officials for their work during the 
session, and the work that they do throughout the year to ensure 
that the corporation acts in the best interests of the people of the 
province. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — Perhaps before we proceed, I think it's been 
some time and we can impose upon the minister to introduce 
the officials who have joined us here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We have with us 
tonight a number of officials from the Department of Health 
including Duane Adams, deputy minister; Andrea Smandych, 
who is the acting manager of financial services; Lois Borden, 
executive director, district support branch; Steve Petz, associate 
deputy minister; Glenda Yeates, associate deputy minister; 
Maureen Yeske, the executive director of health planning and 
policy development; Jahzi Van Iderstine, assistant to the deputy 
minister; Roger Carriere, project manager for home and 
community alternatives; and Al Walker, director of the program 
development unit. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, while I'm on my feet, I have brought with me 
tonight, for the official opposition, the package of the global 
questions and estimates that they've requested. 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials for joining us. Seeing as the Liberal 
members don't have any questions, I guess I'll get into the 
debate this evening. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Minister, a while back we were addressing an issue and I'd 
asked for some information. I sent a letter and I'm still waiting 
for information and it's regarding ophthalmologists. And going 
back to Hansard, March 10, 1995, I asked a question about the 
number of ophthalmologists practising in Regina, the facilities 
used, and the same information for Saskatoon. And I also asked 
a question at that time wondering about the difference between 
laser surgery and other eye surgeries and clarifications as to 
why which option may be chosen by individuals or by a certain 
ophthalmologist. Would you have that information available, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I apologize to them. I was 
confident that I in fact had signed that and had sent that over. 
It's prepared here and so on. I may not have signed it to send it, 
but the information is here; I can read it into the record if you 
wish and then we will be certain that you're provided the hard 
copy. 
 
You had asked the question: how many ophthalmologists are 
operating in the province, how many would operate in the city 
of Regina, and what facilities would they operate out of, as well 
as in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The most current, the most current figures — and I'd spoken 
earlier in the House that the total is 17, but now there is one 
more, so there are now 18 certified ophthalmologists 
performing cataract surgery in our province. That breaks down 
to eight in Regina, working out of the Pasqua Hospital; eight in 
the city of Saskatoon, working out of City Hospital; one in 
Yorkton; one in Lloydminster; and then three general 
practitioners with special training in ophthalmology performing 
cataract surgery  one in Swift Current; one further in 
Yorkton; and one in Prince Albert. 
 
And you'd asked the question about laser and other surgery, 
asking for some clarification. The response, and I'll just read it: 
with regard to cataract surgery per se, lasers are not used. With 
this procedure the surgeon makes a surgical incision in the eye, 
pulls out the bad lens, usually after pulverizing it; he inserts a 
new lens and then stitches the incision. Lasers are not used in 
removing a cataract and replacing it with an artificial lens. 
 
Laser surgery in the area of ophthalmology is used in fixing 
things such as detached retinas, treatment of blurred vision after 
cataract operations, treatment of glaucoma, and other 
non-insured treatment for short-sightedness. 
 
I hope that answers the member's questions, and as I say, we'll 
get the hard copy of the information to you. 



May 8, 1995 

 
2080 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what type of waiting-list can a 
person expect to find for this type of surgery at the present 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it is difficult to categorize 
generally about waiting times because they vary so, so much 
from doctor to doctor. One doctor's waiting period will be quite 
a bit shorter than the other and so I will report to the member 
that in Saskatoon, if we take the first five months of '94-95, the 
waiting time for two of the doctors practising in Saskatoon was 
a waiting period of 380 days, a relatively long waiting period. 
That is for two of the doctors in Saskatoon. For the other 
doctors performing cataract surgeries in Saskatoon, the waiting 
time on average is 86 days, so a considerably shorter period of 
waiting time for other doctors than the two. The average 
waiting time for Regina, during June '94, was 110 days. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What would be the reasons for the differences? Is 
it just the choice of patients as to the abilities of one doctor over 
the other? Would it have something to do with privileges in 
hospitals? What are the avenues that would constitute waiting-
lists and such large variances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think there are two reasons essentially. 
Perhaps the first and most important is, for these procedures, 
these patients will have been referred by another doctor or eye 
doctor, and referral patterns may direct to two doctors in 
Saskatoon or to another doctor, and patients may not be aware 
that they have some options and some choice. 
 
The other would be simple patient choice. Some patients may 
wish to have their surgeries, these cataract surgeries, done by 
these particular doctors. So that's essentially the reason. 
 
It is important, I think, for people who are needing the cataract 
surgery for them to realize that there are 18 individuals in our 
province, ophthalmologists or those with training in 
ophthalmology, that can perform the cataract surgeries, and 
patients should be aware that they do have options in terms of 
getting the surgery done. 
 
Mr. Toth: — How many patients would the Department of 
Health cover for surgeries undertaken outside of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, perhaps I could ask the 
member to clarify the question. Are we speaking specifically 
about cataract surgeries? Yes. We'll get the number. 
 
Mr. Chair, these are important figures, I think. I want to just do 
a bit of comparison. In the years 1988-1989, in that year there 
were 3,082 cataract surgeries done in Saskatchewan. In '93-94, 
we completed 6,774 cataract surgeries in Saskatchewan. So 
that's about a 120 per cent increase in the number of cataract 
surgeries we're doing in province. In 1988-89 there was 3,082; 
in 1993-94 it is now 6,774; about a 120 per cent increase in the 
number of surgeries we're doing in province. 
 
Now, so that then compare these numbers to out-of-province 
surgeries in 1988-89. In 1988-89 there was 1,295 surgeries  

completed out of province. In 1992 there were 692 performed 
out of province. And in the year, the last year that we have the 
figures, accurate figures for . . . no I'm sorry, 1993-94 there 
were 67, and in 1994 there were 48. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, what's happening here is we're able to offer the 
service more and more in province. We see the numbers going 
up dramatically in province and we see the out-of-province 
numbers going down. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as you're 
well aware, we've been raising a number of questions, "Mr. 
Premier, I want to know." Unfortunately the number of 
questions that have been brought to our attention, it's just 
physically impossible for us to raise them all in question period 
and I'm going to raise one right now and then just indicate the 
number of people who have basically raised a similar question 
rather than go through — it looks like — about 80 names here, 
but I'd just like to get them on the record. 
 
The question that I'm raising and this one has to do with the 
abortion issue and I'll read it as it came from one citizen and 
then just indicate the other citizens from across the province 
who indeed wrote a similar question. 
 
This question comes from Clarence Wiebe from Rush Lake. 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why you brought in tax-funded 
abortion clinics after the people of Saskatchewan very clearly, 
by vote and by a high majority, said they were against such a 
move. That is not democracy. That is dictatorship, to ignore the 
vote of the people. 
 
And that question is reiterated by Inga Brown from La Ronge, 
James Crawford from Estevan, Anne Hoffart from Unity, 
Bernard L. Trost from Springside, Ben LaPointe from Melville, 
Cathy Kary from Allan, Rudy Fast from Moose Jaw, David 
Ginther from Saskatoon, Mimi Loewen from Elbow, Michael 
Hertz from Kenaston, Carol Thomas from Dalmeny, J. 
Daghorne from Rosetown, Anna Klein from Francis, Valerie 
Lozier from Meadow Lake, Marg Angelstad from Humboldt, 
Andrew Novecosky from Viscount, Arla Krein from Burstall, 
Vera L. Thomas from Biggar, Bibiane Ayotte from North 
Battleford, Lois Genert from Robsart, Al Wiegers from Watson, 
Clara Feist from Wilkie, Yves Parrot from Lac Vert, Ian 
Bennett from Lang, Pearl and Lenard Maess from Turtleford, 
René Benard and Therese Jelinski from Prince Albert, Dennis 
Penner and A.M. Stang from Stockholm, Herb and Laura 
Schrader from Churchbridge, Wendy Brucks from Meadow 
Lake, Helen M. Friesen from Wymark, Douglas G. Marr from 
Moose Jaw, Leonard Bilinski from Punnichy, Marie Jerred from 
Wapella, Bruce L. Guenther from Hepburn, Lucille Wolters 
from Marcelin, Mr. and Mrs. Ron Pigott from Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Vanden Boer from Manor, and Melinda Reimer from Osler. 
 
So you could see, Mr. Minister, we had a number of questions, 
not specifically the exact wording as the one I've read, but we 
just felt rather than trying to go through them all we'd just refer 
to . . . because it basically deals with the same issue. And so I'm  



May 8, 1995 

 
2081 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could respond to the question 
that's been raised by the citizens of Saskatchewan in regard to 
that question regarding abortion, funding of abortions, in view 
of the referendum vote that was taken in the last provincial 
election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in response to the questions 
that the member has received through their mail campaign — 
and I would want to address each of those that have written — 
at the same time, I know that I will likely have written to some 
of them on an individual basis myself, and do receive this 
question fairly often. 
 
Let me say for the record, Mr. Speaker, tonight, that our 
government respects the laws of Canada. And we respect the 
1988 Supreme Court of Canada decision on the right of an 
individual to access the abortion procedure. It is our view that if 
an abortion is necessary that it should be provided in a safe 
environment where there is professional care, and counselling 
services are available. 
 
And our province, like all other provinces and territories, funds 
the cost of hospital and the physician-related abortion services. 
In addition, our government is committed to improving 
reproductive health and preventing the number of unintended 
pregnancies in our province. 
 
Now at the time of the last provincial election, Mr. Chair, you 
will recall the former government added to the election ballot a 
number of plebiscite questions. One of the questions had to do 
with the funding of the abortion procedure by way of plebiscite. 
A number of . . . a majority of those who responded to that 
plebiscite indicated their desire that the government should 
cease to fund the abortion procedure in our publicly funded 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Chair, we took that plebiscite result very, very seriously. 
And I know, as the member will know — because he has raised 
this issue before with the former minister and with other 
members of our government — he will know in responses that 
have been given in other times in this House, that as a result of 
our serious consideration of that, we sought the very best of 
legal opinion. And the very best of legal opinion that we could 
secure informed us that there are a number of constitutional, 
charter related, Canada Health related issues which simply 
make that option not only impractical but impossible in the 
current circumstance. 
 
It is the opinions that we have received that deinsuring abortion 
services would violate the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. We know that under the 
Canada Health Act our funding would be jeopardized if we 
were to deinsure the abortion procedure. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to conclude by emphasizing again, with the 
member and with those who have written, the activities that we 
have taken as government since assuming office to reduce the  

incidence of the unintended pregnancy in our province, and 
surely no matter where we stand on the question of the abortion 
procedure, and surely we all can agree that to prevent the 
unintended pregnancy is the best course of action. 
 
So in June of 1992 we appointed the Advisory Committee on 
Family Planning to develop a number of recommendations for 
the government on ways to improve reproductive health and to 
reduce the high incidence of unintended pregnancy in our 
province, as well as the sexually transmitted diseases. This 
advisory committee has proceeded with implementing now 
several recommendations in its first report of 1993 toward 
sexual and reproductive health in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I reaffirm that we took the results of the plebiscite 
very seriously. The best legal advice that we could muster 
indicates that it's not an option for a province to opt out of the 
funding of the abortion procedure. And this, I may say, Mr. 
Chair, is consistent with every other province and territory in 
Canada. But we've gone a step further and we're doing what we 
can, although there's much more to be done, in terms of 
education and community health programing to prevent the 
unintended pregnancy. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I was just trying to find . . . 
there was a recent article in one of the papers and unfortunately 
I don't have it in my file right now, just talking about the 
economic benefit that this country would have if we just took 
the number of abortions over the past 20 years, and if the 
majority of those individuals would have had a chance to be 
vital citizens in this country it would certainly have played a 
major role in how this country and certainly this province has 
developed. 
 
And it's interesting to note in discussing the number of students 
in our rural schools, even how many teachers would make the 
comment about the fact that if the families were larger or if 
there were more children around even their job would not be in 
jeopardy as the student population diminishes. 
 
But it's also interesting to note, Mr. Minister, that on one hand 
we talk about fiscal responsibility; on the other hand, we talk 
about, I think, some of the essential services. And I think sooner 
or later, Mr. Minister, we're going to reach a point where we're 
going to have to determine what are some of the most essential 
services that we have available to maintain life. Are we going to 
be able to just maintain the universal type of health care system 
that we've come to expect, or are we going to take a look at 
what are the essential, life-giving type of services? And people 
may have to assume more of a direct role in other services that 
they would feel are essential. 
 
And I think the insuring of abortions is one procedure that in 
the long run, I think, Mr. Minister, if it's the health of a patient 
is in jeopardy, then certainly a doctor and a patient make a 
decision. But to use it as — we talk about the education — to 
use it as it has become, to be used in many cases as more of a 
birth control procedure rather than a life-giving procedure, I 
think is what most people really take offence to and is very  



May 8, 1995 

 
2082 

questionable. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, I think we need to really take a look at 
what we really mean by life — we really believe in life or don't 
we believe in life. 
 
I'm going to move on to a number of other questions from the 
"Mr. Premier, I want to know." And they range all over the map 
and I think I'll try and get these out of the way so that at least 
we can get some responses to them. 
 
This question comes from Ken Schmeiser from Bruno, and he 
says: in the last provincial election, the NDP promised a nursing 
home in Bruno. When is Bruno getting its level 4 care nursing 
home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am not aware of any 
commitments that may or may not have been made in the last 
election around a level 3 and 4 facility for Bruno. I am 
informed by officials of the Department of Health that Bruno 
has had a relatively long-standing request for a level 3 and 4 
facility in Bruno. I'm confident that request was there when the 
member opposite and his colleagues were in government. 
 
In the new circumstance of district board governance, of course 
what happens is the district board will be doing their needs 
assessment in that particular area, will be looking at Bruno in 
the mix of their communities, I'm sure, and if it is assessed by 
the district board and the communities that this would be an 
appropriate development, then they would make that 
recommendation. There would be a request for a capital project 
come through the district to the department, and we would 
seriously consider it, as we do all capital requests that come. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Chair, I would encourage the writer of the 
letter to be in touch with his district board to see exactly where 
their assessment is about the need in Bruno and in their entire 
district. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, well I don't believe I was actually 
lobbying for a home in Bruno. I think there was a hospital in 
Moosomin that we were certainly looking for. But maybe the 
NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from that 
area might have been lobbying at that time as well. 
 
This question comes from J. Stobbs from Birch Hills. I want to 
know why Birchview home was not left as a level 2 and 3 
home, and the Birch Hills memorial union hospital was closed. 
Tell me why the hospital could not have been used for all the 
people who need level 4 care when they become bedridden. The 
building is in good condition. To spend 700,000 for a clinic in 
Birch Hills is the height of stupidity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to the individual who has 
written, I had the good fortune of being in Birch Hills some 
weeks ago and turning the sod on the new health centre which 
will be attached and adjacent to the existing nursing home. I 
want to say, as I have travelled the province — and I have 
rather extensively — the facility and the programing in Birch  

Hills is as good as you will find anywhere in Saskatchewan in 
terms of long-term care. The addition of the health centre to the 
long-term care facility will offer a full range of health care 
services to the community of Birch Hills, and I know many, 
many in that community are excited and anticipating the 
development of the health centre. 
 
Now the former hospital building, Mr. Chair, will be fully 
utilized in a very productive way for the community of Birch 
Hills. The town itself will be, I think . . . I think it's the town 
that will be operating the building. They will be putting some 
recreation offices in there. I know there are some service clubs 
which are making use of that building. It is a structurally sound 
building. Perhaps not as appropriate for health care today as it 
was when it was built, but it is structurally sound, and it will be 
fully utilized, Mr. Chair, in the community of Birch Hills and 
will continue to provide valuable service. 
 
But I have had the opportunity to be in Birch Hills, and I know 
they're doing some wonderful things in terms of programing 
and community development in that community. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:26 p.m. 
 
 


