






















































February 20, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 20, 1995 

 

 
265 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
residents of Gull Lake and the area around Gull Lake, including 
Webb and Piapot, I'd like to present the following petition. I'll 
read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'd like to table these now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it's my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly and present petitions on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan who use Highway 42. And I'll read 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate the total amount of 
funds garnered from the taxpayer for fuel tax, vehicle 
licence fees, and provincial sales tax on new vehicles 
toward the maintenance and capital costs to 
Saskatchewan roads; and further, that the Government 
of Saskatchewan dedicate any monies available from the 
federal infrastructure program towards Saskatchewan's 
road system rather than provide these sums toward 
capital construction of casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the communities of 
Brownlee; Riverhurst; Tugaske; Moose Jaw; Saskatoon; 
Cartwright, Manitoba; Red Deer, Alberta; Balgonie, 
Saskatchewan; Stewart Valley, Saskatchewan; Central Butte, 
Saskatchewan. People all over the place, Mr. Speaker, wish this 
petition tabled. And I do so. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double- 

laning of Highway No. 1. 
 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate funding toward the maintenance 
and capital costs of Saskatchewan roads. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
And according to order the following petitions for private Bills 
have been reviewed, and are found to be in order pursuant to 
rule 11(7). 
 
 By Mr. Swenson of the Caronport schools in the 

province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend 
the Briercrest Bible College. 

 
 By Mr. Cline of Our Lady of the Prairies foundation in 

the province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to 
amend the Act of incorporation. 

 
 By Ms. Lorje of the Manitoba-Saskatchewan 

Conference of the Seventh-day Adventist Church in the 
province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to 
incorporate. 

 
 And by Mr. Upshall of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 

the province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to 
amend An Act to incorporate the Saskatchewan Co-
operative Wheat Producers Limited. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 
 Regarding the Public Employees Benefits Agency, how 

many employees are currently contributing to the 
following pension plans: (1) the public employees 
superannuation plan; (2) the public service 
superannuation plan; (3) the municipal employees 
superannuation plan; (4) the judges of the provincial 
court superannuation plan; (5) the Workmen's 
Compensation Board superannuation plan; (6) the 
Liquor Board superannuation plan; and (7) the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company superannuation 
plan. 

 
I give notice that I shall on day 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 
 Regarding SaskTel, how many employees are currently 

contributing to the Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
superannuation plan? 

 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that  



February 20, 1995 

 
266 

I shall on day 16 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding their Crown Investments Corporation, how 

many employees are currently contributing to the capital 
pension plan? 

 
And I give notice that I shall on day 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 
 Regarding the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, how 

many employees are currently contributing to the Power 
Corporation's superannuation plan? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, I've got two groups of guests 
here to introduce this afternoon. They've been strategically 
separated, one over in the west gallery, and another group in the 
north gallery here — the Speaker's gallery — as you'll 
understand why in a moment. 
 
We have a group of about 40 young lads and lasses, students 
from my district. Now this is rather complicated. They're from 
grades 10, 11, and 12. There's a bunch of 40 of them. It's not 
organized by the school but by the joint co-op youth bus tour 
sponsored by Assiniboia Credit Union, Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, and the retail co-ops. The students are from Chaplin, from 
Moose Jaw, from Weyburn, from Assiniboia, from 
Gravelbourg, Limerick, Torquay — it should be pronounced 
Tor-ki not Torquay, Tor-ki; I've been there — Willow Bunch, 
Lafleche, Rockglen, and Killdeer. And I'd like you all to join 
with me in welcoming them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — The second group, Mr. Speaker, sir, from the 
Assiniboia-Borderland-Gravelbourg-Wood River teachers' 
convention — this is why they have to be separated, so that they 
don't fight. Yes, yes, yes. I'm seeing some of the faces up there 
and I can see that they would fight. 
 
They're here to witness the proceedings and to go on tour, and I 
hope that you will join with me and I hope the students will join 
with me too in welcoming these teachers to our proceedings. 
Thank you, sir 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join the 
member from Gravelbourg in extending a warm welcome to the 
students from the southern part of the province and to the 
teachers in for their convention. I see some familiar faces up 
there. 
 
I've had a privilege to meet some of the students in the 
classrooms at Bengough, and just on Saturday morning I was 
down in Coronach for some of the curling playoffs, and I know 
one of the Bengough teams won the boys'. I'm not sure how 
some of the other teams did. And my son, his team from  

Milestone, they lost on their last rock. 
 
So I want to extend best wishes to the students, teachers. Good 
luck in the curling championships coming up, provincials, and 
I'm sure you'll do well and we're really pleased that you're here 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Snowmobile Rally: Fund-raiser for Drug Awareness 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in an 
effort to raise drug awareness in Saskatchewan schools, it has 
been given a boost because of a fund-raising event which was 
held recently in my riding. Two hundred and seventy 
snowmobile riders braved the temperature of minus 20 at the 
5th annual Peace 100 Snowmobile Rally and raised a total of 
$44,000 for drug awareness in schools. 
 
The riders rode their snowmobiles from Nipawin across Tobin 
Lake, through the Torch River area; most of them went on a 
longer trail which actually took them through Choiceland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the riders on the trail of roughly 100 miles 
was 83 years old, Eldon Abrey, of Imperial, Saskatchewan. He 
has taken part in every Peace 100 Rally that's ever been held 
since they began five years ago. And Mr. Abrey and all the 
participants, I would like to thank them for their dedication in 
such cold weather. 
 
There were several riders from out of the province. The one 
who came the furthest was Mike and Shari Bisson of Peace 
River, Alberta. They travelled the furthest. And there was more 
than 20 peace officers came. The furthest of them travelled — 
two of them — from Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Nipawin Elks, the 
Royal Purple, and the police, and all the snowmobile riders for 
another successful rally. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Volunteers and Workers 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd just 
like to take a moment to acknowledge the efforts of volunteers 
and workers in our communities. 
 
First of all, Friday evening I had the privilege of attending the 
chamber of commerce dinner in Moosomin and certainly 
chambers across this province do a lot to promote not only the 
business community but their community as well. 
 
And yesterday in the town of Kipling the community gathered 
around a couple who lost their home to a fire about a month 
ago, to raise some support for the family in rebuilding their 
lives and rebuilding their home. And I'd like to acknowledge  



February 20, 1995 

 
267 

the work of the community and the program that was put on 
yesterday. I'd like to thank the Wa-Wa Shrine Temple pipes and 
drums for giving of their time to come out and be a part of that 
program, and certainly say a hearty thank you to each and every 
one of the participants, local participants that participated in 
this worthwhile endeavour. And thank you to Mrs. Faye 
Knowles for having put the effort together to bring this function 
together. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1995 River Junction Winter Games 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, the 1995 River Junction Winter 
Games were a big success this past weekend in my riding. 
Many of the games’ activities were held in Maidstone at a 
number of venues in that community, my home town. 
 
These games attracted people from over 20 communities from 
Pierceland to Meadow Lake, Turtleford, Lloydminster 
communities, and communities as far south as Highway 40 and 
communities along Highway 16. This covers a very large area. 
 
Organizers of the games should be congratulated for organizing 
so many events, such as curling and bowling on Friday and a 
pancake breakfast on Saturday, along with competitive events 
which included a hockey tournament, bowling, seniors' pool, 
shuffleboard, volleyball, cribbage, small-bore shooting, 
Scrabble, snowmobile racing, wrestling, just to name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these games were important because they brought 
together people from all ages from the various communities in 
the region. One of the highlights of the games were the opening 
ceremonies, which were beautiful, included performances from 
the Maidstone High School band, figure skaters from the 
region. 
 
These games are a part of the fabric which makes Saskatchewan 
a great place to live — people joining together for a common 
purpose in the spirit of cooperation and generally having a good 
time. Congratulations to all the game officials, the participants, 
and volunteers for a job well done. Thank you. 
 

New Library Computers 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to advise members 
in the House here that Prince Albert is joining the information 
highway. This weekend I had the opportunity of attending a 
ribbon-cutting ceremony of the John M. Cuelenaere Library 
where eight computers were unveiled. They will now have 
access to information around the world on any publications that 
are on this particular network. 
 
This ceremony was attended by the mayor, Don Cody, of Prince 
Albert; and also the chairperson, Claude Quinton, of the John 
M. Cuelenaere Library; as well as a former chairperson, Barb 
Gustafson, of the John M. Cuelenaere Library. Congratulations 
go to them and to Eleanor Acorn who was the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the John M. Cuelenaere. 

Now just what does it mean? It means that any man, woman, or 
child now has access to the entire . . . to all the information on 
the network out of P.A. (Prince Albert); and maybe more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of the world now 
have access of information that's housed right in Prince Albert, 
in the John M. Cuelenaere Library. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Luther Invitational Tournament 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to report to you the results of one of the most 
exciting sporting events held in western Canada today, and 
that's the 43rd annual Luther Invitational Tournament. Now I 
know the member for Regina Wascana told us about it last 
week and I thought it's appropriate to report on the results. 
 
Let me first of all give my congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to the 
players from Sheldon Williams Spartans from the city of 
Regina who captured the championship game, and more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, captured the sportsmanlike award or 
the team sportsmen's award of the tournament. They exhibited 
not only a high level of basketball prowess, but also displayed 
an exemplary attitude when it comes to sportsmanship. 
 
As the proud parent of a Luther Lion, I also want to extend my 
congratulations to the students and the teachers at Luther High 
School. They did an admirable job putting on a banquet on 
Wednesday night, which was attended by 400 people, whose 
main speaker was the former head of Canada's national team, 
Mr. Jack Donohue; to the 1,500 and 1,700 fans who crowded 
the Luther gym during the tournament. It was indeed a spectacle 
to behold. It's something that the city of Regina, and particularly 
the young people of Regina, should be very proud of in holding, 
Mr. Speaker. And so I want to extend my congratulations to all 
involved and especially to Sheldon-Williams. 
 
If I may say on a personal note, we get to play Sheldon-
Williams on the 27th, the Riffel Royals, and we're looking 
forward . . . as a coach, I'm looking forward to meeting them 
and taking away their LIT (Luther Invitational Tournament) 
crown. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie Region Outstanding Young Farmer Award 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take a 
moment to add my congratulations to a young couple who farm 
at Milestone and who received a great deal of deserved 
recognition at the Farm Progress Show and Agribition. Brent 
and Pam Sattler are both engineers by trade and have active, full 
lives both in their community and in their professional life. 
They operate their own soil analysis business to supplement 
their farm income. This business expanded into farm consulting 
and research. But their main love is their 1,600 acre farm called 
Innotech Farms and it is for their innovative approach to  



February 20, 1995 

 
268 

farming that they have been recognized. 
 
Together they were first awarded the Prairie Region 
Outstanding Young Farmer Award at the Farm Progress Show. 
They were then named one of three outstanding Canadian 
farmers at Agribition, a prestigious award indeed. The awards 
of distinction, Mr. Speaker, deserve our attention. The Sattlers 
won these awards because of their innovation, their enterprise, 
and their hard work — the characteristics that have helped put 
Saskatchewan back together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan farmers deserve annual 
recognition from all of us, and I dare say this award to the 
Sattlers is, in one respect, symbolic of the recognition our 
farmers deserve. 
 
Congratulations to Brent and Pam. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compact Disc Release 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Is it permissible, Mr. Speaker, that I can 
have another member's statement? Nobody else is standing up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Missinipi Broadcasting and 
Stump Studios who, this weekend — Stump Studios of La 
Ronge — who, this weekend, released a CD (compact disc) 
made up of northern music and stories. This unveiling was done 
in the Gateway Mall in Prince Albert. I had the opportunity to 
attend that this weekend. 
 
It's part of the entire winter festival in Prince Albert. This is a 
great weekend to be in our city in P.A. This project was partly 
funded by the cultural industries coalition, made of funding 
from the provincial government and federal government. 
 
It's something that is, I think we will find to be, very valuable 
and very popular because music, as we know, expresses the 
soul of the nation. And that part of our nation needs to be 
congratulated and needs to be promoted, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Firearms Legislation 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the new Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the official 
opposition has been vigorously fighting the Liberals’ ill-
conceived gun control legislation. We have attended and spoke 
at numerous rallies. We have designed, distributed and 
submitted to the legislature over 7,000 names on a petition with 
more coming in, and we intend to introduce a motion and 
preparing Bills to fight this initiative. 
 
Mr. Minister, very simply, will you continue to work with us  

and Saskatchewan's firearms owners, as your predecessor did, 
in opposing federal gun legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
former minister of Justice was there before you were; I expect 
we'll be there after you are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I'm not sure if that's a commitment to support Saskatchewan 
firearms owners, but I hope that it is. 
 
Mr. Minister, your predecessor told the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation on the weekend that a federal Commons justice 
committee, which will be examining the issue, will be touring 
Saskatchewan. The former minister said that it would be very 
unusual for a provincial government to make a presentation to a 
federal standing committee and he didn't know if cabinet would 
agree to do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you commit today to take that unusual but 
very necessary step: commit the provincial government to make 
a presentation to the federal committee and to do something to 
stop this Liberal initiative? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I am struck, Mr. Speaker, by the fact 
that on the second day after the budget the members opposite 
are as silent as the hills on the whole subject of the budget. One 
would have thought that this issue would have lasted a little 
longer than a couple of days. I may say to . . . I may say there's 
probably, Mr. Speaker, no more eloquent testimony to the 
wisdom and the courage of the government in bringing forth a 
balanced budget than these questions opposite. 
 
May I say with respect to the actual question, we will be . . . I 
think the question is far more important for what it's not asking 
about than for what it's asking about, and therefore my 
comments. With respect to the comment, as the matter unfolds 
the government will be present and will be discharging its 
responsibilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Revenues 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance. The reviews are in on the Premier's 
performance last night and they're not good. I think the Premier 
should have bought an hour of air time because in half an hour 
he only told half the truth. 
 
I was hoping the Minister of Finance might tell us the whole 
truth. Madam Minister, last night while the Premier was giving 
only half the story, he mentioned the reduction in the deficit  



February 20, 1995 

 
269 

reduction surtax. What he forgot to mention was the hundreds 
of millions of dollars in increased taxes that your government 
has collected over the past three years. 
 
Madam Minister, will you tell the part of the story the Premier 
forgot to mention? How many hundreds of millions of dollars 
have NDP (New Democratic Party) tax increases cost 
Saskatchewan families over the past three years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is correct — the reviews are beginning to come in. And I will 
read the first one from Nesbitt Burns' response to our budget: 
 
 The surplus will remain intact because the province is 

effectively freezing program expenditures at a time 
when it has entered the virtuous cycle. Interest rates are 
now being compounded off a declining debt load. It is 
refreshing to see a government in Canada post a surplus 
and, at the same time, reduce the tax burden. 

 
Mr. Speaker, since the budget has been released, I've been 
around this province and I can tell you the atmosphere around 
this province is in stark contrast to what's occurring in this 
House. As I go around this province, people are saying, we're so 
proud of what we've achieved in this province. 
 
Saskatchewan is the first province in Canada to balance its 
budget. It not only has one balanced budget; it has a sustainable 
balanced budget. Our first plan has worked. We now have in 
place the second plan — to reduce the debt, to reduce the tax 
load, to enhance our quality of life, and to create jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Economic Development. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Premier told only half the truth last night 
when it came to job creation. He talked about jobs that are 
being created by your government. What he forgot to mention, 
Mr. Minister, was that there was actually 1,000 fewer jobs in 
1994 than when your government took office in 1991. He also 
forgot to mention that the number of people on welfare had 
climbed from 57,000 to over 80,000. This is since your 
government took office. And this was the Premier who vowed 
to end poverty. 
 
Mr. Minister, why was your Premier only telling half of the 
truth? Will you tell the whole truth and admit that jobs are 
down and welfare numbers are away up since your government 
took office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the  

member opposite that far from his gloomy outlook on the 
economy of Saskatchewan, I think the local newspapers of 
Saskatchewan tell you quite a different story. I'm not going to 
bore the Assembly with all of them, but just to read a few 
headlines, not from the Premier of the province, but from 
various people and editors and writers in newspapers across the 
province. 
 
But here's one from the Star-Phoenix, dated January 4, '95: Job 
outlook bodes well for 1995. December 31, 1994, Regina 
Leader-Post: Optimism high for Saskatchewan. Here's one on 
the Estevan area — the member from Estevan will appreciate 
this — Upswing for Estevan, boom in agriculture and natural 
resources. And the story tells about all of the jobs. Booming 
Drinkwater firm geared up for 1995 expansion. Building boom 
in Carlyle. And the list goes on and on. 
 
The only people in this whole Assembly that don't understand, 
or in the whole province who don't understand the great 
recovery in this province, are the dinosaurs seated over on the 
other side in the Liberal and Tory opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GRIP Premiums 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Agriculture or whichever one of 
these people over there has the courage to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Premier was only telling half the truth when 
he talked about agriculture last night. He completely forgot to 
mention the $188 million in GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) premiums he took from Saskatchewan farm families. 
Why is that, Mr. Minister? How could he possibly forget $188 
million like that. Or did he leave it out on purpose, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, when your government tore up 60,000 GRIP 
contracts in 1992, we said it was because you were setting up a 
slush fund for the next election. Your Premier denied it at the 
time. Well isn't that exactly what happened, Mr. Minister? Will 
you tell the rest of the story that the Premier forgot to tell last 
night about that agricultural issue. Will you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the 
member opposite for that question. First of all, I'd like to 
remind him — I keep having to say this over and over again; 
maybe he'll hear it this time — we took in our share of the 
GRIP surplus; 70 per cent of that went back to Saskatchewan 
farmers in the form of farm programing. 
 
The federal Liberals took their share of the GRIP surplus; gave 
less than half back to farmers. So if you have a complaint, join 
with us and we'll complain to Ottawa. 
 
Now again I'd like to say to the member opposite, what is his  



February 20, 1995 

 
270 

complaint with the government? Is he saying, my gosh, there's 
extra money there and you didn't get it out and you didn't spend 
it? That's what they used to do in the 1980s. Or is he saying we 
balanced the budget because of GRIP? Because if it is, how did 
we get the other four balanced budgets? Or is he just confused 
and not sure exactly what he's saying? Mr. Speaker, . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I'm not interrupting the Minister of Finance, 
but there is a constant barrage of interruption from the opposite 
members today. You've got to give the minister a chance to at 
least answer. So I would ask you, please respect the opportunity 
for a minister to answer a question that you yourselves are 
asking. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps if the 
members opposite listen to the answer they wouldn't keep 
asking the same question. 
 
We have balanced the books of this province, not just one year, 
but for five years out. And we did it not because of any one 
single event. We did it because of the cooperation and the 
dedication and the hard work of Saskatchewan people. And 
we're proud of it and the people of Saskatchewan are proud of 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Revenues 
 
Mr. Toth: — I have a question here, Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister responsible for gambling. Madam Minister, your 
Premier didn't even tell half the true story about gambling. In 
fact last night he didn't even mention gambling at all. I think 
that's a pretty major omission, wouldn't you say, Madam 
Minister? Do you think the Premier forgot the gambling story or 
was he too ashamed to mention it? 
 
Madam Minister, by your own admission, the budget only tells 
half the story about gambling. The gambling revenue figure 
doesn't even include revenue from casinos but you expect to be 
open by November. Madam Minister, why is that figure left out 
of the budget, and how much do you expect that amount to be? 
Will you tell us the rest of the story about your government's 
gambling policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, maybe in response to 
the member I would say that they're only asking half the 
question, and if they got together with the Liberal leader, they 
might get a decent question put together. 
 
But I want to say on the issue of gaming, on the issue of gaming 
and the recent casino agreement that was developed with the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indians) and the Exhibition 
Board here in Regina, I want to say to you that there has been a 
good deal of support for the policy that has been developed. It 
includes the local community of the city of Regina. It includes 
the FSIN, and also it includes a good deal of  

business support, something that I can say is sadly lacking in 
the position that you're taking when it comes to asking the 
question you put today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Premier's infomercial last night only told, as 
we've been saying, half the story. He didn't tell Saskatchewan 
families about the taxes you have piled on them over the last 
three years. He didn't tell Saskatchewan families about the . . . 
that Saskatchewan lags behind other provinces in job creation 
and that thousands of families have joined the welfare rolls 
since you have taken over. 
 
He didn't tell the farm families about the GRIP money that you 
have took from them. He didn't tell families about the addicted 
gamblers that you, as the Premier, and minister . . . who brought 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) and government-run casinos to 
this province. He didn't tell about the money you are hoarding 
in multimillion dollars fashion in the Crown corporations, the 
NDP-run Crown corporations, which is now being run by you, 
the most political minister of all, the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Mr. Minister, why didn't the Premier tell the truth  that he and 
your government cares a lot more about the family of Crown 
corporations than he does about the families of the people 
across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to answer 
the member's question, the Leader of the Official Opposition, 
because, Mr. Speaker, it gives me an opportunity to ask the 
Leader of the Opposition this question: how does he compare 
the activities of this government in bringing together a budget 
in three years, turning around a deficit line of a billion dollars in 
three years, to the kind of spending that his colleagues did when 
they were in the government? 
 
And I want to ask him this: why doesn't he make a comparison 
today on the increases on utility rates with Alberta, like he has 
been doing in this House for the last several days. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, he knows that in the last four years in Alberta, 
electrical rates, power rates, have gone up by 22 per cent but in 
Saskatchewan they've only gone up 11 per cent. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, that's why he doesn't make those comparisons, and 
that's why he makes only selective comparisons from time to 
time. 
 
The fact of the matter also is, Mr. Speaker, that in the Crown 
Investments Corporation, because of the bad megaproject deals 
made by the former Conservative government, money is being 
used to pay off bad debt. Money has been used to pay off bad  



February 20, 1995 

 
271 

debt which was incurred by the members opposite, and the 
money that is in the Crown Investments Corporation, if the 
dividend that is there had not been used to do that, we would 
have had to borrow money at the expense of the taxpayer to 
meet the obligations which they committed the taxpayer to in 
the deals that they put together. 
 

VLT Revenues 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister in 
charge of Gaming says that VLT . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I don't want to single out 
individual members but I think the one member knows who I'm 
speaking about. He's been interrupting throughout the whole 
question period, and I ask him please to resist and give other 
members an opportunity to ask a question, and to answer the 
question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister in charge of Gaming says that VLTs are not draining 
the amount of money out of Saskatchewan communities that 
people fear they are. The Finance minister has said that the 
government will take a mere $90 million from VLTs. This 
equates to $510 per week per machine. 
 
We have not talked to anyone in the province of Saskatchewan 
who is sending less then $1,000 per week per machine to the 
government coffers. In fact a councillor from La Ronge, Mr. 
Speaker, says their machines are sending, on average, $2,300 
per week per machine to this government. 
 
This has incredibly serious implications for communities. My 
question to the minister of Gaming. The community-by-
community numbers are the ones that tell the real story, Madam 
Minister. Will the minister agree to publish all of the detailed, 
community-by-community figures for VLT revenues for 1994, 
and then agree quarterly to publish those numbers for 1995 and 
beyond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
Leader of the Liberal Party that the number that I understand for 
the coming year is $95 million. And you may argue that we 
shouldn't be taking that revenue, or the government taxpayers 
shouldn't be involved in that area. But in saying that, you would 
then have to say we'd have to increase the sales tax by 1 per 
cent in order to cover it off or cut programing to health care to 
make up the $95 million. The reason is you can't have it both 
ways. 
 
And the more I listen to you, Madam Member, the more I 
believe that those former Tories coming over to your operation, 
like Ted Yarnton, are actually developing an election platform 
similar to the one ran on in 1982 by your colleagues to your 
right. That is, cut taxes, spend more money, and today talking 
about getting rid of the revenue from VLTs. It doesn't work that 
way. 
 
And what people are beginning to realize is that in taking a  

chance on electing you, you're going to end up with a 
government similar to what we had with the leader from 
Estevan when he was in government in the 1980s which would 
lead the province once again to rack and ruin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's most 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we now have a direct confession 
by the Minister of Economic Development that indeed VLTs 
are a form of taxation for the government. People across this 
province are concerned in fact that this a form of regressive 
taxation and they know that it is a tax on the poor, Mr. Speaker. 
They know that it is money leaving local economies, Mr. 
Speaker. We believe that people cannot judge the impact or 
even judge whether enough is being done in their communities 
if they have no reliable information from which to work. 
 
My question to the minister is: your VLT revenue numbers are 
not only out of whack with what Saskatchewan hoteliers are 
saying, they don't even fit the experience in other provinces. 
You claim revenues for this past fiscal year of about $500 per 
machine per week, while both Manitoba and Alberta admit to 
substantially higher returns. Will you just put the community-
by-community numbers on the table, put them on the table and 
let the people of Saskatchewan know what they are really 
dealing with in their local communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, here again we go. The 
member opposite indicates that we're not getting enough from 
our VLTs in Saskatchewan; saying that $500 per machine isn't 
enough, that they're getting more than that in Alberta and 
Manitoba. On the other hand, you're saying we should be 
getting less, that we're taking too much. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Liberal Party, that just like your 
numbers on StatsCanada, which you never had the courage to 
come back to the Assembly and apologize for attempting to 
mislead the people of Saskatchewan on your job numbers, 
today you're doing exactly the same thing on VLTs — trying to 
have it both ways: that there should be more than $500 per 
person, but yet, on the other hand, you argue that there shouldn't 
be any revenue. 
 
And I want to say to you when I made the comparison of the 
replacement that would be needed in the formation of taxation 
to take place of the revenue coming from VLTs, it would be 
about 1 per cent increase on sales tax to take the place of the 
revenue coming from VLTs. 
 
Now you may argue that that should be more, but you can't have 
it both ways. You can't say that gambling is bad, although 
you've got lots of experience with it. But you can't have it both 
ways. You can't have no gambling and more gambling at the 
same time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — It's very, very intriguing, Mr. Speaker,  



February 20, 1995 

 
272 

very intriguing indeed, that the Economic Development 
minister thinks that what we're saying is that they aren't taking 
in enough. Mr. Speaker, they're taking in substantially more 
than what they're willing to put on the books. Where is this 
openness and accountability that they talk about? They claim to 
be open and accountable, but they are very selective, Mr. 
Speaker, in the information that they make available. 
 
In December the MLA for Shaunavon wrote to the very Premier 
of this province asking the government to release a detailed 
breakdown of the VLT revenues community by community. In 
spite of having access to 88 staff in the Premier's office, we 
didn't get the courtesy of an answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Gaming Authority annual report will not even be available 
to tell the people of this province about the province-wide VLT 
revenues until this session is long over. The current reporting 
system will never give us community-by-community figures. 
 
To the minister once again: can the minister explain why the 
Premier and his government was unwilling to answer our 
request? What exactly is it that you're so afraid to let the people 
of Saskatchewan know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how 
much more clear I can make the numbers that the government 
intends to receive in terms of revenue from VLTs. We have 
made it very clear that in the coming year we expect to get $95 
million. You argue with that and say that that's not enough, or 
that it's too much, but that's the best we can do at this point of 
time at giving you the estimate on the amount of money that we 
expect to get from VLTs in the coming year. 
 
Now in a few moments I'll be giving you the answer to the 
question, the written question which you gave in the House. I'll 
take time to read it now so that you will at least have the 
information. But your question was, why don't we give out the 
numbers per community or per machine in community? And I 
want to say to you that in some communities where there's only 
one operator of VLTs, it would be very . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Unfair to competition; is that what the former 
premier said? 
 
The point here, Mr. Speaker, is that the member should know 
that giving out information that would put one hotelier, the 
amount of money that they're getting from VLTs, on the front 
page of the paper, is absolutely against the policy of the 
government. And the member opposite should know that that 
isn't a proper way to deal with business people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Social Assistance for the Disabled 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to respond to a question that was recently taken 
notice of in my absence. And the question was, asked by the 
hon. member from Wilkie, was, why does a fully employable  

person receive more social assistance than a disabled person? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's very important to clarify that this is not 
the case. In fact allowances for disabled or unemployable 
people are considerably higher than for employable people. 
That's because, Mr. Speaker, this is a needs-based program. Of 
course you have to take income into account. But the reality is, 
Mr. Speaker, that at least 225 per month more is available to an 
unemployed person. Potentially up to 340 per month, depending 
on the needs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for employable people we attempt to provide a 
sustainable income. And of course the key is links to jobs and 
education and training opportunities. So I'd be happy to sit 
down with the member to go over the allowances. But it's 
important not to promote what he was trying to do last week in 
the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare Numbers 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Social Services. Mr. Minister, the minister responsible for 
Economic Development tried to answer a question earlier that 
dealt with job creation and the numbers in Social Services and 
the people on welfare. 
 
Would you please explain to this legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan why 80,000 people are on welfare today, and 
why your Premier didn't talk about that yesterday when he was 
on the air and could easily have done it — talk about the 80,000 
people that are on welfare today and mention the fact that he 
promised to eliminate welfare in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Would you explain to the people of Saskatchewan why he didn't 
tell the whole truth on that one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to report good 
news to the House, Mr. Speaker. From May of 1994 to January 
of 1995 the case-load is down by 1,300, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . Mr. 
Speaker, in Alberta that they like to quote, in Alberta for 
December the case-load was up 1,000 new cases. January, 
Alberta was up 1,500 new cases. That's in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1994 the case-load went down in 8 of our 11 
regions. Now that's a success story, Mr. Speaker. Our 
dependency rate is the second lowest in all of Canada. 
 
What Alberta is doing is driving people out of province. Seven 
thousand . . . they drove 12,000 clients back to the reserves 
where there's no housing and no jobs. Mr. Speaker, they 
transferred 10,000 clients over to other dependency programs.  



February 20, 1995 

 
273 

They're playing a sham game. 
 
What we're trying to do is to create the 7,000 new jobs and with 
New Careers and Future Skills and JobStart and all of these 
programs, are designed to support the Partnership for Renewal, 
Mr. Speaker, which is working. They're offside on this with the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I call ministerial statements I just want 
to remind the House, particularly government cabinet ministers, 
that written answers should not be read into the record. They 
will be printed in Votes and Proceedings and it is not the 
custom to read them out loud. Of course the tradition of that has 
been to save time of the House. So I ask cabinet ministers to 
refrain from reading answers that have been written into the 
record. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Heritage Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, Heritage Day is celebrated 
nationally each year on the third Monday in February to 
recognize the significance of our heritage, our unique identity, 
our roots, our past, and our present. On Heritage Day, and 
especially in this year as we are celebrating the 50th anniversary 
of the end of World War II by participating in the Canada 
Remembers program, it is fitting to recognize Saskatchewan 
residents who were awarded the Victoria Cross in both world 
wars and the Boer War. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan will recognize these 
individuals by erecting historic markers at the site of their 
homes, farms, or businesses. Victoria Cross recipients were 
ordinary Saskatchewan people doing extraordinary deeds. It is 
also fitting to recognize the recipients as we celebrate the 90th 
anniversary of our province. 
 
Four members of the Canadian Forces from the province have 
been awarded the Victoria Cross. Lieutenant Robert Combe of 
Melville won a posthumous Victoria Cross in 1917. That same 
year Sergeant Harry Mullin of the Moosomin area was awarded 
the Victoria Cross. Sergeant Hugh Cairns of Saskatoon was 
awarded a Victoria Cross posthumously for actions in 1918, 
and Major David Currie of Moose Jaw received the Victoria 
Cross for bravery in the Normandy campaign of 1944. 
 
Two recipients were members of the North-West Mounted 
Police who joined British military units directly from their 
service in Saskatchewan. Sergeant A.H.L. Richardson won the 
Victoria Cross in 1900 for actions in the Boer War; and Lance-
Corporal Michael O'Leary was awarded the Victoria Cross in 
1915. 
 
Lieutenant-Colonel Cecil Merritt was awarded the Victoria 
Cross in 1942 for actions in Dieppe; although not a recipient of 
the Saskatchewan . . . a resident of Saskatchewan, Merritt was  

awarded the Victoria Cross while a member of a Saskatchewan 
regiment. 
 
The Victoria Cross was created by Queen Victoria in 1856 to 
reward exceptional courage by members of the armed forces. It 
is the Commonwealth's highest award for valour. In 1993, the 
Government of Canada established Canadian military 
decorations for valour. The Canadian Victoria Cross is now 
Canada's highest honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also appropriate that we recognize the 
Victoria Cross recipients in a year that we are celebrating the 
90th anniversary of our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 15 — An Act to provide for the Enforcement of the 
Code of Ethical Conduct for Members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly (Anti-corruption) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move first reading of a Bill, An Act to provide for the 
Enforcement of the Code of Ethical Conduct for Members of 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly (Anti-corruption Act). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 17 — An Act respecting an Economic Strategy for 

Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill, An Act respecting an Economic Strategy for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I inadvertently 
referred to in question period, I now table answers to questions 
3 and 4. 
 
The Speaker: — 3 and 4 are tabled. 



February 20, 1995 

 
274 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to outline some of the reasons why I think this 
budget is, as the press have named it . . . the budget misses the 
mark. And I want to point out a number of ways that this budget 
has absolutely missed the mark. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is only one point that the government made 
and that's been their driving agenda through the last three years 
and that was one single facet  regardless of the cost to people, 
regardless of how many people are impacted negatively in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they were going to deliberately 
deliver more taxes into the government coffers without 
reducing any spending; in fact increasing spending and 
increasing taxes, and then say they have the courage to balance 
the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance quoted Mr. Mike Duffy 
earlier last week and made the point of saying that Mike Duffy 
had given them a great mark for the things that they had done. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there's one thing about Mike Duffy, he 
doesn't have to pay Saskatchewan taxes. No, Mr. Minister, he 
doesn't have to pay Saskatchewan taxes. Do you know who said 
it probably right? Mr. Bruce Johnstone, who said it probably is 
one of the most difficult things to do is that we have to live in 
the province of Saskatchewan and pay all the taxes. 
 
And why is there a difference between the media in 
Saskatchewan and the media across Canada? And the media 
across Canada doesn't have to pay the taxes, Mr. Minister, and 
that is the big difference between what the media in the 
province of Saskatchewan are suggesting to the people of 
Saskatchewan and what the Saskatchewan people are saying to 
us. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, they're saying it to the people 
across the way. They just don't want to do it. They don't 
understand it and they have never understood really the facets 
of business. 
 
I want to point out how this budget misses the mark. Mr. 
Mandryk says: "Budget misses the mark." 
 
 Finance Minister (and I'm quoting from the paper, Mr. 

Speaker) Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon has 
accomplished something that, to me, is a far more 
amazing feat than balancing this year's budget, putting 
together a plan to balance the 1995-96 budget or 
beginning to chip away at the debt. 

 
 (That's) Child's play, comparatively speaking. 
 
  

 Her far greater feat — at least in my mind — is she has 
become the first person who has ever made me wish I 
was an Albertan. 

 
That's what she has driven the people across Saskatchewan to 
say. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, when I was speaking in 
Rosetown just recently, I was speaking in Rosetown and I asked 
this group of people who were farmers, I asked them this 
question. I said: what would happen if we could move the 
Alberta border, take our tractors to the west side and pull that 
border 150 miles to the east? And one guy in the back said, he 
stood up and he said: 75 miles is plenty; that's as far as my farm 
is and I'm prepared to take my tractor and do that. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the attitude across the western part of this 
province in dealing with how we have to pay taxes and the 
different things that we have to do in relation to that. That is, 
Mr. Speaker, why people across the western part of this 
province say it's time we had a part of Alberta coming to us, 
because we're giving the Alberta economy a great big boost. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. And I will point that out as I 
deliver the rest of my speech here today. 
 
The Premier has said over and over and over again that $4.5 
billion is enough. That's enough money being spent on the 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. And he committed 
himself, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, to the fact that he 
would not spend more. That, Mr. Speaker, has had some 
interesting play. And I'll read what Murray Mandryk said about 
that and I think he's right on the money.  
 
 The 5.1-billion we will spend in 1995-96 is going to be 

the minimum cost of the provincial government for the 
next several years. 

 
 It's not making do with what we can afford. It hasn't 

been (done) for years. 
 
 Minus the 873 million it will cost us to service the debt 

this year, that’s almost $4.3 billion to run government 
(Mr. Speaker). 

 
 Minus the debt servicing, government in . . . 1991 — 

(and the member from Estevan ran that government) — 
cost us $4.2 billion. 

 
So it was less than what the Premier of Saskatchewan said he 
could run the government on. And now, Mr. Speaker, the 
interesting thing is in 1989 it only cost the people of 
Saskatchewan 4 billion to run the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has increased spending in 
services provided to people across the province every year since 
it got elected. Mr. Speaker, they said that they had enough in 
waste and mismanagement that they could run the government 
on 4.5. And have they done that, Mr. Speaker? The answer is 
absolutely no. And that's why people across this province are 
saying, it's maybe better that I was in Alberta or that I could be 
in Alberta. 



February 20, 1995 

 
275 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are many people across the province of 
Saskatchewan that can't move. Their businesses are located 
here, their reputation is located in Saskatchewan, their 
opportunity for service is located in Saskatchewan. And I just 
have to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are a lot of people who 
have a lot of real estate, who own a lot of real estate and could 
not afford to sell it and move to Alberta. 
 
Manufacturing plants, business opportunities that have grown 
up in the province of Saskatchewan, and that, Mr. Speaker, 
cannot be moved to Alberta. The ordinary wage-earner, he can 
go to Alberta and get a job. And they have provided jobs, job 
after job, in Alberta, in order to do that. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we have said to this Assembly 
and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan that we need 
to have a taxpayers' protection Act put together in this province 
so that we could have the government controlled by the 
taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It's my belief that that's what the people want to have  that's 
what they've asked for in my constituency  and I believe that 
the people across this province are going to recognize that that's 
an important opportunity for them to regulate and control the 
government. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of higher taxes and doing things in a 
proper fashion, I was interested in a headline in both papers, in 
the Star-Phoenix and in the Leader-Post. And that story had . . . 
it was a cover story and had . . . this is the headline: Tax-free 
Alberta crippling businesses in western Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it talks about a businessman from Swift Current and 
this, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the way it is for the majority of 
them. 
 
 George Kushner calls it the "frosting on the cake. For 

years, the owner of Robinson's Electronics had 
complained that taxes were slowly, but surely, ruining 
his business. Now he had the proof. 

 
 So early last month, Kushner loaded his van with brand 

new television sets, VCRs and "ghetto blasters" that 
customers bought over Christmas. All were covered by 
warranty and brought into his store for service when 
they failed to work properly. 

 
Now that's a good thing to do, Mr. Speaker. Buy your Christmas 
gifts and if they don't work, take them to be repaired. But what 
happened, Mr. Speaker? 
 
 The only catch was that none were actually purchased in 

his store, even though all the buyers lived in Swift 
Current. The sales had been made in Alberta, mostly in 
Medicine Hat, and arrived on Kushner's doorstep 
because he was the local authorized dealer to handle 
warranty work. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what is going on in community after 
community after community across western Saskatchewan. 
 
I was interested to note on television last week, the day before 
the budget, on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), they 
had an interview with the mayor of Maple Creek and he pointed 
out the different locations in the town of Maple Creek where 
this store is closed and that store is closed and that store is 
closed. And then they went to the manager of the co-op store 
and they said, are you suffering any? And he said, any of the 
appliances that we have that are sold in Alberta do not sell in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is a fact, Mr. Speaker, across the western part of this 
province. That happens in Eastend, that happens in Shaunavon, 
that happens in Swift Current, that happens in Gull Lake, Maple 
Creek, Leader. And you go all the way up to Meadow Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, and that's happening across the western side of this 
province. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, the people are getting more and 
more irritated. Last year, the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance spoke in Swift Current to a meeting of the chamber of 
commerce. Mr. Speaker, they said to them, they said to the 
Premier, can't you reduce it to some extent so that you save the 
people of western Saskatchewan some business opportunities? 
Can't you do just a little bit of that? 
 
And what did they say, Mr. Speaker? No, we can't. We can't 
treat any community different than another; one community 
cannot be isolated, and said, you can't have this and you have to 
pay. 
 
So what did we have shortly after that? The town of 
Lloydminster got a special Bill in this Assembly; made 
precedent, Mr. Speaker, that a Bill passed in this Assembly 
would have authorization to have special levies made in 
Lloydminster. That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why the people 
in Swift Current were complaining about what they had to pay 
in taxes and reducing their opportunities in business. It's very, 
very significant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know how significant it is? It's estimated by the Medicine 
Hat Chamber of Commerce that their city does $550 million 
worth of business annually in their city — a huge amount of 
money. It's almost 10 per cent of what the province spends; 
that's what the city of Medicine Hat does in business. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is very significant. 
 
The other thing that the chamber of commerce in Medicine Hat 
says, is that 10 per cent of the $550 million flows out of 
western Saskatchewan — $550 million, 10 per cent comes from 
western Saskatchewan; $55 million is taken out of retail sales in 
western Saskatchewan and delivered into the town of Medicine 
Hat. That's only one community, Mr. Speaker, and there's a 
whole lot more of those communities along the western side of 
the province. These people have a serious problem. They have a 
very serious problem. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
276 

You know what else it does, Mr. Speaker? The very fact that 
sales are up in Medicine Hat because of this extra volume that 
comes in means that the people there do not have to have 
discounts. They can in fact increase the price of the retail 
product, and they can increase the price to the extent of the 
sales tax to those people in the western part of the province. 
And so that, Mr. Speaker, is another factor that increases the 
cost of this tax on the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what they're doing in fact is they're building the economy in 
eastern Alberta and crippling the economy in the western part 
of the province of Saskatchewan. That is the way that the 
people of the western side of the province look at what this 
budget is doing. It is driving out business. It is not providing an 
opportunity to enhance their retail stores. It is in fact decreasing 
that opportunity. And that, Mr. Speaker, costs jobs — cost jobs, 
cost jobs, cost jobs. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why Mr. Kushner said at one time he 
had 17 people employed, and now he has seven. That's what the 
cost is to Mr. Kushner. And if there's a cost in one retail 
business like that, there's a cost across the retail suppliers and 
distributors in the western part of the province. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is why the people and the media are saying this budget 
misses the mark, misses the mark completely. 
 
Mr. Johnstone, Bruce Johnstone, had a headline here, here's a 
few more ways to cut the debt. Some advice that he gave to the 
Minister of Finance that I thought were of some interest. And 
one of the things that he says: since the deficit has been 
eliminated, a tax that generates a hundred million a year to 
reduce the deficit is by definition redundant. That, Mr. Speaker, 
is a fact. 
 
Now what could be done to eliminate some of this, this deficit? 
And if you reduce the tax and put it into place where it should 
be, is some of the costs . . . no, some of the benefits that have 
accrued in CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) from increased utility rates in power, in 
telephone, and in energy, that, Mr. Speaker, could have been 
used to offset the volume of dollars that were required to 
balance the budget this year. 
 
But you know what they did, Mr. Speaker? They had a surtax to 
eliminate the deficit, and then they went into the back pockets 
and picked them. They picked the back pockets of every farmer 
in the province of Saskatchewan for another $188 million. And 
there is a line in the budget that says: other and sundry. Mr. 
Speaker, they picked the pockets of every farmer in the 
province of Saskatchewan to $188 million, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, is a fact. And the people of the province don't like that. 
They don't like that. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, not only did they take away their 
contracts, not only did they take away their contracts, but now 
they picked their pockets for another $188 million. And do you 
know what else? By doing that, they worked out an agreement 
so the federal government could pick their pocket as well. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is why the people from across this province  

are saying to you and to all of your MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly): we need to have some of that money 
come back to us. 
 
You know what you're doing now? Oh, yes, the Minister of 
Finance said today, we gave back a whole bunch of this money. 
Yes, you did, in a new program, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker. 
And do you know what the people are telling me? They're 
telling me over and over again that they don't trust this 
government, so why should they get in on a new program? 
Because a year down the road, they'll take that away from them 
too. If they have set the precedent for doing it once, and then 
doing it the second time, and then allowing the federal 
government to come along for the third time, are they going to 
respect the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Agriculture 
who will continually pick their back pockets until there's 
nothing left for them to buy? 
 
And are the people in the western part of the province satisfied 
with that? No, Mr. Speaker, they're not. 
 
You know what? That's not the only place that, in taxes, they're 
not the only place that they pick the pockets of Saskatchewan 
people. They pick the pockets on levies. Now that, Mr. Speaker, 
is an interesting thing. If you were a bonded livestock dealer 
five years ago, you could get a bond for five years for $50. Do 
you know what it costs today? Two hundred dollars. 
 
So you got . . . Sask Wheat Pool is a bonded dealer. It doesn't 
cost Sask Wheat Pool much to have a $200 fee for buying 
livestock. But the ordinary, average guy out in the country who 
is a bonded livestock dealer — and there are lots of them 
because of the new program that we brought in that deals with 
feeder associations; each one of them uses bonded livestock 
dealers — each one of them, Mr. Speaker, must pay that 
additional amount of money. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we 
have across the province in place after place after place. 
 
You go and ask what did this cost last year? And the price is up 
this year. The levies across this province have increased. It 
doesn't matter whether you're talking about registering your 
firearms. It doesn't matter whether you're going to get your 
firearms acquisitions certificate. It doesn't matter whether you're 
getting married. It doesn't matter whether you're having a 
family. Everything has gone up. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, has increased the revenues to the 
province of Saskatchewan and has irritated people across the 
board. And that's what Mr. Mandryk again says: provincial 
taxes and levies have hurt the most. 
 
 . . . the biggest problem faced by such middle-class 

families seems to be the result of taxes that have been 
dumped on them by governments — specifically, the 
provincial government. 

 
 Sure, the 10 per cent more they now pay in federal 

taxes, UIC, and CPP than they paid in 1991 doesn't 
help. But at 19.3 per cent of their total gross income  



February 20, 1995 

 
277 

 (that, Mr. Speaker, then starts to make a difference) . . . 
 
And that's talking about a middle class family who have an 
income of over $60,000. And, Mr. Speaker, how many people 
across Saskatchewan have an income of over $60,000? Not 
many, Mr. Speaker. That is only a family that has two incomes 
coming together. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why it is very significant to 
the people of Saskatchewan. If you don't have two family 
incomes, you can't afford to live in Saskatchewan. That's what's 
happening over and over again. 
 
And what he concludes his remarks — and this is before the 
budget — what he concludes his remarks by saying this: 
 
 Grossing in the mid-60 range, they're just getting by. 
 
 And if a family like this is just getting by at around 

$65,000 a year, what about those earning $45,000, 
$35,000 or $25,000? 

 
What about those young people who are on jobs — jobs like 
mechanics, storekeepers, all of those kinds of things; people 
that are clerks in retail stores in places like Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Swift Current. Do they earn $65,000 a year? No, Mr. Speaker, 
they do not. And for them the tax burden is getting very, very 
serious. And what he concludes is: 
 
 Let's hope that the NDP government has a kind thought 

for all such families . . . (on last Thursday's budget). 
 
And did they, Mr. Speaker? No they did not. They didn't at all. 
 
Another point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is a headline that 
says. "Four-year debt reduction plan not good enough." That's 
not good enough. We need a plan, Mr. Speaker, in this 
Assembly in how these people are going to curtail their 
spending and how they're going to reduce it. That's what we 
need. That's what we need to have in this Assembly and that, 
Mr. Speaker, is what these people are afraid to deliver. They're 
afraid to deliver because they don't know how to do it. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 
 
They said, in health care we'll reduce the spending. And all they 
did in health care was cause an irritation across the province of 
Saskatchewan. They caused an irritation whether it was in 
Carlyle, Saskatchewan or whether it was in Eastend, 
Saskatchewan. They caused irritation upon irritation in every 
health facility. And among the union members and the workers, 
they caused nothing but irritation across this province. Do they 
know how to do it? You bet. 
 
And that irritation, Mr. Speaker, cost an added $10 million last 
year. And it cost more money this year, that added irritation. 
And what have we got? Have we got better health care? Are the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan healthier because of 
their wellness? No, Mr. Speaker, they're not. They're not at all. 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, you go ask the people that  

are living along the U.S. (United States) border about how far 
they have to drive. 
 
And even your member from Gravelbourg has had the courage 
to tell you exactly what should be told you. And for that, for 
that, Mr. Speaker, he's got his nose stuck in the dirt from that 
party over there. They said, we've got to have an old NDPer 
come alive, come alive from the riding of Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg and he's got to take this thing and move it ahead. 
 
(1445) 
 
Because the member that is there from Gravelbourg who 
understands health care, I listened to his speech here on Friday. 
And he said, I might not be able to understand agriculture but I 
know health care. And he told you, he told you there's a 
problem. Do you know why? Do you know why? Because 
Chuck Lowen who lives south of Mankota, 30 miles south of 
Mankota, told him. He's the vice-chairman of Rolling Hills 
Health District. He told him. He's got almost 130 miles to drive 
to Gravelbourg and about 110 to drive to Swift Current. 
 
For what, Mr. Speaker? Because he's got to drive past the 
hospital in Ponteix; he's got to drive past the hospital in 
Mankota; he drives past the hospital in Kincaid; and he drives 
past the hospital in Vanguard. And to what? To get to 
Gravelbourg or to Swift Current. Four hospitals he can drive 
past, Mr. Speaker, on his way to get health services. 
 
And you know what? The town of Ponteix doesn't even have an 
ambulance, doesn't even have an ambulance. They've got just 
kind of a makeshift operation there now in order to put the 
whole thing together so they can have an opportunity for health 
care benefits that accrue there. People across this province are 
telling us exactly the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I got home this weekend, I had four 
envelopes in my mailbox, and in those four envelopes were 
about 30 names of individuals who said for the town of Cabri 
which is 40 miles away from any health service in any kind of a 
volume, either they have to go to Leader which is 60 miles 
away, or they go to Swift Current which is 40 miles away. 
Those people have no access to health care if a serious accident 
were to occur. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, an interesting thing happened in Cabri just 
one year ago. We had snow last winter, and they had a blizzard. 
And a mother was giving birth to a child. And that mother . . . 
the husband, they took her into the hospital at Cabri, and they 
phoned the highway hot line and said, should we drive? And 
there was an absolute no. The RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) said no, you can't drive. So what did they do? 
Mr. Speaker, they delivered the baby in the hospital in Cabri, 
and the mother was fine, and the child was fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's what happens all the way across this 
province. Emergencies come up, and then there has to be health 
services delivered. Whether you're 150 miles away or whether 
you're 10 miles away, you sometimes can't get to the place  



February 20, 1995 

 
278 

where it has to be done. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the way the 
people of this province have had to operate. 
 
I'll just point out one other thing. You know why this is a 
special event for me when this happens? Because in 1955, Mr. 
Speaker, my youngest sister was born in the house that I live in. 
She was born in that bedroom in the south-east corner. My 
father delivered the baby. Why? Because there was a blizzard 
on, Mr. Speaker. There was a blizzard on. And today that young 
woman has four children of her own. If anything serious would 
have come up . . . The plane didn't come. We phoned for the 
plane but he couldn't come because there was too big a blizzard. 
 
Everywhere across Saskatchewan, when the ambulance from 
Swift Current is called to go down to Mankota and it's zero 
visibility, Mr. Speaker, it's zero visibility. And that opportunity 
for that health care to . . . health care delivery service to access 
that opportunity is gone. And so maybe, Mr. Speaker, the 
opportunity to have health and safety and a good way of life. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? This is what irritates me 
the most about this. Those people did two things. Number one, 
when they moved to this country they decided that they were 
going to set up hospitals and schools. They worked hard to 
deliver health care, the kind that would give an opportunity for 
people to live in some sense of security. 
 
They decided they were going to do it and they did it. They did 
it with hard work, sweat, and all of those kinds of things. And 
what have we got today? We've got a government that says 
that's of no value. That is gone. That's history. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that kind of health care delivered at that 
time is just as pertinent and as important to the people in those 
areas today as it was then. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 
why I think that this government has far outstepped any 
obligation it has to the society that voted for it. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many people tell me that 
they aren't going to support this government again and they're 
finished voting for these people. In fact, they haven't renewed 
their memberships. And I've heard that from individuals in 
communities that have never, ever voted Liberal; that have 
never, ever voted Conservative. And in my constituency I've got 
about four or five of them and they, Mr. Speaker, have said, no, 
I'm not going to vote for these people. Why? Because they took 
my health care away. 
 
They did. And that's why you have headlines that say, "Four-
year debt reduction plan not good enough." It's not good 
enough. Why isn't it good enough? Bruce Johnstone thinks that 
probably some of the taxes collected in utility rate increases 
should have gone to offset the costs and then the government 
could have cut their spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another headline: “More spending, tax cuts 
urged.” And Mark Wyatt says: when all of this shakes down, 
government in this province is not smaller, and the future  

numbers really are based on luck. This is what people really 
want to hear. I guess they want to hear. 
 
Not only has this government gambled on video lottery 
terminals, it's gambled on the very fact that people will forget 
where they pay their taxes. One of the things that we tried to do 
this afternoon in question period was to say that the Premier's 
remarks on television yesterday were only half the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Provincial Auditor says the same thing: The 
budget not accurate picture, points out the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I want to point out a number of other things that I think are 
significant, too, Mr. Speaker. I want to go around this province 
and talk about a number of areas and investments that have 
been made in the province of Saskatchewan over the last 15 
years. And let's talk about some of them that have been made 
that would be very near and dear to the hearts of the people 
opposite. 
 
Let's talk about Sask fertilizer company. Is it a good deal? How 
much does it provide to the people of Saskatchewan in 
economic benefits and work, benefits for people all across this 
province in the gas . . . investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That production of fertilizer is probably the 
mark of excellence across North America, for not only how they 
deliver their product, but also how they manufacture it. 
 
And if you haven't had an opportunity to visit that facility, you 
should go and do it because, Mr. Speaker, that facility operates 
and sells, economically, fertilizer as far south as Florida. It sells 
urea and fertilizer. Anhydrous ammonia, it sells that across 
Saskatchewan. It sells that into United States and across 
Canada. Excellent opportunity to market thousands and 
thousands of metres of natural gas. And it does it in a way, Mr. 
Speaker, that puts people in Saskatchewan to work. It doesn't go 
down to Minnesota to be manufactured into fertilizer and then 
delivered to all over North America. No, Mr. Speaker, it's done 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's just go down the road a ways and see another facility. Let's 
talk about . . . one that comes to mind is Millar Western in 
Meadow Lake. And the member from Meadow Lake recently 
stood in this House and he said, Meadow Lake has become the 
forest capital of Canada. And that's a compliment, Mr. Speaker. 
That's a compliment coming from people from Ontario, people 
from New Brunswick, who have trees and always have had 
trees. But why would a prairie town get to be the capital of the 
forestry industry in Canada? Why, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Because one person . . . Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you that there are 
people across Canada that don't even think there's a tree in 
Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is evident all the way 
across Canada. They think this is bald prairie, Mr. Speaker, and 
yet we have the forest capital of Canada in Saskatchewan. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is unique, very unique. And why do they get 
it? Did the member from Meadow Lake or his party have any 
reason to compliment the former government for any of the 
things they did in building that plant — totally, Mr. Speaker,  



February 20, 1995 

 
279 

totally environmentally friendly. Totally, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
example of how to do business in North America. And many 
people across the world should take some lessons from how 
they did it up there. 
 
But did they give the former administration any credit for that? 
No, Mr. Speaker. They just say it's a good thing to do, it's a 
good thing to do. And now they're trying to take the credit 
themselves. 
 
Let's go across the province to another facility. Let's talk about 
the P.A. pulp mill. Was it a good thing to do? It was 
hemorrhaging money out of this province, something like 
$90,000 a day. And what happened, Mr. Speaker? We sold it. 
And I can recall standing on that side of the House and hearing 
all the verbiage about how terrible that was. And then we built a 
paper plant alongside, to balance off the use of all of the 
material that was harvested in the forests in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what happened? We have two plants there instead of one, 
operating about at a thousand people on a daily basis. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is very significant, very significant for job creation in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Then we got another thing that these people scorned so many 
times in reviewing how we should do things when we were 
government. We were told that the oil patch were the 
slipperiest, foulest people in the history of the world doing 
business, and you couldn't do business with any of them. That's 
what we were told over and over and over again. They were the 
. . . they misused people, they drove business out of the 
province. 
 
The oil patch, Mr. Speaker, today is booming. And I just saw a 
headline that said, from the Minister of Energy, who said that 
this is great; we finally broke a record that was set in the middle 
1980s. We broke a record, Mr. Speaker, and these dirty oil men 
did it to us. We broke a record. 
 
And how did they do it? They did it by paying over $200 
million into the provincial coffers for land sales. That's how 
they did it — using something very similar to the oil royalty 
holidays that we had in place. Very similar, almost to the . . . 
one or two commas difference, that's the only difference 
between their royalty holiday and the one we had. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is the reason why there's $200 million extra in the 
budget, in the revenue from last year. That's the reason. 
 
People said they could do it, and they can do it if you allow 
them an opportunity. But who did they use as an example? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they used the former administration's 
example of how to do it in the oil patch. 
 
So now what have we got left? Well how is business handling it 
with turbines in Saskatoon? How is that going? Does anybody 
talk about that? That's a good business. In fact the Japanese said 
that the people in Saskatchewan have a higher work ethic than 
the Japanese do. That, Mr. Speaker, is why they wanted to build  

in Saskatchewan. 
 
And some people say that the turnaround in the history of 
Saskatchewan's economy is due to these people managing 
different. Some people say it's because of luck. But, Mr. 
Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it's not luck when you build an 
opportunity for yourself. It's not luck when you build an 
opportunity to develop your resources. It's not luck; it's 
planning. It's good and healthy, sound management planning. 
 
You know what the problem is on the other side, Mr. Speaker? 
These people, many of them, have never made an investment 
beyond their home. They have never made an investment where 
they take a dollar and put it into an investment and then expect 
to earn $1.35 or a $1.40 out of that dollar investment, and then 
return not only a labour opportunity to the province of 
Saskatchewan but an added benefit so that they can live and 
exist in the province of Saskatchewan and pay taxes. 
 
(1500) 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what many of these people have not ever 
had an opportunity to do. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why they 
have a very narrow perspective of opportunities like Saskferco; 
why they have a negative attitude towards the pulp mill. That's 
why they had a negative attitude towards Millar Western. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, you know what these people all have to 
do? They have to hoard things. Well, Mr. Speaker, they hoarded 
things in the '70s. What did they do? They said, well we can run 
potash better than anybody else, and that, Mr. Speaker, was a 
fallacy just like the pulp mill. It was a fallacy. And what do they 
do, Mr. Speaker? Over and over again they said potash, we can 
do it better; potash, we can do it better. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what do I see headline after headline 
saying? Potash Corporation making money. Who is it making 
money for, Mr. Speaker? It is making . . . paying royalties to the 
province of Saskatchewan. It is making money paying 
shareholders in the province of Saskatchewan, all over the 
province of Saskatchewan. And we have a company that was 
formerly named Saskoil; today it is called Wascana Energy. Mr. 
Speaker, the criticism heaped upon the government of the day 
that said that we could privatize that business and have it earn 
dollars for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, that single resource . . . oil and natural gas 
resource company is one of the largest in Canada. It is one of 
the strongest companies in Canada. Why, Mr. Speaker? It is one 
of the strongest companies in Canada in the resource sector 
because the people of the province of Saskatchewan know how 
to manage oil. They know how to run an oil business, and they 
understand not only how to run it; they know what the oil 
business is all about. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan are proud to be shareholders, 
proud to be shareholders and pay taxes on dividends that return 
on shares. 
 
So today, what do we have? We have taxes being collected on  



February 20, 1995 

 
280 

earnings by shareholders. We have taxes collected on royalties 
in the province of Saskatchewan because our natural gas and 
our oil is being used where, Mr. Speaker? Where? It's being 
used in a refinery. 
 
I heard the other day that the co-op refinery is probably going to 
earn one of the highest dollar returns it has ever earned in its 
history. And, Mr. Speaker, I doubt very seriously that that 
would have ever happened had not there been a refinery or an 
upgrader built alongside of it. I doubt whether that would have 
ever been there. 
 
And so why do we have a hundred thousand barrels of oil 
coming out of mainly western part of Saskatchewan into Regina 
here? A hundred thousand barrels a day, delivered to the 
upgrader so that the refinery can use it after it comes out of the 
upgrader so that we can, number one, Mr. Speaker, not have to 
import the oil that we use in the province of Saskatchewan from 
Alberta, which we did traditionally prior to 1980. We don't have 
to pay royalties to Alberta so that they can deal with their 
budget. We don't have to pay taxes into Alberta so that the 
people who have the freehold can pay taxes in Alberta for the 
oil that is generated there. 
 
The natural gas that is used in the upgrader and in the refinery is 
pumped from western Saskatchewan. It's used in western 
Saskatchewan because for the first time we can use our own oil 
resources. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? What I find most 
interesting is all of these people think that it was luck that gave 
them an opportunity to balance this budget. And I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, and to the members of this Assembly, it was not 
luck. It was financial planning and looking for an opportunity to 
deliver a way that we could get the benefit of using our natural 
resources and doing it here; providing jobs here, providing an 
opportunity for work and providing an opportunity for 
investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over and over again this is the kind of the thing 
that wasn't luck. It wasn't luck at all. It was in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
an opportunity for investment the like of which Saskatchewan 
has never seen in its history. And that is the reason. And I could 
even go on and talk about Cameco and how they provide to the 
people of Saskatchewan an economic opportunity. All the way 
across Saskatchewan we have had these kinds of opportunities 
to build and to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's one other point I want to make . . . well 
there's two I guess. One is that there was a tax reduction. There 
was a tax reduction in two places. Well there's more but there's 
two places that are going to impact in economic development in 
some way, shape, or form. And I want to talk about them a bit. 
 
First one is that airplane fuel is going to have less tax. And I 
thought it was rather interesting that one of the comments on 
the street said, you know maybe I can fly to Moose Jaw from 
Regina and see if I can get some more business down there and 
see whether it would help me. This whole saving on fuel, fuel 
tax for aircraft, I thought . . . I almost laughed when the 
Minister of Finance thought it was important enough to bring  

up in this Assembly. I think that that, Mr. Speaker, is the kind 
of attitude that these people have. 
 
Who pays? Who pays now? Let's talk about balance? Who 
pays? The people that live here pay the tax. We have the 
syndrome of Mike Duffy or Bruce Johnstone. Mike Duffy can 
talk about how good it is in Saskatchewan but he doesn't have 
to pay tax here. Bruce Johnstone lives here and understands 
what's going on. He pays the tax. Mike Duffy would likely say 
that aviation fuel taxes is the wrong things because you know 
what? His cost of his airplane ticket is going to go down, so he 
can fly into Saskatchewan. That's what's likely going to happen. 
But Bruce Johnstone, he's got to offset that in some other tax in 
utilities that he has to pay. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 
what we have. We haven't got a balance. These people don't 
understand what they're doing. 
 
The other thing that I thought was of significance . . . this is 
really interesting. I live in a community that has some 
manufacturing. And in that community we have Spar. We have 
REM Manufacturing. We have the UFR. We have a number of 
other manufacturing plants. We have a glass manufacturing 
plant. We have a plastics manufacturing plant in Swift Current. 
All of these people, Mr. Speaker, paid 9 per cent tax, paid 9 per 
cent PST (provincial sales tax) sales tax on their equipment 
when they put it in. That's a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now all of a sudden we have tax relief, 9 per cent, for those 
people who are going to build for infrastructure and 
manufacturing and processing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They will get a rebate of 9 per cent. So now you have a 
competitive advantage, given through taxation, to my 
competitor in the market. 
 
And what's that going to do, Mr. Speaker? It's going to pit 
neighbour against neighbour in saying: look, he got a 9 per cent 
cut in his sales tax; it cost him a million dollars to build that 
facility, and he's going to get 9 per cent of that back. And the 
guy that built it last year is going to have to pay it. And for that, 
Madam Finance Minister, that, we have to thank you? 
 
I'm not sure what they're trying to do. Are they trying to 
harmonize and in a very selective way try to harmonize? 
Because that's what they did with Sears. Now Sears is a major 
company that came into Regina; that's what they did with Sears. 
We'll give them a break on 9 per cent; we'll be selective. 
 
So we have Lloydminster who doesn't have to pay the tax of 9 
per cent sales tax. We have different, isolated islands in the 
province of Saskatchewan that don't have to pay sales tax 
because they're developing marketing for resource development 
or processing. They don't have to pay tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a person comes in and builds a new resource 
manufacturing facility in the province of Saskatchewan. He'll 
get a 9 per cent cut. If he builds one for the meat-packing 
business, he'll probably get a 9 per cent cut. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all of those abattoirs in my constituency will  



February 20, 1995 

 
281 

have to pay the 9 per cent. And because they've paid the 9 per 
cent, they will have to ask their purchasers or their consumers, 
they will have to ask those people, for that amount of money to 
offset that 9 per cent that they had to pay for the increased cost 
in building their facility. The new abattoir coming in, he doesn't 
have to pay for it, Mr. Speaker. He doesn't have to pay the 9 per 
cent sales tax. 
 
So we have an island that is being developed, and all of the 
kinds of things that people are very hesitant to even suggest are 
coming to pass in fact. And these islands are being built, and 
they're tax shelters. They're tax islands in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And big airplanes coming in and landing in 
Regina or Saskatoon, they get a tax shelter. Manufacturing and 
processing building new in Saskatchewan, they get a tax shelter. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Is it to create jobs? Would it be possibly in 
the framework of their imagination to create jobs? And if it 
would be good for an isolated few, why not give it to 
everybody? Why not give it to everybody and then see them use 
the 9 per cent of the province of Saskatchewan as an 
opportunity to make an investment. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? We are at the crossroads 
in this province on processing and manufacturing. Because you 
know what? This year some time the federal government is 
going to have to make a decision on what they're going to pay 
the Crow, and where they're going to pay it, and how much is 
going to be paid. When that decision comes forward, Mr. 
Speaker, there's going to be an immense amount of 
responsibility placed on those people who will have to pay 
more freight. And then what are we going to have? We're going 
to have to look for places to process those things that were 
formerly moving by an extra cost to the freight. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be very, very serious. At 
some point in time the $300 million is going to have to be 
addressed, that these people are looking at. They're not sure that 
they know what they're doing. And at some point in time, Mr. 
Speaker, processing and manufacturing is going to have to be 
done for our agriculture products. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
why I think isolating this 9 per cent on a rebate to those people 
that are increasing their processing and manufacturing is not 
enough. Why not give it to those people who in an ongoing 
basis have developed this province over the last 75 to 100 
years? And that, Mr. Speaker, is a reason why those two things 
are very, very incidental to the value of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Those are islands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to point out another island, and that's in the gaming side. 
People in the province of Saskatchewan are going to have to 
live with islands. There's going to be an island built around 
every video lottery terminal that is on an Indian reserve. There's 
going to be an island of no tax on every casino that is built in an 
Indian reserve. 
 
And what is that going to do, Mr. Speaker? When you go there 
to gamble, you go there to buy groceries, all of those islands,  

Mr. Speaker, are going to represent a loss of tax dollars to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, because everyone will 
be able to buy in those islands, not just the people who are 
living there. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why these islands of 
protection are going to cause a serious problem for the economy 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
You've got an island in the 9 per cent sales tax given back to 
those people who are starting up processing and manufacturing 
or adding on. You've got an island built by casino development. 
You've got an island built by aviation fuel rebate in fuel tax. 
You've got islands all over this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that is being asked over and over 
again: why not make Swift Current an island? Why not make 
Maple Creek an island? Why not make Leader an island? Why 
not, Mr. Speaker? It's because those people have asked over and 
over and over again for some consideration as it relates to tax, 
and this government says no, I can't afford to do that. 
 
And over and over again the people of the province are doing as 
the headlines have suggested. They don't have a plan. They 
don't understand what they're doing. They don't . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . the Minister of Economic Development says it 
isn't right. Well take the people who wrote about you, and we'll 
point that out. 
 
(1515) 
 
"Agriculture feels used"; "GRIP surplus made a big difference," 
almost enough to make this year's and next year's surplus 
accountable for. The auditor says, "Budget not accurate 
picture." "More spending, tax cuts urged"; "Four-year debt 
reduction plan not good enough"; "Most job creation left to the 
private sector", and that's an interesting one too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 In a provincial budget that proclaims its commitment to 

job creation, the only hard evidence of new jobs are 180 
additional positions within the provincial government 
itself. 

 
Well another headline: Provincial taxes and levies have hurt the 
most. Here's a few ways to cut the debt. Medicine Hat mall 
targets Saskatchewan shoppers. "Budget misses the mark." All 
over the place, Mr. Speaker, we are finding people who have a 
great deal of difficulty understanding why this minister would 
do what she did. 
 
You know, and another thing that concerns me, she said we're 
going to take one-third and spend it on new projects. We're 
going to take one-third and make jobs. We're going to take one-
third and pay down the debt. And when the people of 
Saskatchewan heard that there could have been a surplus last 
year, Mr. Speaker, they told me over and over again, why 
doesn't the Premier of the province pay down the debt? Pay 
down the mortgage. Why doesn't the Premier pay down the 
mortgage? 
 
You know what the headline in Alberta said? You know what  



February 20, 1995 

 
282 

the headline in Alberta said? The budget surpluses will be used 
to pay down the debt. What do we hear in Saskatchewan? No, 
no we can't do it that way. We can't do it that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so over and over again, I believe these people could take 
some lessons from the economic development that's taking 
place in Alberta. Over and over again, they could learn how to 
do it if they'd only get their mind or their head out of the sand 
and look around them, because there are other places that are 
substantially ahead, substantially ahead, Mr. Speaker, I say, 
than the people of the province of Saskatchewan in the 
government's eye. 
 
One of the things that I think needs to be said here and that is 
very important. Alberta is setting the track for themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. Low taxes, high employment — they are, in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, they are ahead of everybody in Canada in putting new 
jobs together. New jobs, Mr. Speaker — they're ahead of 
everybody. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, where is economic development going to take 
place in western Canada? Where is it going to take place in 
western Canada? It is not going to be in high-taxed areas. It 
won't be. Would any of these individuals invest dollars in 
Saskatchewan if they had a choice between Medicine Hat and 
Swift Current? Lloydminster on the east side of the border or 
the west side? Edmonton versus Saskatoon? Calgary versus 
Regina? Where would you put a major investment, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to taxes? Would you put it in 
Saskatchewan? No, you would not. You would not put it in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So where are companies from western Canada going to set up? 
They're going to set up in Saskatchewan? Never, never. They 
won't set up in Saskatchewan because the taxes are too high, 
Mr. Economic Development Minister. They are way too high. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why they will go to 
Alberta. They don't pay the PST on manufacturing 
development. Resource development, they don't pay taxes on 
that. And that, Mr. Speaker, well there's some people that have 
this imaginative kind of thing that floats across their eyes every 
once in a while, and says that we don't pay taxes. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, take a look at it — utilities, telephones, power, energy 
— all of those taxes, Mr. Speaker, plus highest income tax, 
highest sales tax in western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would people build processing and manufacturing 
plants in Saskatchewan? And the answer is no. Where do they 
go? They go into Alberta; increases their opportunity for 
development. When we take a look in agriculture and where 
things are going in the next 10 years, Mr. Speaker, they are 
going to go into Alberta. There is . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Oh, I'll tell you about Spar industries sometime when we 
have a time to talk behind the bar, Mr. Economic Development; 
I will tell you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Minister of Economic 
Development that there are a lot of things that the community of 
Swift Current are talking about Spar about that are very, very  

negative. And I will tell you that day that the owner of Spar was 
on national television and said he couldn't get jobs out of the 
people of Swift Current was the day that he and my office got a 
lot of phone calls that said, why? Why are there unfair labour 
practices in that job opportunity? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Step outside and say that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, I'll tell that person himself. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You go outside and say that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — No, I'll tell the person himself, Mr. Minister, 
because those people have . . . and actually the people that got 
laid off after 80 days will tell him themselves. They have told 
him in spades, Mr. Minister. 
 
That's what's happening at Spar, Mr. Minister. And when he 
said that on national television, I heard of an individual who 
called from New Brunswick and said, I want to go down there 
and find a job. And then they told him  do you know what 
they told him?  don't bother to come. Don't bother to come 
because I have enough people working here. 
 
What he said on television didn't actually fit the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh boy, you're in big trouble down there 
now. 
 
Mr. Martens: — No. No, I'm not in trouble; he is. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that manufacturing across 
this province  I just got deflected there for a bit, Mr. Speaker 
 manufacturing and processing in agriculture across this 
province is going to have to take a second seat to Alberta. It's 
going to have to because of taxation in this province. 
 
And that's why they put islands up, so that their people can get 
the 9 per cent sales tax back, to make a level playing-field. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is going to have to be done across this 
province in order to have an opportunity to compete, to 
compete with the people in the province of Alberta. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I will not be voting for this 
budget. I will not be supporting this budget at all. Because, 
number one, it doesn't address the real needs of real people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It does nothing to waylay the 
concerns that people have in gambling. It does absolutely 
nothing to waylay the concerns that people have in health care. 
It does nothing to waylay the opportunity for economic 
development in the province of Saskatchewan. And their job 
creation is dismal to say the least. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I won't be supporting this 
budget. Because every year from the time that these people 
were elected, they have said more jobs, more jobs, when in fact 
they are at a thousand less today than they were when they got 
elected. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the Statistics Canada  



February 20, 1995 

 
283 

has said. They revised their numbers and that's what they've 
come up with — a thousand less today than they had in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's why this member from the constituency of 
Morse will not be supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
very proud to talk about today a new day dawning. It's very 
interesting to hear the words from the opposition when we talk 
about a new day dawning. And the positions of their seats face 
east and it's a wonder they're not wearing sunglasses to be 
blinded by the sun that's coming up in the east. 
 
It's very interesting too, Mr. Speaker, when the member from 
Morse talked about that he would not be supporting this budget. 
Not a surprise. Not a surprise. Because it contains a word I 
think that is new to the official opposition, one that they, we, 
had not heard in this province for 10 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What's the word? 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — The word is balanced budgets. Balanced 
budgets. 
 
But we've gone beyond the balanced budget. We've gone to 
surplus budgets. Two years in a row in terms of a surplus 
budget, Mr. Speaker. This is a new day dawning. 
 
Again the province of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatchewan have risen to the difficulties that are out there 
and have become new and innovative. We are leaders. We are 
leaders in terms of financial responsibility in this province. And 
as I will outline, we are leaders in health care and education 
with this budget, and we are leaders in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of this budget. We are leading the way. The people of 
Saskatchewan are leading the way in terms of this budget. 
 
I also would like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, later on, is how the 
Liberals and the Tories and the other parties, the third party and 
the official party, talk about the Alberta plan. Well I want to 
talk about this so-called Alberta plan, its relationship to what 
we're doing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let's talk about the surplus budget and our plans for this 
surplus budget, Mr. Speaker. A surplus last year $119 million 
— Mr. Speaker, this is amazing; this year a surplus of $24 
million. And the plan continues: '96-97, $65 million surplus; 
'97-98, Mr. Speaker, 80 million surplus; '98-99, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, $120 million surplus. Truly we are on the road. Truly 
we are on the road. 
 
And when we do it, Mr. Speaker, in a balanced approach, when 
we take that surplus and try to share it around in terms of what 
we're trying to do, to deal with the problems that we've faced as 
a province, one-third of that paying down the mortgage, Mr. 
Speaker. This is very significant to be paying down the 
mortgage. 

And we say, if we continue on this path, which we will, from 
April 1, 1994 to March 31, 1999, using the surplus funds, we 
would have paid down this debt by $1.2 billion. That's not 
interest. That's principal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That's principal. 
The less interest we have to pay outside this province . . . that is 
significant. That's why we're leading in the nation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We talk about the other third, the question of a tax reduction. 
And this is where it's very interesting when you talk about the 
Liberals and the Conservatives or the Conservatives or the 
Liberals or whatever. They said we should have done more, we 
should cut more taxes. 
 
The question becomes, what is sustainable in terms of a tax? 
We have done something in terms of the reduction of the surtax 
for many people in this province that provides a benefit to 
everyone. I would like to outline some of the things that will 
take place in terms of this tax relief for individuals in this 
province. 
 
Individuals earning up to $20,000 will pay no surtax, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Single income families with two children 
earning up to $28,000 will pay no surtax, Mr. Speaker. Dual 
income families with two children earning up to $34,000 will 
pay no surtax. Two income families earning up to $65,000 will 
see their surtax reduced by more than 50 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is innovative; this is new — a tax reduction. 
 
But what would the opposition parties have us do? They talk 
about, well one suggestion was moving the Alberta border over, 
you know, a few hundred yards to include some other 
communities. Reduce the PST by 2 per cent or 3 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The question becomes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what would they cut then if you took $200 million out of the 
government revenue? What would they cut? What would they 
do? 
 
I guess the question becomes, would they make the kind of cuts 
that they refer to in Alberta under King Klein, the reduction in 
terms of health care and the closure of hospitals, a change to the 
health care system with no plan? I guess, would the Leader of 
the Opposition stand up in his community of Kindersley when 
they cut $200 million and close the hospital in Kindersley? 
Because that's the kind of things he would have to do. 
 
But at the same time we have the Liberals making promises in 
tax cuts that add up to $350 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
where would they cut? Where would they cut? 
 
An Hon. Member: — And he says they've just begun. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — They've just begun. Yes, they've just begun. 
 
And they also look to Alberta as the economic model in terms 
of what they would do there. Now in health care, would the 
Leader of the Third Party then talk about the question of health 
care premiums, something we don't pay in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 



February 20, 1995 

 
284 

Do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what health care premiums 
are for a family of four in the province of Alberta? $1,350 per 
family. And there's no taxes in Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There's no taxes. Then what is this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What 
is this? 
 
(1530) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tax. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Exactly right. It is a tax. 
 
These are the questions that the third party and the official 
opposition have to answer in terms of how they would beat 
their targets. We have delivered a plan. We continue on the plan 
and we deliver the target to say, this is what we're going to do. 
 
In the area of social services, Mr. Speaker, we have continued 
even through these tough financial times of increasing our 
contributions to those people least able to survive in terms of 
the present day economy. We have not done our budget 
budgeting on the backs of the poor, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm 
proud to say that we have not done that. But the members of the 
third party and the official opposition, they talk about the 
Alberta model and how they deal with welfare there. 
 
But you know what they do in the province of Alberta, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? They have puréed it. They have fought the war 
of fiscal responsibility on the backs of the poor. And in this war 
you know what they've created? They have created welfare 
refugees, welfare refugees. Those people least able to survive 
are kicked out of the province. That's how they deal with the 
problem  a one-way ticket out of the province. 
 
I know people that have come to the community of Biggar that 
are now examples of these welfare refugees. That's how you 
deal with the problem? You simply send them away? 
 
And as our Minister of Social Services has outlined today, an 
increase in terms of the social welfare rolls in Alberta. So I 
guess then that means that the business for Greyhound is going 
to increase out of the province in light of this. I suspect that the 
province of Alberta is buying bulk tickets in terms of sending 
people out of Alberta. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not fair. 
That is not fair to do it in the . . . doing on the backs of those 
people least able to survive. 
 
But you know I hear nothing from the third party and I hear 
nothing from the official opposition on how they would deal 
with the problem  absolutely nothing  put them back to 
work you know, do these kind of things. 
 
That's exactly right, Mr. Deputy Speaker; as a government we 
are dealing with those questions. We are providing one of the 
most intensive job training programs and innovative job 
training programs in all the country. This is very important, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and we will get those people that are able to 
work. We will be able to find them sustainable jobs in the  

future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is important — that's how you deal with people on welfare 
rolls. You don't give them a one-way bus ticket. That doesn't 
solve the problem, that simply just sends it away. But that's the 
model that the third party and the official opposition hold up 
and they advocate, as they did today, moving the Alberta border 
farther over. 
 
The area of education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here again we are 
leading the nation in the area of distance education outlined in 
this budget and the commitment we have made to distance 
education, which will allow those communities to be served, 
with greater services to provide them with greater information 
in terms of providing those educational resources. We're 
leading the nation in this area. 
 
We have also tried to be very careful in terms of dealing with 
education in terms of post-secondary education and primary and 
secondary education in terms of funding cuts. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, these boards have risen to the occasion. These boards 
have, in their wisdom, continued to develop a quality education 
system and I applaud them for that. 
 
And now because we're coming out of it and we're seeing the 
new day dawning, we can say to these school boards in the next 
year coming up, that they will see an increase, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, an increase of 2 per cent to their budgets. This is very 
important in terms of the new day dawning. 
 
But what do they do in terms of the model that they talk about 
in Alberta? What are they talking about there in terms of the 
model that the third party and the official opposition like to 
hold up under King Klein  that being, Mr. Speaker, where 
fees are charged for those children attending kindergarten. But 
we don't have taxes in Alberta. There are no taxes in Alberta — 
$450 per student to attend kindergarten in the province of 
Alberta and that's not a tax? What does the Alberta government 
do in terms of the school boards and their ability for taxation? 
They take away their powers. And it all goes to the provincial 
government. 
 
So at the same time they take away the control that the school 
boards have in terms of administering what's going on in the 
school system. Well, that's an interest . . . I would like to know 
how the Saskatchewan Trustees Association would react to that. 
 
But that's the model that the third party and the official 
opposition like to hold up, and it's a very flawed model. These 
are the kind of things that are going on in this province that they 
hold up beside us. And the way they talk, this is the model that 
they're going to use. Well I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
people of this province will not stand up for that model. That is 
not the model they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to deal with the question of agriculture 
and rural life and how it relates to the budget. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, we are leading the nation in terms of what's going on 
in terms of farm income programs. We are the first province in  



February 20, 1995 

 
285 

this country to sign with the federal government under a new 
safety net program. 
 
And outlined in our budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on page 35, 
for the third party and the official opposition to see, reference 
under item 9, farm income stability and development, the 
budget from this year from last year increases for farm income 
commitment by this government of $14 million. An increase, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, an increase. 
 
And do you know what's going on in the province of Alberta, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? That right now the Minister of 
Agriculture in Alberta is approaching the farmers in Alberta to 
see if they want to get out of GRIP early. They want to get out 
of GRIP early. And he feels the farmers will say yes, that they 
want out of GRIP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give him McPherson's plan. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Well I don't think that the Alberta 
government would care for the plan that was proposed by the 
member from Shaunavon. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it shows that we are leading the way. 
The Manitoba government is doing the same thing with their 
producers, talking about getting into this new, whole-farm 
program. They're jealous that we're in it. But they're also faced 
with another problem. As we committed 70 per cent of our 
GRIP dollars, of the provincial government GRIP dollars, to the 
new program, to create this program, Alberta and Manitoba are 
faced with no money for a new program and massive deficits 
that their farmers will have to pay for, and their taxpayers. 
 
We are on the leading edge. We are on the leading edge. In the 
question of value added industry and research, we have 
committed a further $9 million to the ag equity fund . . . or ag 
innovations fund. We will continue to fund those areas where 
we are seeing growth and potential for growth in this province. 
 
Biotech. We are the world's leaders in terms of biotech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker  leaders. This is clearly an important role for 
us to be taking. We are leaders in the area of minimum and zero 
till seeding in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bourgault and 
Flexi-Coil and many other smaller manufacturers in the 
province are showing that. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the member from Morse talked 
about companies leaving the province, Flexi-Coil has stayed 
and expanded. Bourgault has stayed and expanded, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
In an area that's dear to me, in the town of Biggar, in terms of 
value added processing, I want to talk about two things that are 
going on there that just fit into this; things that are not going 
away. Last Wednesday, we announced a venture, the opening of 
a venture that's taking place in Biggar: the largest greenhouse in 
Saskatchewan, which will provide materials for the greenhouses 
in Saskatchewan and western Canada. This is phase 1, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a program that was done in 
partnership. It was done in partnership by the community who 
raised $350,000 to invest. It is done by 13 of the major 
greenhouse owners in the province of Saskatchewan as 
partners, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is done also with the 
contribution by the ag equity fund, as they see this as a potential 
to invest in it also. This is clearly on the leading edge, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And this is phase 1. 
 
Phase 2, hopefully next year, will be the construction of the lab. 
Phase 3 will mean an additional construction of the greenhouse 
and expansion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this will employ in the community of 
Biggar seven full-time people. And the spin-offs will continue, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the community did it, the community 
did it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other one is Prairie Malt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Prairie Malt 
has a long history since it was this government in the '70s that 
was involved in attracting a malting company to the community 
of Biggar. The Prairie Malt has continued to survive, and under 
the partnership of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Schreyer Malt 
of Shebowgan, Wisconsin, continues to expand. They've 
entered into a major expansion program by which they will 
increase their exports by 25 per cent. That was phase 1. 
 
Phase 2 is now under construction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. More 
expansion, more good news. This same company has signed a 
joint venture with the Chinese to provide malting barley to 
them. Looking at new horizons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
question of a new day dawning; again on the leading edge. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at the plan that we have 
outlined and the direction that we plan to be going and the 
future that we're seeing that is bright for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and then I look to the plan or the non-plan that's 
being offered by the official opposition and members of the 
third party, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am confident to know where 
the people of Saskatchewan will stand in support in terms of a 
budget like this. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with that kind of support that we 
know that we are on the right course, because it has been the 
people of Saskatchewan that have supported us through the 
decisions that we've done, and they're now seeing that new day 
dawning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride then that I 
will say that I will be supporting this budget, and am very 
pleased to be part of this history-making in terms of providing 
the surplus budget to the people of Saskatchewan. And I think 
the people of Saskatchewan will believe the same thing. Thank 
you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Indeed it is a new day dawning for Saskatchewan. Bright days  



February 20, 1995 

 
286 

ahead, no doubt about it. 
 
I just want to take some time to look back into '91. Flashback 
into October, November of '91, just how things were just three 
short years ago, three and a half short years ago. 
 
Before I entered into the political field, as many of my other 
colleagues, we all had a wish list, some of the things that we 
wanted to do, some of the things we wanted to accomplish. But 
once we took power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we soon realized 
how bad the financial position was in this province. The picture 
certainly was bleak. 
 
In fact it was so bad that back in October, November of '91 
when myself and yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or anybody else 
could have borrowed money at 8 or 10 per cent, 8 or 9 per cent, 
the province was having a hard time borrowing money for day-
to-day operations and was getting offers at 13 per cent. That's 
what a risk Saskatchewan was at that time. 
 
This province couldn't borrow any money and it was on the 
brink of disaster, on the brink of default. It was at that time we 
realized as social democrats and as politicians that that wish list 
is going to have to be put on hold for a little while. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to accomplish that, yes, we had to add to 
the taxes, and we had to reduce some of the programs that we 
had in this province. But there's no politician that wants to do 
that. I mean your popularity definitely goes down. Nobody 
wants to increase taxes and reduce programs, but it was out of a 
matter of necessity. It was out of a matter of need. 
 
I wonder why that happened, why we had to do those things, 
why the province was in such terrible shape? Well think back to 
the '80s and the Tories’ years. They never balanced a budget; in 
fact they added to the debt of this province $1 billion for every 
year they were in power. Lots of mismanagement, there's no 
doubt about it. 
 
But today, just three and a half years after October '91, as I go 
on the doorstep there's a new line of questioning. There's a new 
line of questioning. Instead of them asking me why we raise 
taxes or cut programs, they have suggestions. They have 
suggestions on which taxes we could cut or which programs we 
could add or enhance. And there's only one reason that they're 
asking those questions. And that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because we have announced the first balanced budget in this 
province in 13 years. 
 
How did we do that? How did we do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Through sound financial plans, no doubt about it. But one thing 
that accomplished this was the people of Saskatchewan. We set 
the targets and put a plan together, and the people followed 
through. 
 
And I just want to explain what kind of people we do have here 
in Saskatchewan. I want to talk about my neighbour. His name 
is Jim Rose. He has some cattle, and of course I don't on my 
farm. And last summer he asked if he could cut some hay on 

 my farm, and I told him, go ahead. While he was out there 
cutting hay, I was out there doing summer fallow one Saturday 
afternoon. And being overworked and lots of time to 
contemplate life, I was just feeling a little down on myself and 
wondering why I had to be out there. I was sitting in an air-
conditioned cab, climate-controlled, and I looked at Jim out in 
the creek, and he had an old mower and a old tractor, no cab. 
And he was out there, and he was having fun. And I thought, 
boy, I sure got a lot to complain about. 
 
I talked to him just two weeks ago. He talked to me about two 
years ago when they had Heritage Days up in Leslie, how he 
seeded with his team of horses and how he was running the 
binder and they used a threshing machine. Brought back a lot of 
memories for him. 
 
He also told me that he wakes up every morning, it takes him 
three hours to do his chores. He's calving out 34 cows this year. 
Every morning he hitches up his horses, he cuts wood, and 
every weekend he goes to old-time dancing. But the point here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Jim is 77 years old. It's quite amazing 
for someone of that age, a terrific amount of strength and 
stamina Jim has. 
 
But it's people like him, it's people like him, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that contribute to Saskatchewan — strong, ambitious 
Saskatchewan people. And that's how and why Saskatchewan 
can and will rebuild. Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thanks 
to the people of this province. 
 
I also want to make a comment that the member from Wilkie 
made last week on his debate on the throne speech. And he 
talked about how these debates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are a 
waste of time. Well I think it's to the contrary. That member 
was sitting here for 10 years, could have said that when they 
were in government for 10 years; never had once said that in the 
'80s, now he's saying it's a waste of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not agree. I agree this is a very 
important part of this institution. The people of this province 
deserve to hear our debates, deserve to hear our plans, our 
future plans, what we plan to do in Saskatchewan. And I know 
there's a lot of interested viewers out there watching TV right 
now. In fact I'd like to pay tribute to a couple of my neighbours 
from Bankend, who moved to the city — that's John and 
Doreen Kuyak — who I know are watching right now with 
great interest. And I'd just like to say hi and take care out there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget must be difficult for the 
members of the opposition and the members of the third party 
— the Liberals and the Tories. It must be awful difficult for 
them because I know full well  some members have spoke 
already  that they're going to vote no on this budget. They're 
going to stand up in their place and vote no. But what are they 
going to vote no to? 
 
They're going to vote no to jobs; new agriculture programs, 
agri-food innovation fund; they're going to vote no to new 
health care initiatives; they're going to vote no to a balanced  



February 20, 1995 

 
287 

budget. They're also going to vote no to reduced taxes. It must 
be very difficult for those members sitting there across the way. 
 
And we talk about jobs, and in the last two years we have 
something like 7,000 more jobs here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. One of the new initiatives is through JobStart. 
It's going to help people that don't necessarily have post-
secondary education, don't have a job. It'll help get them off 
social assistance and find them a job. A new program, it shows 
some compassion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There's also new ag programs. One, as I mentioned before, is 
the new agri-food innovation fund which is going to put money 
into research and diversification. It's very important, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we do this in the province of 
Saskatchewan, especially now at a time when the federal 
Liberals are going to change the method of payment. We know 
that's going to happen. We know that the federal Tories cut the 
method of payment for a number of years, and now the federal 
Liberals are going to eliminate this method of payment. 
 
And regardless of how it's paid, the more important part is 
going to be Saskatchewan's entitlement. And you're going to see 
those dollars reduced drastically, thanks to the federal Liberals. 
Former Tory cut-backs and now Liberal cut-backs  and yet 
the opposition sits quite silently on these two issues. I think I 
know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it's going to be very 
difficult for Saskatchewan farmers, and that's why this new 
agri-food innovation fund is going to be so important to help 
farmers diversify through research. 
 
I want to take a minute to talk about GRIP — GRIP versus 
Alberta and Manitoba. There's no doubt in my mind, and 
everybody knows that in 1992-93 that our neighbouring 
provinces . . . or the neighbouring farmers in the neighbouring 
provinces got more money than Saskatchewan farmers. There's 
no doubt about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But look at today. Look at what's happening today. Take 
Alberta, for example. There's a large deficit in that program, 
and the program was set up that it had to be actuarially sound or 
self-funded. That would mean any deficit in this program had to 
be paid back by producer premiums. Today the premiums in 
Alberta are between 10 and $12 an acre. They're probably going 
to rise more. They would have rose last year, but according to 
the formula, they only could rise so much per year. 
 
Plus there's no pay-out there this year at all. And you take that 
10 to $12 an acre premium, on a 1,000 acre farm, that's $12,000 
per year to those Alberta farmers. 
 
Recently I talked to an Alberta farmer who's complaining about 
what had happened. And I told him, now you as farmers in 
Alberta, you also have a production loan, like our farmers had 
under the Tory administration. 
 
Another thing that happened is that our specialty crop acres in 
canola and flax acres in Saskatchewan rose dramatically; in 
Manitoba and Alberta stayed quite flat. It's very important,  

looking at today's prices, Mr. Deputy Speaker — canola 
reaching $9 and flax at seven and a half dollars, specialty crop 
prices are up, our farmers taking advantage of that because they 
diversified. 
 
They do what they do well; they know how to farm here. In 
Alberta and Manitoba they didn't do that; they stayed with 
traditional crops. Now that the prices are high for specialty 
crops, canola and flax, it doesn't help Alberta and Manitoba 
farmers one little bit. 
 
Our farmers got money from the market-place. Never mind that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have technology in place on how to 
grow these crops. You just don't learn how to grow them 
overnight. They also have machinery in place. Our farmers will 
continue growing these crops in large acres. Our neighbouring 
provinces won't be able to do that till they learn how and get 
that technology and machinery in place. 
 
So just look at the difference between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. Alberta has large premiums, they've got a large 
deficit, no specialty crop in canola and flax acres, no money 
from the market-place. Yes indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 
Alberta farmers do have a production loan. 
 
There's also other new programs on the agriculture scene. And 
this new program we have, the new safety net, is a three-tiered 
process. One is the sector program, which will ensure that 
farmers will be paid if the prices drop below a certain level. 
That is, if the prices go down in the elevator, our farmers will 
be getting a cheque. There's no premium attached to this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also have the continuation of the crop insurance program. 
And in Saskatchewan you can get crop insurance at 80 per cent; 
Manitoba and Alberta is at 70 per cent maximum. 
 
We also have the farm net income stabilization account, or the 
new NISA. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a lot like the old 
western grain stabilization program. When I'm going door to 
door and farm gate and talking to farm families, they tell me 
they really would like to see something like the western grain 
stabilization program brought back. 
 
And we have something very similar to that now — very 
similar. There's only a few differences. One is that the 
premiums aren't deducted at the elevator, something that we 
wanted to achieve but couldn't through our negotiations with 
the federal government. So you have to pay the premiums on 
your own merit. 
 
But the more important part of this new NISA program is that 
it's in your own account. The very important part of being your 
own account, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that governments won't be 
able to manipulate a pay-out like they had in the past. They 
manipulated pay-outs from the federal government just for 
politics. When there was a federal election coming, you could 
see there was a payment coming from the western grain 
stabilization program, but it eventually was the demise of that  



February 20, 1995 

 
288 

program. 
 
Farmers said they wanted that program back. They've got a very 
similar program now. But the more important thing is it's in 
their own account and they get a chance to access those funds if 
need be. If they don't need those funds it stays there and they 
can use it for their retirement, or it can help them transfer land 
to their children because they won't have to use all their capital 
assets to retire on. 
 
I want to talk about one of my neighbours, Mr. Speaker, and it 
relates to agriculture and it relates to this program. The point 
being that this neighbour of mine, he's married to my cousin, 
he's a Liberal. He never would vote New Democrat. And when 
he talked to me about '92 GRIP and what had happened in the 
new programs, I sat down with Pete and I explained how the 
new farm program worked, what's happening in Alberta and 
Manitoba, and the vision we have for our Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
(1600) 
 
I can tell you, after talking to him for 20 or 30 minutes, he was 
glad that I got the message across to him. He said, after all, 
that's what we put you there — to do a good job. I believe 
you're doing a good job. And at the end of those comments he 
also said, I just pray that the New Democrats get back into 
power to continue this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kluz: — The most important thing is this was a Liberal 
talking to me, Mr. Speaker, telling me that I hope you guys get 
back into power. And, Mr. Speaker, that was before we 
balanced the budget. So imagine what he's thinking now. 
 
We can talk about the GRIP surplus for a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
Three-quarters of this government portion — of course the 
farmer portion went back to the farmers — three-quarters of the 
provincial government portion is going back into new 
programs, going back into new programs. It's programs that 
Alberta and Manitoba can't participate in. 
 
And they can't participate in them because they got a big deficit 
in the old GRIP program. And if you listen to the media, you 
read the papers, the farmers in Manitoba and Alberta and 
Quebec and Ontario are upset with Saskatchewan because they 
have a new farm program and they can't participate in it. 
 
Well if the other farmers are mad and would like to participate 
in our program, it tells you one thing, Mr. Speaker; they like our 
program and they would like to belong to it but they can't 
because they've got a big deficit in their pool. 
 
So with this money going back, this three-quarters of the 
provincial money, it's going in to develop some of these new 
programs. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government is only giving about a third of that money back to 
farmers, the rest they're clawing back. Sitting here in the last  

few days in question period, I haven't heard the Liberals ask 
that once because they know, they know that Saskatchewan 
gave a good chunk of that GRIP surplus back to ag programs, 
and they know the federal Liberals clawed most of it back. 
 
You take the provincial share that went back to general revenue, 
is about $50 million, Mr. Speaker. I know it sounds like a lot of 
money but when you think about it, and 60 million acres in 
Saskatchewan, that's less than a dollar per acre. That's less than 
a dollar per acre back to farmers if we would have put all the 
money back. But instead, some of that money went to enhance 
some of the programs that exist elsewhere in society. And those 
programs too, will benefit farm families. 
 
One of those programs, Mr. Speaker, that comes to mind is 
health care, new health care initiatives. We're talking about 
added money going into health care, and it's going to create 460 
new jobs — 460 jobs for nurses, home care aides, therapists, 
and counsellors. 
 
But the more important thing — never mind jobs for people — 
but it's added health care for society, added health care for 
people. 
 
Yesterday morning, at 9 o'clock in the morning I got a phone 
call. I was still in bed sleeping in, Mr. Speaker. And the call 
was . . . the first thing she said to me was, it certainly is a nice 
day out, isn't it? And I had to tell her the fact that I was relaxing 
a bit. 
 
But none the less, we as politicians are accessible, regardless if 
they phone us in our homes or wherever we are phoned. We 
don't mind the phone calls because we really believe that people 
are important. 
 
So in talking to this lady, she started telling me about home 
care. She said that her father needed 24-hour care. And she had 
no trouble sitting there with him because after all it was her 
father and he devoted a lot of his life towards her. So she had 
no trouble sitting there with him. She had access to two 12-hour 
shifts of home care. For the rest of the time and weekends, she 
had to go sit with her father. She had asked if it would be at all 
possible to get some more 12-hour shifts during the day because 
her and her husband were busy calving. They were busy 
showing cattle. She said, I would be even willing to pay if I 
could access some of this, but it would certainly help us out. 
And I had told her at that time, a new important initiative that 
we were recently embarking on had some more money for home 
care. In fact my staff and I are working in trying to help this 
lady right now access more of this home care. 
 
That's where some of these new initiatives — this 460 new jobs 
— is going to take place. It's going to help people like Lydia 
and her dad to access more home care. It's going to help him 
stay in his own home. Yes, there's a cost saving to society by 
staying in your own home, but this gentleman wants to stay 
there. That's some of these new initiatives. 
 
And if some of that money from that GRIP surplus, the  



February 20, 1995 

 
289 

government portion, the provincial portion, had to go into new 
programs or help start these new programs, I have no problem 
with that, Mr. Speaker, because it helps all of society out. It 
helps farm families. And it's certainly helping somebody like 
Lydia and her father out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this balanced budget, there also comes with it 
a surplus, something I'm sure the officials in the Finance 
department had trouble wrestling with because they probably 
didn't even know what a surplus budget was after all these 
deficits that were racked up. But with this surplus, we're going 
to be allocating some funds back into society. Of course one-
third, roughly one-third is going to go to debt retirement; one-
third is going to go to new initiatives, new programs or 
enhancing programs; and the other third is going to go into tax 
reduction. 
 
When you talk about reduced taxes, 80 per cent of those tax 
reductions in this budget year are going for personal taxes — 
personal tax reduction in the form of the surtax deficit 
reduction. There's not a lot of time explaining this because it's 
the one reduction we have on the personal side. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there's a lot of dollars involved because it involves all 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There's another 20 per cent reduction going for business — very 
important reduction as well, Mr. Speaker. Some of these 
reductions are, for example, the fuel tax for airlines. It's going 
to help create jobs even if we cut that fuel tax in half, because 
now we're talking about new companies coming into 
Saskatchewan; about more planes fuelling up in Saskatchewan. 
The industry is saying that it's going to add about 500 to $600 
million in tax revenue for the province because of added 
activity. Even though we reduced the taxes, there will be more 
money coming in and more jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've also introduced a 9 per cent investment tax on machinery 
purchases, Mr. Speaker, for manufacturing and processing 
firms. We've also reduced their business tax from 17 to 10 per 
cent, and are proud to say it's the lowest tax west of Quebec. 
Mr. Speaker, it's lower than Alberta. 
 
And what's this doing for jobs? It's attracting people into this 
province. I talked to a Saskatoon businessman this weekend 
who said that he was contemplating moving to Alberta. Not no 
more. He's staying here. He's talked to some of his 
acquaintances in Alberta, are contemplating moving into 
Saskatchewan because it's a good place to do business and it's 
going to create jobs; it's going to get people working. 
 
Since I mentioned Alberta quite a bit today, Mr. Speaker, it's 
because Alberta has been in the news a lot about the Alberta 
model versus the Saskatchewan model — Alberta with no PST, 
less fuel tax. That may be the case. That may be the case. There 
are some other things that people don't realize, and one is health 
care premiums. 
 
My brother and his family just moved back from Alberta. They 
were paying about $1,350 a year in health care premiums for  

their family. If that isn't a tax, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what 
is. Their vehicle insurance was outrageous compared to 
Saskatchewan. And with Saskatchewan's new plan for vehicle 
insurance, we have virtually guaranteed no increases for the 
next three years. And do you know what's happening in 
Alberta? Insurance rates are going up and up. Utility rates went 
up twice as fast as Saskatchewan's did. 
 
What about tuition for kindergarten children? If you live in 
Calgary, it costs you $700 for your child to go to kindergarten. 
But the worst thing this has done to that society, regardless if 
you believe in funding kindergarten or not, but the worst thing 
it has done in Calgary is developed a two-tiered system. 
Approximately one-third of those kindergarten children aren't 
going to be going to kindergarten. Very, very unfair, Mr. 
Speaker, and what it's doing is developing a two-tiered system. I 
guess that's the Alberta model. 
 
So there's lots of different parallels between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. And if you take everything into consideration, 
it's less expensive to live here in Saskatchewan than it is in 
Alberta. And we're done our cuts, Mr. Speaker. In fact we're 
reducing taxes, we're adding new programs, where Alberta is 
going the other way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about oil and our oil royalty 
structure for a minute. When we were first elected in October of 
'91, a friend I went to school with was a part owner for 
Williston Wildcatters. And I can tell you, he was just wild, he 
was livid that we were elected. I asked him, why are you so 
excited? He said, the New Democrats are going to kill the oil 
industry. Those were his very words. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of sitting down 
with him last fall and having a lengthy discussion. And you 
know what he told me? He said that the old structure that he 
thought was so good, that was designed by the former premier, 
the member from Estevan, the old program that was designed, 
all it did was cater to the large companies, the large companies 
from Calgary and the large companies from Edmonton, and it 
was choking out the Saskatchewan producers. It was choking 
them out. It was good for the big people from Alberta, and the 
companies in Saskatchewan were going broke. 
 
All we did, Mr. Speaker, was sit down with Saskatchewan 
companies. And through negotiations with the former minister 
of Energy and Mines, the member from The Battlefords, who 
did a lot of work, through him and his department and through 
caucus negotiating with these small Saskatchewan companies, 
all we told them was we believe that the royalties and some of 
these resources belong to the people of Saskatchewan. We're 
social democrats; that's what we believe, and we believe that 
some of this money has to stay with the citizens of the province. 
 
We told them how much money we need, and we asked them 
what do they need. We sat down and negotiated, Mr. Speaker. 
We come up with a new royalties structure designed for the 
companies of Saskatchewan, and I can tell you they went to  



February 20, 1995 

 
290 

work. 
 
And after that discussion, this friend I went to school with — I 
can tell you he wasn't a New Democrat, he was a Tory; he was 
friends with the member from Estevan; in fact, they golfed 
together — today he's saying, I just couldn't believe; I couldn't 
see in front of my eyes the system that they had designed. 
 
In fact he said, thanks for designing that new program; pass 
thanks on to the Minister of Energy and Mines, and keep 
working and stay elected because you guys are doing a good 
job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a short, brief history here on my comments 
that I've made for the last few minutes. And before I close, 
remember some of the things I talked about. 
 
You know, the members opposite, there's no doubt in my mind 
they're going to vote no against this. They're going to vote no. 
Like I said before, they're going to vote no to a balanced budget 
— first one in 13 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They're going to vote for a new government initiatives. They're 
going to vote no for tax reductions. They're going to vote no to 
our four-year plan which has further initiatives and further tax 
reductions, and it's going to start paying down that massive 
debt. And it was paid down over $500 million last year alone 
just to get restructuring and good management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And before I close I can tell you I'm going to stand in my place 
and I'm going to be very proud of what this government and the 
people of Saskatchewan have accomplished in the last three and 
a half years. I'm going to be voting yes, Mr. Speaker, yes to this 
new budget; yes, to this new direction; and yes, because 
definitely a new day is dawning in Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well my first remarks ought to be to compliment the member 
from Kelvington who has served his constituents very well in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and has really analysed the current 
fiscal and political situation here in Saskatchewan and brought 
his feelings to it. And mine reflect very closely to what he said. 
And I will be saying a lot of the similar things, but I will be 
using my own examples from my own constituency. 
 
I want to follow in the direction set by the member from 
Kelvington in saying that, Mr. Speaker, we have accomplished 
our first priority, the priority that we set back in '91 when we 
first got into government. And that priority was to get the books 
in order so that we could do the things that we feel that 
government should be doing. 
 
That was not an easy task, Mr. Speaker, and I really have to 
give credit, and I think credit is due to my colleagues in the  

cabinet, my caucus colleagues, those of them who sit in cabinet 
and made the difficult decisions, went out and promoted the 
need for everybody to work together. 
 
And work together the people of Saskatchewan did, worked 
together to accomplish the monumental task of bringing down a 
deficit which was projected to be originally in '91, about 1.2 
billion, down the first year to about 800 million, and then in 
subsequent years, down to a smaller and smaller number till just 
last week we learned that we now no longer are working on a 
deficit budget but that we actually have accomplished a small 
surplus. And that is definitely a relief to all of the people in 
Saskatchewan and certainly a relief to the legislators in whom 
the people of Saskatchewan placed their faith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a new set of priorities as a result of 
having achieved that particular goal. And I want to address 
these in a minute. But I'm just reminded of a little analogy, Mr. 
Speaker, about what has to be done in order to achieve a target 
such as we've achieved. We achieved it a little sooner than we 
perhaps expected because the revenue came in, from the oil 
revenue, as the member from Kelvington has just mentioned, 
came in very well. There was additional revenue from 
agriculture and additional revenue from VLTs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this was not an accident. It was because of the new royalty 
structure that the government put into place. It was because we 
saw that there was an opportunity for farmers to look and make 
a great deal of money where money wasn't being made before, 
by diversifying. 
 
Farmers responded, have always responded in Saskatchewan, 
and responded once the negative programs were removed. And 
as a result, the tax dollar came into the Saskatchewan coffers a 
little faster than might ordinarily have been expected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you've got to have the bucket there underneath the 
drain spout when it rains. Our government showed that it was 
prepared. It had the bucket put into place so that when it did 
rain, the bucket would fill. 
 
I'm reminded, Mr. Speaker, of my grandmother who, when I 
was a little child, I remember always had a beautiful, beautiful 
garden. And this is in Saskatchewan. Whether there was a 
drought or not, she always had a good garden. And the reason 
she had a good garden is because she had a great big barrel 
underneath the drain spout. And any time it rained, it would 
collect this. And then from there she would take the water every 
morning and carry it, distribute it through her garden, and it 
flourished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that lesson can be applied to the finances of 
Saskatchewan. You know the Tories kicked holes in the 
buckets. Matter of fact, they were taking and they were dipping 
into the bucket and they were double-dipping in some cases, my 
colleague says, and spilling the water all over the place, so that 
when the drought came and the tough times came, there wasn't 
anything there. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
291 

The people of Saskatchewan are relieved that the policies have 
changed. We have some new priorities, Mr. Speaker, and those 
are the things that I want to address in my remarks today. Our 
new priorities have been outlined by the Premier. He outlined 
them yesterday in his address to the public. 
 
Our Premier mentioned that our new priorities will be: number 
one, to go after jobs and economic development for 
Saskatchewan; to continue with tax reduction is the second 
priority; health is the third priority; and go after debt reduction 
as a fourth priority. 
 
I will be dealing with each one of these, Mr. Speaker, in a 
moment or two. But before I do, I want to just go back for a 
moment. I didn't have an opportunity to rise in the throne 
speech debate and I did want to acknowledge some of the 
changes that have taken place in the time since I last spoke in 
this legislature. 
 
And the first thing that I want to acknowledge is to welcome to 
the legislature Ms. Margaret Woods, the assistant to the Clerk, 
who is new to the legislature. I wish you a good work situation 
here, Ms. Woods, and I know that you've got some good people 
to work with in the name of Greg Putz, who has been sitting 
here for a while, and our Clerk as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to congratulate the new Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Kindersley, for taking on what is a momentous 
task for him, and I'm sure that he will be challenged. And I wish 
him the best in his new ambition. 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we have some new 
cabinet ministers and ministers who have taken on some new 
duties. And I certainly want to congratulate my colleague, the 
member from Regina Centre, who has taken on the task of 
working in the area of Gaming and the Liquor Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I had the pleasure of working with the 
member from Regina Centre on the Health, Social Policy and 
Justice Committee for the last three years and she certainly 
proved that she is a very diligent and hard worker, represents 
her constituencies. And I know that her constituents will be just 
as pleased as I am that she received this appointment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the member from 
Athabasca who has been given the new position of Associate 
Minister of Economic Development. Coming from the North, 
Mr. Speaker, this is important to us, to have a Minister of 
Economic Development. The North is developing. I know that 
the member from Athabasca has the best, or if not the best, then 
certainly one of the best handles on the economic situation in 
the North and I wish him the best in his work. And I pledge him 
my cooperation in his endeavours as he works for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote, has now become the Minister of Energy and Mines.  

I know that he's looking forward to this challenge. All of Prince 
Albert and the constituents in both Northcote and Carlton 
congratulate him and wish him the best in that new job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a new seat mate as you know; the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow is now the Minister of Health. I 
know that he has worked hard as well. He knows the field of 
health. He is trusted by the workers. He is trusted by the 
administration. He is trusted by those people in the health field; 
I know he is trusted by his colleagues. This task of carrying 
through this next phase of health reform will be up to him. I 
know he's up for it, and I wish him just the best, and again I 
know that the committee that I am now chairing will continue to 
work with him closely. 
 
I want to thank the member from Hillsdale for the work that she 
had done on her job as former Health minister. She has 
certainly made history, and I hope to hear more from her in the 
House in the future when she will have an opportunity to 
summarize some of the things that have happened in health 
care. And it's my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
from Hillsdale will have an opportunity to go international and 
visit a few places on their invitation to explain how 
Saskatchewan is leading in health care and health care reform in 
Canada. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that we're all very, 
very proud of her and her representation of us. 
 
I want to extend also best wishes to the former associate 
minister of Finance who is resigning due to health reasons, who 
has resigned due to health reasons . . .no, I'm talking about the 
member from Swift Current. And I was going to congratulate 
the new associate minister of Finance who is, I think . . . I call 
him our utility person because the member from Regina 
Churchill Downs has certainly done that; he's worked in every 
field in this legislature. And anytime I know that I want to find 
where to go to get certain kind of information, I go to the 
member from Churchill Downs, and he usually is not reluctant 
to tell me where to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in mentioning these, I am 
somewhat shocked and disappointed at the requirement of 
having to even mention that the current minister of Justice had 
to resign from the cabinet. I hope it's only temporary, Mr. 
Speaker. I know the people of Saskatchewan and a lot of people 
that I've talked to even on the phone just today expressed their 
dismay. But I know that being an honourable person, he felt 
that was his only move at this point. And I guess that's all that 
needs to be said about that at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to do is go back to our priorities 
in this budget speech, in this budget debate — our priorities of 
jobs and economic development, our priority in tax reduction, 
our priorities in health, and our priorities in debt reduction. 
 
Let me talk briefly, first of all, about jobs and economic 
development. Over the past half-year, as I've gone and visited 
constituents and gone to coffee row and talked with people, I  



February 20, 1995 

 
292 

found that there was a resurgence and people were telling me, 
yes, things were getting better. One or two places I'd go and 
they told me they were expanding or they were hiring a person 
or two, and I felt that, well this was proof that we were on the 
right track. 
 
And yet when I went to the statistical bank and asked whether 
or not we were on the right track, something was rather 
perplexing. The statistics were not reflecting that. And so while 
I was feeling quite good inside, I was rather amazed that this 
wasn't being reflected. Naturally the opposition parties were 
also doing the same thing; they were looking to the statistics, 
but they weren't bothering to check with their own people back 
home. Because they were rubbing their hands with some glee 
that somehow the job numbers in Saskatchewan just weren't 
increasing — rubbing their hands with glee, looking at these 
statistics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I checked also not only with business people in 
my own constituency but I checked with my colleagues in the 
legislature. And I asked them if they were experiencing the 
same thing. And pretty well every part of Saskatchewan that my 
colleagues were representing, the same thing was happening. 
They were telling me that yes, there seemed to be a job 
increase. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, lo and behold, what happened? About two 
weeks ago we got some news. That is we got the news that 
StatsCanada was updating its statistics. They were changing the 
way that they were going to record their stats. And overnight 
Saskatchewan's employment increased by — what was it? — 
7,000 people, I believe, this revised data. That's because they 
revise it and they were no longer going to use the '86 basis but 
the '91 basis. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't expect the opposition members to 
acknowledge that this has actually happened but I do take some 
satisfaction in knowing that the people that I talked to were 
telling me the truth, in knowing that my contacts were saying 
that yes, that there was an increase in activity and now know it 
is a fact because it has been borne out by the new stats that have 
been released. 
 
(1630) 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the revised data indicates that employment 
in Saskatchewan was 450,000 in '92. This increased to 455,000 
in 1993 and then to 457,000 in 1994. And all of this time, while 
this increase was going on, the unemployment rate in 
Saskatchewan remains at the lowest in the country at around 7 
per cent. 
 
It's kind of interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that this 
employment growth of 7,000 since 1992 coincides with the 
Partnership for Renewal paper which was presented by the 
Minister of Economic Development. This paper, a well-
thought-out paper, is something that has been read by leaders 
— economic leaders, business leaders — around the province. 
They applauded it as a good plan when it came in. It's  

reassuring, Mr. Speaker, to know that the plan is working. 
 
I would sooner, Mr. Speaker, have employment increase 
steadily but slowly than increase in spurts, only to falter at some 
time. It's a false economic theory at this stage to put a lot of 
money into creating jobs, short-term jobs for the . . . just for a 
purpose of bringing up the stats on a temporary basis. We know 
that that kind of money just doesn't stay in the country any 
more. 
 
Our plan, according to the Partnership for Renewal, is to set up 
an infrastructure, to set up the conditions in such a way that the 
jobs will be made by small-business people. The record shows 
very clearly that small businesses in Saskatchewan are where 
the job creation is at, and we want to assure . . . do everything 
we can to have this continued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have before me here a piece of paper which says 
a survey shows a jump in jobs and refers to the same gain I just 
mentioned, the 7,000 jobs in three years. But it's kind of 
interesting to take a look at the graph of this, Mr. Speaker, 
because it shows that the job decline in Saskatchewan started 
about 1987. Now these things you can't turn around very 
quickly; it started in 1987 and bottomed out in '92, and are on 
the rise and have been since then. 
 
These cycles, there are things that government can do and 
should do. And one of the big factors, of course, in the case of 
the province of Saskatchewan, was that the businesses were 
afraid that the province itself might go bankrupt. And it was the 
good fiscal management of our Minister of Finance and our 
Premier and entire cabinet that really has caused businesses to 
become optimistic and decide to stay in Saskatchewan rather 
than moving out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have done a little survey, had a little survey done 
in my own city, the city of Prince Albert, about business 
openings, what kind of businesses opened, what kind of 
businesses closed, and the numbers from '92. And I found that 
in 1992 there were 51 new businesses that officially opened in 
Prince Albert and district. 
 
Prince Albert serves about a population base, a trading area, of 
about 70,000 people. Of those . . . you wouldn't expect every 
one of them to stay open, but of those businesses there were — 
of those 51 — there were five businesses that we know have 
closed. There probably are a few more but we were only able to 
identify five that closed. But let's say even double that number, 
but that's still quite the thing, to have 51 businesses open in '92 
and only five to ten close. 
 
In 1993 there was an additional 51 businesses opened, 
according to the registrations in Prince Albert, and all but nine 
remain open to this day. In 1994 there were 53 businesses that 
opened in Prince Albert and all but six are . . . there were six 
that we know have closed, put it that way, Mr. Speaker. There 
may be even double that number, but out of 53, even if 40 
stayed open, that's very significant, Mr. Speaker. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
293 

So what we have in my own city, Mr. Speaker, if I add them up 
and if I'm rather cautious, if there were say 40 per year out of 
the 50 that remained open, that's 40 per year for three years, 
that's well over 100 businesses, new businesses, in three years 
opened in Prince Albert. 
 
Now as I mentioned earlier, that Prince Albert has a trading area 
of about 70,000 people. That's about 7 per cent of the province 
of Saskatchewan. So if you multiply that by the appropriate 
factor to extend it over the entire province, multiply it by 
approximately 15, I would estimate that there would be, just on 
that projection, about 1,500 new businesses, new small 
businesses, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when I see this happening at home, that explains to me 
how come the statistics show that there are 7,000 new jobs. 
Because when you look at the small businesses, you should add 
to them not only the new ones that open, but you should add the 
jobs that have come from existing businesses which have 
already been there before that. 
 
These businesses have come not in just one or two areas, Mr. 
Speaker, but it's quite a wide variety. There are some that have 
just opened up offices to help with bookwork; there are second-
hand and pawn shops; there are clothing shops; publication 
shops; grocery stores; restaurants; auto shops; automobile 
dealers or associated with automobile dealerships or parts or 
services, and as well as others, Mr. Speaker. So this points to 
me that there is a general increase in activity that's broad based. 
 
Let me give you a couple of specific examples of the type of 
businesses that will open in my city of Prince Albert. There was 
a funeral . . . one is funeral chapel, although they had two others 
in business there before, Mr. Speaker, and in this case it's a 
father and son operation. The son decided he wanted to come 
back to Saskatchewan, and he presently employs two full-time 
and six part-time employees in this business, this service 
business. 
 
In other case, it's a food service business. This case, the person 
came to Prince Albert from Winnipeg. He surveyed business 
opportunities right across country. He thought that the steady 
payroll in Prince Albert made up from education, from 
Weyerhaeuser, from first nations people who spend and make 
up a large part of our economy, and the correctional institutions, 
were a good place to set up a fast food business. And this 
particular business now employs 20 full-time and 30 to 50 part-
time employees, Mr. Speaker. It's really a sign of what is 
happening in Prince Albert and in Saskatchewan. 
 
I'll give you another example, Mr. Speaker, of a person who 
employs eight full-time employees in a rent-to-own business. 
This entrepreneur used to operate a furniture-appliance 
business, and he had an outlet, one outlet, for seven years. And 
this year he added an additional outlet because of his faith in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is an agri-business that has opened in our city. He sells 
retail farm supplies, chemical feeds. This business operates six  

full-time and one part-time employee. 
 
I'll give you one more example, Mr. Speaker. No, I'll give you 
two more examples. One is a small-engine repair shop. It is a 
business comprised of one person. But the reason he went into 
business is because he opened and operated a business next to 
Christopherson's welding who recently expanded into the forest 
service industry and they needed somebody to do their small-
engine repairs; so he opened a business right alongside them. 
So we have a case where resource-based forestry business goes 
into a spin-off of two or three layers of business. 
 
Another example — and this one is a production business, Mr. 
Speaker — where a company, a family who wanted to remain in 
Saskatchewan and remain in Prince Albert, saw a potential use 
for flax. And after doing considerable research, this business 
opened up a mill which produces flax seed and flax flour for the 
retail market and most baking needs. 
 
They employ five full-time people and five part-time people. 
They do their own packaging. They use a vacuum-pack system. 
It's a new product. They hope to distribute it across the nation 
and find international markets as well. 
 
It's a case of Saskatchewan entrepreneurship, Saskatchewan 
entrepreneurship at its best, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
using their knowledge to do value added work. They will . . . 
through their work not only their employees and them will 
benefit, so will the agricultural industry in total. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I mention these examples to show that in my 
city of Prince Albert, like in many other locations in 
Saskatchewan, people have a renewed confidence in the 
economy and in the business world. They have a renewed 
economy because they feel that Saskatchewan is a good place to 
live — they always have felt that way — but more importantly 
than that, they feel that the Government of Saskatchewan is 
going in the right direction. They no longer feel threatened that 
they're liable to lose their livelihood due to other people moving 
out or due to the catastrophe of the province going broke. 
 
Because we were headed in that direction, Mr. Speaker, and we 
all know the trying times that our Minister of Finance and our 
Premier went through as they were looking for ways of 
renegotiating old loans, sometimes at interest rates which 
ordinarily we wouldn't want to have to face in our own private 
lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, jobs and economic development are the first thrust 
for us as we're going . . . and a first priority to us as we move 
into this new budget and into the next three- or four-year plan. 
 
In order to continue to entice business and to encourage 
businesses to come to Saskatchewan, to open up in 
Saskatchewan, our government has put into place strategies 
involving training and strategies involving tax reductions. In her 
address to the people of Saskatchewan, her address called A 
New Day Dawning for Saskatchewan, the Minister of Finance  



February 20, 1995 

 
294 

outlined tax reductions for business people and for individuals 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I never thought I'd live to see the 
day when there would actually be tax reductions proposed by a 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And I must say, Mr. Speaker, I am very, 
very proud to be part of a government which has been able to 
accomplish this, Mr. Speaker, which has been able to 
accomplish this. 
 
Let's take a look, Mr. Speaker, of how these tax reductions will 
affect the small-business people that I had just talked about. 
What will happen in their case is, they will be . . . their small-
business tax rate will be lowered from the existing 17 per cent 
to as much as 10 per cent, depending on how much of the 
company is Saskatchewan owned and operated. 
 
The whole concept here, Mr. Speaker, is to have Saskatchewan 
products being useful and being used to create jobs right here in 
Saskatchewan. I thought that was a very brilliant way of 
reducing the taxes. So in Prince Albert companies like the flax 
company of Randolph & James that I just mentioned, and 
Weyerhaeuser, who's the manufacturer, will be able to take 
advantage of that particular reduction — a reduction in 
corporate tax for small businesses from the 17 per cent level to 
the 10 per cent level. 
 
When you compare that tax in Saskatchewan with other 
provinces, you see that Saskatchewan will come in as low as 10 
per cent and B.C.'s (British Columbia) is about 17 per cent, 
Alberta is around fourteen and a half, 15 per cent, Manitoba is 
— I'm approximating at about 17 per cent, according to the 
chart — and Ontario's is about 14 per cent. 
 
So come on businesses, come on to Saskatchewan. By locating 
here, you can have a tax rate that is very, very competitive 
compared to other places. 
 
(1645) 
 
There is a tax that's been reduced for . . . a fuel tax that's been 
reduced for airplanes that come and land in Saskatchewan. This 
is rather important for me in Prince Albert. We have an airport, 
one of the airports that's slated for closure by the Liberal federal 
government, and our city is doing whatever it can to try to keep 
it in place. This will certainly be an assistance because it will 
encourage more airplanes to come and land and refuel there. If 
we're able to do that, we'll be able to retain employment and 
perhaps even increase employment with that particular 
reduction in tax. 
 
There's also a reduction in the corporate income tax rate, Mr. 
Speaker, for small businesses, which is very encouraging to all 
small business. And that small business tax rate is now 8 per 
cent, which is the second lowest provincial tax west of Quebec, 
Mr. Speaker — second lowest. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I know that these businesses will also appreciate 
the reduction in the gas charges, the natural gas charges, 
especially companies which use a lot of natural gas in their 
businesses. And in this country, in this province, although 
we've had a rather mild winter this year, the usual case is that a 
great deal of money is spent, expended, just to heat the 
businesses and business places in the wintertime. I know that 
they will be . . . that this reduction, which was made possible 
because the spot price of natural gas decreased, will be rather 
welcomed. 
 
Of significance to business and to individuals in Saskatchewan 
is the income tax reduction on the deficit surtax. As a result of 
this new decision, Mr. Speaker, starting effective July 1, people 
who take home a pay cheque will find that their take-home pay 
will be increased. Their take-home pay will be increased by $75 
between July 1 and the end of the year, and the following year 
it'll be double that. It'll be double that; it'll be $150. 
 
The reduction of this surtax will result in 6,000 lower income 
taxpayers no longer having to pay a Saskatchewan income tax. 
And two income families who earn up to 34,000 will no longer 
pay the surtax as well, Mr. Speaker. And those two income 
families who earn up to $65,000 will see their surtax removed 
by more than 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that our priorities are jobs and 
economic development, tax reduction. I've spoken briefly about 
both of those. The other two priorities are health, and debt 
reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all I want to just mention something very briefly about 
debt reduction. In the current budget year, this government has 
for the first time reduced the amount owing by paying $119 
million into the mortgage against Saskatchewan. The plan put 
forward by the government is to take approximately one-third of 
the surplus over the next four years and apply it to reducing the 
debt. If we have an extraordinarily good year we might put in 
more; if you have a poorer year, of course then you can use that 
to draw upon to keep your program stable. 
 
Some people have said, why are you taking off the income tax 
and not the sales tax? Mr. Speaker, we would all love to reduce 
the sales tax. Every one of us would love to reduce it, but we 
would want to make sure also that whatever tax reductions take 
place, that those are sustainable. This year we were fortunate 
enough to have an increase in retail sales in Saskatchewan of 10 
per cent. So although we know that there is some leakage along 
the Alberta border, it's wrong to say that sales tax is holding 
back consumer spending because clearly the statistics . . . and 
speaking to any business person they will tell you otherwise. So 
I believe that to be a good plan, Mr. Speaker, to work on 
reducing the debt of Saskatchewan so that our children and our 
grandchildren and those that plan to live in Saskatchewan in the 
future will not be burdened, overly burdened by the mess left by 
the Tory government previous. 
 
In the last few moments that I am going to speak, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to spend a moment just talking about health and the  



February 20, 1995 

 
295 

health reform package in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are 
some rather amazing things happening in health even though 
when you drive into the city, any city or any part of 
Saskatchewan, you might not notice what's happening. But you 
can . . . if you just ask around and talk to people in the medical 
field, talk to people in the Department of Health, talk to people 
who are experienced going to the hospital or involved in home 
care, they will identify this for you very quickly. 
 
I want to give you a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. It used to 
be that we went to hospitals -- if you felt you were not well you 
would go into a hospital and you would receive your diagnosis 
and you would stay there until you were healthy. Sometimes 
while you were in the hospital you would actually catch another 
illness because of some of the things that happened in hospitals 
because it becomes a sanctuary for certain bacteria. 
 
But that whole thing was based on the premiss that you had to 
have somebody to take care of you. But as medical technology 
and the ability of the medical profession changed, we found that 
people were able to take care of you at home just as well as they 
were in hospital. And at the same time, we find that we're 
having a rising population . . . an ageing population, Mr. 
Speaker, meaning that more and more people need health care 
and have a requirement for health care. 
 
So we find that what is happening is we needed to adjust the 
system, the health system, to be able to provide for people to be 
able to convalesce at home. In many cases it's a healthier place 
and a better place to do it. And many of us who have to have 
. . . have needed some type of hospital care or health care have 
found that we simply would prefer to do it at home if we could. 
 
As an example, Mr. Speaker, I was advised just recently that 
mastectomies used to take about seven or eight days. And quite 
often during that time there was the threat of infection. 
Nowadays, mastectomies take at the most three days. There's a 
follow-up to the home by nurses and a follow-up to the home 
by home care. And I want to emphasize that point, because 
people . . . it's something we have to get used to, something new 
that we have to get used to. 
 
Quite often, under the new conditions, a person might be sent 
home even though they might still have a bit of a pain or a scar 
that's not completely healed. But there's good reason for it. And 
the reason is that it will probably heal faster at home, and also 
the bed you're occupying needs to be used by the next person 
that's coming in. 
 
The key to this whole operation working and the key to the 
entire system working is the follow-up work. It is up to the 
home care assessment unit and the doctor and the medical 
workers in the hospital to make the assessment and to make 
sure that the nurse arrives on the doorstep shortly after or even 
with the person leaving the hospital. If this happens, everything 
works out well. If it doesn't happen, that's when people should 
phone their MLAs or phone their hospital boards and make sure 
that that kind of thing does happen, because sometimes you get 
these little slips, Mr. Speaker. We're working into a new  

system, and the follow-up is definitely required. 
 
But it's through that major change that's going to enable us to 
continue to be in the forefront of health care. Go into CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scans; use MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging); have dialysis machines accessible; have a 
911 system accessible to all parts of the province; have a health 
care system which is second to none in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to close, Mr. Speaker, after having mentioned that our 
priorities are jobs and economic development, tax reduction, 
health, and debt reduction. I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by just 
saying very briefly, spending a moment very briefly on talking 
about why Saskatchewan and Canada are a good place to live. 
There are numerous articles and data supported by a UN 
(United Nations) declaration that identifies Canada as a very, 
very good place to live, Mr. Speaker. And many of us prefer it 
to even our neighbour, who living — say in our neighbour 
country, the United States of America. The human development 
index reported by the United Nations used as the reasons . . . 
the three broad factors of why this is a good place to live. The 
factors they used are longevity and life expectancy, knowledge 
as measured by adult literacy in years of schooling, and 
standard of living determined by average income compared to 
the cost of living. 
 
Now I know that Saskatchewan scores very high on all of those, 
Mr. Speaker. And the reason I'm mentioning this is because 
there is a current move, political move, afoot in the United 
States of America; in parts of Alberta — we see lots if it in 
Alberta — and somewhat in Saskatchewan. And that move is 
that government is bad. There are people in the province and in 
the country that are trying to model themselves after Newt 
Gingrich and Ralph Klein and saying that government is bad. 
 
It is my contention, Mr. Speaker, and it is the contention of the 
New Democratic Party and it is the contention of this caucus, 
that government can be used for the common good of the 
people. That is our mission, Mr. Speaker. That is the purpose of 
government -- to use it to be able to create a country and a 
province that can continue to be number one. 
 
The factors, Mr. Speaker, of longevity have everything to do 
with health care, medicare started by New Democrats and 
continued by New Democrats; that has everything to do with 
schooling and literacy, which is a government function, Mr. 
Speaker, a function of people working together; that has 
everything to do with the standard of living and the distribution 
of income which has to do with labour laws and business 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I close on that point, Mr. Speaker, that I think we must be 
vigilant about what we think government should do and what 
we shouldn't do, and we should continue. 
 
And we know we can depend on the New Democratic Party; I 
know I can depend on my Premier and my cabinet to work 
towards using government for the good of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleague, the  



February 20, 1995 

 
296 

member from Saskatoon, would like to speak next. I'll take my 
place so that he can take the floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
good afternoon to you. It's my pleasure to rise today to enter 
this budget debate and to first of all commend my colleagues 
who have spoken this afternoon for their very creative and 
stimulating comments with regard to the fine work that's been 
done by the people of the province to get us into position today 
where we're debating this budget, which I might say is quite 
historic, which the vast majority of Saskatchewan people 
support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is my seventh year in the Assembly and it's 
been my pleasure for seven years to represent the people, my 
neighbours in Saskatoon Eastview. They're wonderful people; 
they've been very supportive to me. And I would say that my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, probably represents fairly well the 
mix of the Saskatchewan population. And it always surprises 
some of my colleagues to know that there are, I understand, 
about 1,200 farmers in my riding. So that's farm families who 
farm outside of the city. So a number of young people, seniors; 
of course working men and women, business people, 
unemployed people; and so various levels of income. 
 
It's a typical riding in the province and they have given me, Mr. 
Speaker, and our party, two very strong mandates. I suspect, 
Mr. Speaker, that we'll soon be able to enjoy a third mandate in 
that constituency, a third consecutive mandate, because, Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing what we promised to do. We promised to 
restore the financial integrity to this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 o'clock, this House stands 
recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


