













































February 14, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 14, 1995 

 

 

167 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I'd like 

to read the prayer from a petition that is coming from our area: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 

than allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projects in the province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I'll turn these in now. I have another petition that I will also read 

at this time, Mr. Speaker, totally unrelated to this first one. I 

will read the prayer and I'm sure that some of my other 

colleagues will join in with this. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to the present legislation regarding firearms 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 

And I think the Minister of Justice will know that we are 

cooperating in this matter. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I as well have petitions to present to 

the Assembly, and I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions that I'm presenting today, many are signed 

by individuals from the Manor, Carlyle, Qu'Appelle areas;  

Arcola, Rocky Mountain House, and Swift Current, Gull Lake, 

Viscount, Warman, Leader, Prelate. Mr. Speaker, there are just 

too many to try and go through all the areas they've been signed 

from, and I'd like to lay them on the Table. 

 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions that 

I would like to present from concerned citizens. I'll read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

And these petitioners come from Gronlid, Melfort, Meadow 

Lake, and many other communities. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 

petitions to lay on the Table this morning. And I would like to 

read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to the present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these also are a cross-section of the province by 

very, very many people, and I would like to lay them on the 

Table at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also will be laying 

petitions on the Table today on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 

who are opposed to changes in the firearms ownership: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I also today, Mr. Speaker, have citizens from all across the 

province of Saskatchewan, some also from the province of 

Ontario and the province of Alberta, who were travelling 

through and have seen fit to add their names to this petition 

which I table today. 



February 14, 1995 

 

168 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

add names of petitioners, as my colleagues from both sides of 

the House have already done this afternoon. The similar petition 

on the ones that I have here, which the prayer indicates: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my petitioners essentially come from the Swift 

Current, Val Marie area, and Fox Valley — and literally all the 

other pages are from Fox Valley, Mr. Speaker. I didn't know 

there were that many people in Fox Valley, but they must all 

have signed. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have petitions 

with respect to the gun control issue. And I'll just quickly read 

the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to the present legislation regarding firearms 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Maple Creek area of 

the province as well as into Alberta, from Redcliff, Alberta, as 

it is an issue of national interest. 

 

And I lay these petitions at your . . . 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like members from the 

Progressive Conservative opposition and another member from 

the government side of the House, I too have petitions to 

present to you. The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 

and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 

provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 

provincial basis. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-

laning of Highway No. 1. 

 

 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate funding toward the maintenance 

and capital cost of Saskatchewan roads. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

given notice that I shall on Thursday next ask the government 

the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Commission: (1) how many calls have been received to 

date on the gambling addiction line, 1-800-306-6789; 

(2) what has been the cost to install and maintain this 

phone service; and (3) what date did the service become 

fully operational? 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 11 members of the YMCA (Young Men's Christian 

Association) young mentors program. This program is a pilot 

project and it's funded by Youth Services Canada. It's running 

in five centres with Regina being the only centre in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The mentors work with youth at risk, providing tutoring, social 

and recreational activities, and life skills enhancement. The 

Regina mentors work in partnership with the public school 

board and each are assigned to a school where they work with 

about five to thirty children, young adults. And the YMC 

coordinates the project and trains the mentors. And as you can 

see, they are young adults in our community. They're seated in 

the west gallery and they are accompanied today by Darin 

Banadayga. And I would ask all members to welcome them as 

they watch the proceedings of a lively question period debate. 

And I hope they enjoy their visit to the Legislative Assembly 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too would 

like to acknowledge the guests from the YMCA mentor 

program. There's somebody there that's very special to me, and 

being introduced for the first time in this Assembly, that's my  



February 14, 1995 

 

169 

sister Donna. I would like all members of the Assembly to give 

her a warm welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce a friend from the Shaunavon area, actually Allen Lind 

from the Admiral area. Many of you who curl in the province 

will know Allen as one of the best curlers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I want to welcome him here today and look 

forward to saying hello to you a little later on, Al. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the Assembly some very 

important people who are in the Speaker's gallery this 

afternoon. They are representatives from people who work in a 

very exciting and expanding industry in Saskatchewan — that's 

the film industry. 

 

And I would like to introduce to you Jerry Ferwerda, the 

SaskFILM . . . chairman of the SaskFILM board of directors. 

We also have Mark Prasuhn, the general manager of SaskFILM. 

We have board members of SaskFILM, Andrew Gordon  

Andrew also is on the SMPIA (Saskatchewan Motion Picture 

Industry Association) board and is a member of the Association 

of Canadian Film Craftspeople  and Kevin DeWalt. Kevin, as 

you all know, is the owner/manager of Minds Eye Production 

and doing very exciting things in Saskatchewan. And the 

executive director of the motion picture association, Elizabeth 

Verrall. And the other people up there are from my staff and the 

department. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in bidding welcome to 

these people to the gallery this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Love's Valentine Winter Festival 

 

Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I was in Love. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I'm often in Love and even sometimes I'm in 

Love before I go home. 

 

The member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden told me that she had 

been in Love three times. And I don't know if the Leader of the 

Opposition has been in Love, but I suggest he try it if he hasn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no matter how much other members may wish it 

were otherwise, Love is in my constituency and my 

constituency alone. Others may wish to have Love but I am the 

fortunate one. 

 

On Saturday, February 11, the village of Love held its 24th 

annual winter festival, a Valentine festival they call it. Mr. 

Speaker, the former mayor of Love was Mrs. Carr, and as those  

of us of our age know, a car and love often go together like, 

well you know some other things, I tell you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Love know how to enjoy a winter 

festival. The evening started out with a non-denominational 

service, a church service, where they apologized for what we 

were about to do, and then they cut loose. 

 

The events in Love engaged in pillow fighting and a smooshing 

— whatever smooshing is, I'm not sure — leg wrestling and 

mail bag races. There were stage events and a pancake breakfast 

and a dance until the small hours of the morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in Love, Saskatchewan, know how to 

have a good time and they know how to live and I congratulate 

those in Love for another successful affair, and I look forward 

to the 25th. Happy Valentine's Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn and Area Child Abuse Council Grant 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring a 

group of hard-working volunteers to your attention. 

 

Last week the Minister of Social Services announced several 

grants to groups across the province involved in prevention and 

support programs for vulnerable children, youth, and families. 

These grants are part of the Saskatchewan action plan for 

children. 

 

One worthy recipient is the Weyburn and Area Council on 

Child Abuse. The council represents several agencies and 

groups in Weyburn and the surrounding area, groups in 

education, social services, law enforcement, health, and church. 

The overriding purpose of this council is to prevent child abuse 

through education, advocacy training, and publicity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I and the member from Weyburn were privileged 

to be present at the ceremony announcing the grant, and we had 

the opportunity to further familiarize ourselves with the work of 

the Weyburn council. 

 

The Weyburn and area council came into existence in 1985. All 

its members are volunteers working for the betterment of their 

communities. 

 

In its 10-year history, the council has to its credit 63 separate 

accomplishments, ranging from conferences to Child Abuse 

Awareness Week, to training programs, to the development of 

education materials, and much more. 

 

With this grant it will carry on its established work, as well as 

launch new plans such as fathers and tots program, and a family 

support program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn and I applaud the 

work of the volunteers of the Weyburn and Area Council on 

Child Abuse. They are a perfect example of the Saskatchewan  



February 14, 1995 

 

170 

spirit of community, cooperation, and compassion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Memorial Hockey Game 

 

Mr. Kluz: — Mr. Speaker, recently the feared MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) hockey team under the 

dictatorship of Coach K was involved in a fund-raising hockey 

game in the town of Wynyard. The Wishart Golden Aces from 

my constituency provided the opposition. 

 

This event, Mr. Speaker, was indeed special because it was a 

memorial game held in honour of two former Golden Aces 

team members, Brian Gudmundson, who passed away in 1989, 

and Andrew Fedoriuk, who died in 1994. 

 

Both Brian and Andrew were my friends, as well as being 

people liked and admired by everyone in the community. 

 

Brian's parents, Arnold and Jean, were very appreciative that 

the game was organized in their son's memory. They said that 

Brian would have made the same effort for anybody. 

 

Andrew's wife and family also expressed their appreciation for 

the event. And Andrew's son, Dwayne, drove all the way from 

Calgary to play for the Golden Aces. Mr. Speaker, it was an 

enjoyable evening with good entertainment and, as always, 

first-rate hockey. And as nearly always, the MLA team won; 

Coach K kept them from running up the score. But the real 

winners were children because the evening's proceeds of $507 

went to the Children's Wish Foundation. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Safety Council Contest Winners 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, today I'm pleased to announce that 

25 students from the riding I represent received top honours in a 

contest put on by the Saskatchewan Safety Council. Mr. Ralph 

Galambos and his grade 6 class at Birch Hills School are to be 

congratulated for the hard work in winning this contest. These 

students were asked to come up with a contest entry that would 

help promote seat-belt safety. After giving it some careful 

consideration, they decided to write and record a rap song about 

seat-belt safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every year people are injured or killed in traffic 

accidents in Saskatchewan, and many of these accidents could 

have been prevented if the occupants had been wearing seat-

belts. Tragically many of those involved are young people. 

 

These students wrote the words to the song and produced their 

own sound effects in the classroom. This contest was developed 

after the Safety Council's crash dummies — in reality two 

drama students from the University of Saskatchewan — visited 

some 57 schools across the province to promote seat-belt  

safety. Mr. Speaker, not only did these students win the contest 

but the $200 in prize money will be put to good use to further 

the education of students in the school. Mr. Speaker, 

congratulations to Mr. Galambos and his grade 6 students. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Provincial Sales Tax Reduction 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, as you know, we've 

been having so much fun asking questions in the legislature 

here every day that we decided to share the opportunity with 

everyone else in Saskatchewan. Once again the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus has invited Saskatchewan people to send 

us questions that they want to ask you, Mr. Premier. 

 

And you know what, lots of people across this province, in fact 

800 people, responded in the first week of our, Mr. Premier, I 

want to know . . . initiative. So we're going to start today by 

asking some of those. And one that we received . . . the first one 

is one that we received on the Internet, the information super 

highway. 

 

The question comes addressed, pwr123@arts.usask.ca. The 

question says: Mr. Premier, since the budget is so close to being 

balanced, Saskatchewan residents deserve some kind of tax 

relief. 

 

An obvious answer would be to reduce the 9 per cent PST 

(provincial sales tax). Mr. Premier, I want to know, will your 

government reduce the provincial sales tax from its current rate 

to one which is lower in order to allow all residents of the 

province a much-needed break from our already too high tax 

load? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

as I said yesterday, on Thursday the Minister of Finance will 

deliver this province's budget. I'm sure members opposite will 

join in the pride that most Saskatchewan people will feel in 

what will have been achieved. So I know members will want to 

look forward to that day and to a day when all Saskatchewan 

people see it come together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Deficit Reduction Tax 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We have 

also received a lot of questions from the constituency of 

Rosthern. And the one that I'm going to read now is obviously 

very timely as well, and it comes from a Mr. Bert Senft from 

Rosthern. And he wants to know, Mr. Premier, what was the 

total amount of the 1993 deficit reduction tax that was applied 

to reduce the deficit that year. And will this tax be eliminated 

immediately upon balancing the budget? 



February 14, 1995 

 

171 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Once again the member will have to 

wait till Thursday for the answer to that question. Suffice it to 

say, I think that constituent and all others are going to share a 

real sense of pride when this province finally puts behind it the 

dark, dreadful years when that government was in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Taxes Comparison 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 

comes from D. Jansen of Leroy, Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, 

you stated, when asked why you allowed gambling VLTs (video 

lottery terminal) at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) meeting, it was because the 

neighbouring provinces and states have it so we have to "keep 

up with the Joneses." 

 

Therefore Mr. Jansen wants to know, why not do the same with 

the provincial sales tax — reduce it to Alberta's zero per cent 

level? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the last people on earth 

who should be tendering advice on how to manage a budget 

should be members opposite. In responding to Mr. Jansen, you 

may want to point out that this government has had a real 

challenge trying to come to terms with the enormous mess left 

by members opposite when those two members were in 

Executive Council. 

 

I'm sure Mr. Jansen will be pleased to be reminded that in 

Saskatchewan there aren't any health care premiums. Health 

care premiums which, I might add, have gone up by some 60 

per cent since 1990, some 67 per cent in Alberta. Gone up from 

400-and-some-odd dollars to 700-and-some-odd dollars. 

 

You may want to remind Mr. Jansen that in Saskatchewan, 

kindergarten is freely available to all children of every 

economic circumstance without regard to their ability to pay. 

And Mr. Jansen is no doubt going to be very, very thankful he 

doesn't live in Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Proposed Firearms Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 

comes from Mr. Dave Crook from Wynyard. Mr. Premier, I 

want to know, if Mr. Rock's proposed gun registration law is 

passed, will Saskatchewan make use of the notwithstanding 

clause in the charter of rights to make residents of this province 

exempt from this unbelievably stupid piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the 

characterization of the legislation being proposed by Mr. Rock. 

You wish you could use the notwithstanding clause in the 

circumstances. We wish it were available for us to use to  

notwithstand a piece of federal legislation. 

 

Unfortunately, the only use that we can make of the 

notwithstanding clause is to protect any legislation passed by 

this legislature from certain kinds of attacks or challenges under 

the charter of rights. So we can't do it; we wish we could, but 

we can't. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Expansion 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question, Mr. 

Speaker, and Mr. Premier, comes from Janice Wychopen from 

North Battleford. Mr. Premier, I want to know how you can 

rationalize wellness in the community with increased gaming, 

i.e., casinos, lotteries, VLT machines, bingos, etc., when the 

end result of this is, number one, addictions; number two, 

hungry, poorly clothed, impoverished children; number three, 

lack of parental supervision leading to increases in child and 

youth problems such as substance abuse, behavioural problems, 

break and enters, etc. 

 

How can you justify this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

thank you for your question. 

 

We have consistently taken the position that we . . . our policy 

is to have tight regulation of gaming, to limit and control, to 

deal with impacts, and to have revenue sharing that benefits the 

public. 

 

We are not in a position to decide on whether or not gambling 

exists. It does. It has since 1969 in this province. What we are 

in a position to do is to limit it, to regulate it, to control it. You 

may note that we have set it up in such a way that minors are 

denied access to gaming sites. 

 

We have set up provisions in both of the agreements to deal 

with the impacts of gaming, to deal with addictions on a 

broader basis than just the gaming addiction, but to provide 

resources into the broad band, including alcohol and the other 

problems that already exist in society. 

 

And I would have to say that we've taken a measured and 

reasoned approach. We're concerned, and we're carefully 

monitoring the situation and adding resources as needed. 

 

But the resources dedicated to this area have tripled to make 

sure that all the services are in place throughout all the health 

boards in Saskatchewan, not because we see that the problem 

has increased, but to make sure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, I have recent statistics. To make sure . . . the problem has 

increased, but to make sure that we're ready to deal with 

whatever does develop. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

172 

Federal Gun Control Legislation 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, the new federal gun legislation is being 

introduced, I understand, today in Ottawa. As you know, most 

Saskatchewan people strongly oppose the Liberal plans, 

particularly the proposal to set up a national gun registry. 

Earlier today the PC caucus tabled hundreds of petitions 

containing the names of Saskatchewan people who oppose the 

Liberal gun laws. 

 

Over the past few weeks, I've spoken at several gun rallies; two, 

in fact, in the last two nights. These rallies have been attended 

by thousands more Saskatchewan people opposed to the Liberal 

plans. 

 

Mr. Minister, in spite of the opposition, it appears that Liberals 

in Ottawa are not going to listen. Mr. Minister, what specific 

plans does your government have for dealing with this matter? 

What specific proposals have you developed to change federal 

legislation and the Criminal Code? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

this very important question. It is true that today the federal 

Minister of Justice tabled, in parliament, the Firearms Act 

which does, as he has for so long threatened, propose a system 

of registration of all guns, and firearm possession certificates 

for all people who possess a gun. 

 

And this in spite of the protest that he has heard, particularly 

from all across western Canada, from all political parties in 

western Canada, all political parties in this province, and the 

dozens and dozens of rallies that my friend and I have attended 

and many other members of this legislature have attended. 

 

We have tried in every way we can to indicate our opposition to 

this. It is however at the end of the day a question for the 

federal Liberal government to determine. If they're going to go 

ahead with this, they're going to go ahead with it and we have 

no effective way in which to stop them. The only means at our 

disposal is to oppose it and oppose it with all the vigour and the 

sense of unity that we have brought to this opposition. If that 

doesn't impress them then I don't know what will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, let me get 

this straight. As I understand it, you are developing changes to 

federal legislation and the Criminal Code in order to ensure 

Indian bands get jurisdiction over gambling on reserves, but 

you are not prepared to make the same effort on behalf of 

Saskatchewan gun owners. Why not, Mr. Minister? 

 

Why aren't you working to develop specific legislation solutions 

to protect the rights of Saskatchewan gun owners?  

The people who signed those petitions and attended those 

rallies believe this is an issue at least as important as your 

government's gambling on reserves policy. 

 

Why aren't you making the same efforts with respect to gun 

legislation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm astonished by this line from the 

Leader of the Opposition. He as well as anyone knows that we 

have been right out there at the front of the pack in opposition 

to this. Of all the governments in Canada, our government has 

done as much to oppose — done more — to oppose this Bill 

than any other government, and for good reason. 

 

The member asks what we should do. Does the member 

propose for a moment that we should introduce our own gun 

registration system in Saskatchewan? I think not. I've been in 

close consultation with a large number of groups in this 

connection, including probably all of the groups that are 

opposed to this, and discussed this issue on many occasions and 

have told them without equivocation that we would never pass 

a law like the one that Rock is proposing. 

 

Now surely the Leader of the Opposition is not suggesting that 

we should pass such a law. Indeed, we think there's more than 

enough gun law on the books of Canada right now as it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, two years 

ago your government closed down 52 rural hospitals and 

eliminated hundreds of health care jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan. This move was supposed to save your 

government about $20 million a year. Today we see your 

government putting $20 million of spending, new spending, 

back into rural health care and creating — supposedly — 460 

jobs for nurses and therapists. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't this simply an admission that your health 

care reforms were seriously flawed in the first place? Why did 

you have to cause so much pain in rural Saskatchewan just so 

you could make an announcement like this in an election year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 

question and for bringing this important issue to the attention of 

the House this afternoon and to the attention of the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the announcements that were made today, I can 

say categorically, will mean that in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan people enjoy the most — the 

most — comprehensive and people-sensitive community health 

care in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 14, 1995 

 

173 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the goal of health renewal 

from the very beginning is to match quality services with the 

needs of our people as close to home, as close to family, and as 

close to community as we possibly can. Today we have begun a 

new era, a new era, Mr. Speaker, in community-based services 

in this province. 

 

Now I want to address very specifically some of the numbers 

that the member raises in his question. He talks about the 

thousands — I believe he used the words thousands — of jobs 

lost in health care. Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the House 

this morning the net reduction, the net reduction of employment 

in rural Saskatchewan health care workers, net reduction, 350 

jobs. Today, Mr. Speaker, through these policies and programs, 

we have created 460 new health care positions in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And further to the 

minister: Mr. Minister, obviously you haven't been listening 

very carefully to a lot of health care professionals who lost jobs 

in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, today's announcement does nothing to address the 

real problem which is a severe lack of emergency services in 

many rural areas. I have here an article written by a well-

respected rural physician who has practised in his community 

for 28 years. He is very concerned about the long distances that 

some rural residents have to travel to receive emergency 

medical treatment. 

 

He says, and I quote: purely as a physician, I consider it 

dangerous to have no acute care between the U.S. (United 

States) border, 30 miles south of Mankota, and Moose Jaw, 165 

miles, and Swift Current, 130 miles the other way. At the other 

end there is too much pressure on beds in Swift Current and 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you continuing to ignore the concerns of 

health care providers like the individual who wrote this article? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member does 

not understand, and if he does not, let me clarify. There are 

emergency services available to people across this province, in 

communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. In each of the 

converted acute care situations, emergency services are 

available. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan the 

best road ambulance system anywhere in the country. Mr. 

Speaker, we have in this province, I remind the member, a long-

standing and advanced air ambulance service in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And in recent days and months we have 

announced and implemented  and it's growing  the first 

responders program across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member again that when we 

began the renewal of health in the province, we set forward a  

vision — a vision statement. A vision statement that said we 

want to support and enhance services as close to home and as 

close to families and communities as we can, Mr. Speaker. We 

are on track with that, Mr. Speaker, election year or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Expenditures 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

paper this week the Dolter family of Regina offered a reality 

check to this government by showing the effect NDP (New 

Democratic Party) policies have had on their family finances 

and their quality of life. 

 

For four years the NDP's tax increases, utility rate increases, and 

hikes in drug costs and car insurance have made Saskatchewan 

families extremely vulnerable. All along the Premier and his 

cabinet expected ordinary people to do without so that 

government could feed its own spending habits. Instead of 

leading by example, the Finance minister increased the budget 

of her own department, Mr. Speaker, by $5 million in 1994 

from 1993. 

 

My question is for the Minister of Finance. Why is it that you 

believe everyone can make do with less except your 

government and your own department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of 

the Minister of Finance who is attending a federal-provincial 

conference — I might add, attempting to stem some of the 

damage being done by the federal government on the provinces 

 in her absence, I would remind the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone that Saskatchewan has the lowest utility rates, second 

lowest or the lowest utility rates of any province in Canada. 

And that is true. If you add up power rates, gas rates, telephone 

rates, and water rates, which are the utilities, Saskatchewan is at 

the bottom or second from the bottom in all cases. 

 

I know parties opposite would like to believe that the Crown 

corporations do not serve the province well. They actually serve 

the people very well. Crown corporations in this province bring 

the public of Saskatchewan the best of services and do it at the 

lowest of cost. Saskatchewan people pay lower utility rates than 

anywhere else in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 

Madam Minister must be saying, make sure you don't do as we 

do but do as we say, if we're talking about advice they're giving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all three prairie provinces are similar in that they 

depend heavily on agriculture and on resource-based industries. 

All three provinces will balance their budgets this year but only 

Saskatchewan has done the job on the backs of the taxpayers. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

174 

Both of our neighbouring governments made do with less, Mr. 

Speaker, and both have created an environment that out-

performs Saskatchewan in job creation every single year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Associate Minister of 

Finance. Mr. Associate Minister, you went to great lengths in 

your labour legislation to protect all of us from what you were 

quoted in The Financial Post as saying, the ruthless greed of 

business. 

 

When will your Department of Finance get serious about 

protecting taxpayers from the ruthless greed of your 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The last thing that this government needs in meeting its 

challenge is any assistance from Liberals on balanced budgets. 

Any assistance at all. 

 

Liberals have been in office in Ottawa for most of the last four 

decades and the federal government's finances are in an 

absolute shamble. I would have assumed that the member from 

Greystone would join the people of Saskatchewan in expressing 

pride that this province has met and solved its problem. 

 

If Liberals in Ottawa were anywhere near as successful in 

dealing with their finances as the people of this province are, 

we wouldn't be in the straits we're in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — As usual we get no answers from the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP track record on taxing and spending 

speaks for itself. Both Alberta and Manitoba will balance their 

budgets without increasing taxes. On the CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) radio program, As It Happens, on 

February 8, Manitoba's Finance minister said his province has 

moved from being one of the highest taxed provinces to the 7th 

on the list, while Saskatchewan is moving in exactly the 

opposite direction since the NDP took power. 

 

On that very same program, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Finance minister stated proudly that the NDP has done its major 

cutting, that the cuts are behind us, she said. End of quote. 

 

To the Associate Minister of Finance: Saskatchewan people 

have been paying through the nose for oversized, overpriced, 

inefficient government from the NDP for the last four years. 

Five million dollars more for your department in 1994. Can 

Saskatchewan taxpayers expect more of the same, Mr. 

Associate Minister, in this budget, as you've delivered since 

1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I must say, Mr. Speaker, whether it 

be in Regina or in Ottawa, Liberals certainly don't allow their  

style to be crimped by any sort of consistency. On any given 

day you can hear the Leader of the Liberal Party promising all 

manner of wild things around the province — hundreds of 

millions of dollars. And then practically on the same day, she 

comes and tells us our taxes are too high. 

 

Quite frankly, Madam Member, the public of Saskatchewan 

have a sense of déjà vu when they hear that. It sounds a lot like 

the former government who were in office here during the '80s, 

a lot like them, and the public of Saskatchewan has no desire to 

return to that. 

 

Let me finish, Madam Member, by quoting an editorial from the 

Prairie Messenger. I think you'll recognize the journal. The 

editorial says: 

 

 The current Saskatchewan government inherited a mess 

proportionately far greater than that bequeathed to 

Klein, and Saskatchewan has not known the oil and gas 

revenues which have graced its western neighbour. Yet 

the success Saskatchewan has achieved in balancing its 

books makes its neighbour’s accomplishment seem 

quite trivial in comparison. 

 

I rest my case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, it's most interesting how they 

applaud oversized, fat government. Mr. Speaker, both Alberta 

and Manitoba have fiscal programs that will reduce the cost of 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan produced 

a fall report which clearly showed that this administration is 

spending 270 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 

Auditor produced a full report which clearly showed that this 

administration is spending $278 million more on government 

and its programs than they were in 1991. 

 

My question to the same minister: why does your government 

persist in bucking the national trend of smaller, cheaper 

government by attacking the people of this province, the very 

taxpayers, instead of your overspending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to 

selectively using statistics to try to establish that our jobless rate 

is increasing — which it is not — the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone is now selectively reading from the Provincial 

Auditor's report. 

 

The Provincial Auditor also said that this province had gone 

from having the worst set of financial records to having the 

best. That is something that I would've expected the member 

opposite would be proud of, as are the public of Saskatchewan. 



February 14, 1995 

 

175 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

government has depended on luck and high taxes to achieve a 

balanced budget. I guess they don't even listen to their own 

words — they were just talking about the resource industry. But 

they're making a very generous assumption that luck will 

continue, just as they did in the 1970s. 

 

My question to the same minister: will your government take 

the pressure off Saskatchewan taxpayers by reducing the costs 

of government? That's the only question that I've been asking, 

and you still haven't answered it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The public of Saskatchewan have every right to know what 

programs you'd cut, if you're going to cut taxes. And the public 

of Saskatchewan do ask that question of you. And it's one of the 

reasons why the Liberal Party opposite is synonymous in the 

public mind with inconsistency. 

 

I ask the hon. member opposite, if you want to cut taxes, you 

owe it to the public to tell them what services you're going to 

cut. You can't have it both ways. Trying to have it both ways is 

a sure ticket to remaining in the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to all 

members of the House, I am very pleased to welcome today the 

grades 3 and 4 class, 20 students from the grades 3 and 4 class 

of King Edward Public School in the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with them today are their teacher, Alene Tanner, 

and their chaperons, Sheri Hansen and Sharon Hall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's only a very few years ago that I attended King 

Edward School and I am very happy to say that King Edward is 

maintaining the interest that this school has always had in 

public and governmental affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd ask all members to welcome the students from 

King Edward. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce 

someone to this Assembly who is a . . . I think I can count him 

as a friend. I've known the Birkbeck family for a quarter of a 

century when I practised law in Moosomin. 

 

I know all members will want to join with me in welcoming 

back a member who spent many years here and contributed a 

good deal to the public life in Saskatchewan. I want to welcome 

the former member, Larry Birkbeck from Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

SaskFILM Agreement 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

cultural industries are a key economic growth area in 

Saskatchewan for the 1990s. A moderate investment in them 

from government yields significant returns. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, the film and video industry contributed 

significantly to the economic renewal of the province by 

creating jobs and by attracting out-of-province investment. The 

total value of economic activity directly related to the film and 

video industry in Saskatchewan exceeded $33 million. We 

expect this year it could be even better. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to announce 

in the House today that a new, three-year, $4 million agreement 

between the province of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 

Film and Video Development Corporation or SaskFILM has 

been approved by cabinet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — The agreement is scheduled to come into 

effect on March 1, 1995 and expires on March 31, 1998. The 

new agreement will replace a current one which expired on 

March 31, 1995. 

 

The government's contribution of $4 million will be paid out in 

one lump sum. The agreement charges SaskFILM with the 

responsibility of administering the contribution over a three-

year term. The money is to be used to maintain a film fund 

which is designated to assist in the development of the film and 

video industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

An independent study of the film and video industry conducted 

last year shows that SaskFILM investments have generated $10 

million of production activity for each . . . $10 for each $1 

invested. 

 

Based on these projections, this agreement is expected to 

generate approximately $40 million of production activity over 

the next three years. This production activity will in turn create 

approximately 1,200 employment opportunities for  



February 14, 1995 

 

176 

Saskatchewan people with specialized skills who might 

otherwise have to look for work outside of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, this production activity will 

generate about $130 million in spin-off economic activity. A 

healthy and thriving film and video industry will also allow 

Saskatchewan to take advantage of growth opportunities 

presented by the development of the information highway and 

the recent approval of the specialty channels. 

 

The Saskatchewan industry has proven expertise and experience 

in the development of content for these markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that I've introduced in the gallery today 

will be joining with me to sign this agreement in my office 

later. And I know the people of Saskatchewan look forward 

with great interest to more exciting news from this very great 

industry that is developing in Saskatchewan in the months to 

come. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

acknowledge first of all that the film industry is an important 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan. It probably was 

amplified in my mind this past summer when we set up a guest 

ranch at our place and had people coming down and shooting 

pictures in order to have advertising across this province. 

 

What it does in fact is it enhances the opportunity for us to 

develop not only the industry but tourism as a sideline, because 

people then get to see the landscape and all of the people in it 

and the volumes of value that that can be not only to the people 

of Saskatchewan, but it can be to the film industry. 

 

So I want to compliment the film industry for their involvement 

in producing and making productions. And I wish you the very 

best for this year. Thank you very much. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 

party and our caucus are on record of being in support of the 

film and video industry, as we are with all arts in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And this is an industry that we believe that 

the government should be supporting with fervour. And we 

very much support what is happening today. 

 

The government should be doing, however, whatever is 

possible that will enhance this industry's competitiveness within 

the Canadian market. 

 

And we want to be on record as well of saying that there are 

many in our society who see film and videos and other aspects 

of arts and culture as expendable. We do not. We do not see 

this as something extravagant at all. What we do is see it as part 

of who we are, a promotion of who we are. And it doesn't just 

deal with talent; it deals with putting on record what matters. 

 

Furthermore, we do agree that this not only is important as far 

as tourism is important and employment is important and as far 

as other kinds of employment and taxation and all the different 

kinds of revenues that go into local economies. This is beyond 

that, Mr. Speaker. We know that the only thing that survives 

throughout civilization are those things that come through 

printed word and performance, and of course now with this 

particular era, through film and videos. 

 

We're very, very pleased to hear of this announcement today 

and we hope that you'll take this even further, Madam Minister. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting Private Vocational Schools 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Private Vocational Schools be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley, seconded by Mr. 

Knezacek. 

 

Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be 

part of the government and to speak on the Speech from the 

Throne. First, I would like to thank the mover from Bengough-

Milestone and the seconder from Saltcoats for their fine speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before 1991 we had deficit after deficit by the 

previous administration. 

 

I am very proud to be part of the government to bring in the 

first balanced budget in just over 12 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: — I would like to thank each and every one of 

the people for their support in bringing in our first balanced 

budget. Our farm families faced high debt loads and poor 

prospects to train, and long-term investments necessary to build 

a better future, to have better . . . neglected and too many young 

people have decided to seek new hope and opportunities 

elsewhere. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

177 

As you know, the federal Liberal budget will be a tough one. 

We know the federal deficit has to be tackled, just like we have 

tackled the deficit here in Saskatchewan. But it has to be done 

with fairness, both to individuals and to the region. 

 

Ottawa's proposed changes to western grain stabilization Act, 

the WGTA, will affect only the West, and especially 

Saskatchewan, and this is more than a provincial issue — it is a 

local issue. This will impact on many local communities. 

 

For example, Ottawa, it is said, is considering a pay-out of the 

Crow benefit at 2 billion. This translates into roughly 180 

million annually or one-third of the current level of payment. 

That's $360 million per year taken out of the pockets of western 

Canadian farmers or half of that from the Saskatchewan farmers 

alone. 

 

If it happens, there will be repercussions amongst them. This 

will mean a drop in farm income and a drop in business from 

every Saskatchewan community, closures of rail lines and grain 

elevators, and the negative effect of such closures on the local 

tax base. 

 

(1430) 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we had a couple of rail lines close in my 

constituency. The rail line from Paddockwood to White Star 

was closed, as well as the line from Holbein to Prince Albert. 

With the closure of these lines most of the farmers must deliver 

their grain farther to elevators. This means a higher cost to road 

maintenance and road construction as trucking is replacing rail 

transportation. 

 

Agriculture is the backbone of our economy. I support growing 

farm families, local communities, and more, like biotech, food 

processing, and farm equipment manufacturing. The health of 

our agriculture sector is reflected in the bottom line of every 

rural business, and many urban ones, throughout the province. 

 

At a time when Saskatchewan's recovering is really beginning 

to take hold, it makes no sense whatever to pull the rug from 

under one of our most important industries. So we should all be 

very concerned if Ottawa pursues its program of deficit 

reduction at the expense of individual farm producers and rural 

communities. 

 

I would like to talk about the great comeback our government 

was able to achieve. 1994 was an incredible year for the 

provincial economy. The most recent statistics show record oil 

and gas . . . (inaudible) . . . sales of 200 million. Crop receipts 

up more than 30 million . . . 30 per cent over 1993. Total 

exports up 20 per cent. Restaurant, caterers, and tavern receipts 

up 7 per cent. Retail trades up nine and one-half per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this summer, in and around the lake resort areas in 

Shellbrook-Torch River, businesses were up 25 to 28 per cent 

over last year. Machine dealers are saying sales are up over last 

year. Automobile sales are up. Mr. Speaker, that has to make  

me feel good, to be part of a government that is working with 

people to make things happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our population continues to increase. Best of all, 

employment is on the rise. Short-term jobs in my constituency 

are happening through the infrastructure program. Smeaton will 

be getting their new health care facility. RMs (rural 

municipality) will be upgrading their roads. Shellbrook is 

upgrading their water system. Canwood will be upgrading 

streets and sidewalks. Many other communities will be taking 

advantage of the infrastructure program, which will not only 

give much-needed infrastructure; also many jobs are needed in 

our rural communities. 

 

As we look forward to long-term jobs working with REDA 

(regional economic development authority) and added value to 

agriculture diversification, processing, manufacturing, this 

opens up the opportunity for Saskatchewan working together 

for a brighter tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak on our health care system. 

We have a health centre to be constructed in Smeaton. This is 

because of the work of the North-East Health Board and the 

committee in Smeaton that made the decision based on the 

needs in the community. There is other areas like Christopher 

Lake and Candle Lake that are looking at different types of 

health services based on the needs of the community to provide 

good health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening to 

our colleague from the government's eloquent delivery on the 

praises of the government, it gives me great pleasure, Mr. 

Speaker, to have an opportunity to counter some of the 

arguments that he has put forward. 

 

Certainly as we begin the debate on the Speech from the 

Throne, I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn't say 

something about the Lieutenant Governor who delivered his 

maiden speech in this Assembly in that role. Obviously he has 

been in this Assembly many times before and is well practised 

at the profession of delivering speeches. 

 

Jack Wiebe and his wife of course are from our corner of the 

province and we're very proud to have someone from our area 

representing this great office here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we think that his performance in his duties 

was certainly well done and eloquently put forward, and we 

want to congratulate him and his wife in the role that they are 

playing. 

 

Obviously Mrs. Wiebe is a strong and solid rock of support for 

Jack. She has always been in their home community, and she 

certainly will be in the role that they play in the province today. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

178 

So I congratulate them and if they're listening I want to say 

hello and wish them the best. 

 

It must have been though, Mr. Speaker, somewhat difficult for a 

man of Mr. Wiebe's strong professional and ethical background 

is to read a document as difficult to read, probably as difficult 

to read as it was to listen to, because it's always easier, Mr. 

Speaker, to read and deliver a speech if the contents in that 

speech is something that you can believe in. That didn't seem 

obvious at the time that the speech was read, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once again the government had used the Speech from the 

Throne to talk about job creation. And for those of us who live 

in the real world of observation, that simply hasn't happened. 

And so it makes it really difficult, I'm sure, for someone to read 

a document that makes those kind of claims when in fact 

nothing is in it. 

 

It can be said, I think, Mr. Speaker, and with some justification, 

that this is an empty document. It is a document that isolates 

Saskatchewan from the rest of the real world. A document that 

sets us out on a course of adventure in this province for a future 

that is in dead parallel . . . running the opposite directions to the 

course of action taken in the province of Alberta, for example. 

 

This document will spell stagnation for our province. It means 

we do nothing and we go nowhere. There is no plan for any 

future development. There is no real, true plan for job creation; 

in fact if anything it will do exactly the opposite. 

 

It is without a doubt a direct parallel to the experiment that has 

been put to work in the province of Alberta — an experiment 

that has been put to the test of late with polling that shows that 

Premier Klein is now up to some 80-some per cent popularity in 

the moves that he has made in the control of the Alberta deficit 

problems. 

 

In Saskatchewan we've gone exactly the opposite direction — 

we've gone the direction of increasing taxes, and we haven't 

even decreased the cost of government. We have in fact 

increased the cost of government. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, 

that we in this province could be hearing our Premier and other 

people claiming victory for our province in the direction that 

we've been going politically over the past three years. 

 

And setting out a course for the future that is identically the 

same as what we have just gone through, seems to me to be so 

foolhardy as to hardly warrant debating or talking about. But we 

are hired by the voters to do our job and so we must do that and 

stand before this Assembly and before the people of 

Saskatchewan and point out what is clearly obvious to them, 

which is that we are going in the wrong direction. 

 

I've always said, because I live close to Alberta, things look 

pretty good over there. Of late I've taken some time and gone 

over and taken a look, and found out that my thoughts were 

exactly right. Things are good in Alberta. They always have 

been good in Alberta. And we've always said in the south-west, 

if things are so good in Alberta, why don't we do the same  

things in Saskatchewan. It is clearly obvious to us that if you 

want to be successful, do the things that successful people do. 

 

But no, we've had the good fortune, I guess, of having socialists 

run our province. So we run dead last in just about everything, 

while Alberta runs dead first with almost everything that 

happens in the world of politics and the spin-offs of business. 

 

I'm not really sure, Mr. Speaker, why the government wants to 

persist in the topic of job creation — trying to make claims to 

the unreal situation, trying to make claims that there are in fact 

more jobs in Saskatchewan now than there were before. I guess 

it must just be a habit that they're into. It can't obviously be 

because of the success they've had, because it is so minimal and 

so marginal that it's really hard to understand why a government 

would hang their hat on that particular subject. I would've 

thought they might try something different, something where 

they at least have done some work at. 

 

Well of course that would be pretty hard, because there really 

isn't anything they've done much, is there? Well I suppose 

they're stuck with jobs then. In reality, there has been minimal 

job creation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There has been 

higher taxes, of course — no job creation. We've had higher 

utility rates, but not much job creation. And I wonder if the 

people of this province will soon start to realize that the two go 

hand in hand; the two go together. The reason we don't have job 

creation is because we have too high taxes, because we have too 

high utility rates. 

 

Why does that affect people? Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, people 

who might come to this province to create jobs simply look at a 

better atmosphere in another jurisdiction and they go there. It's 

just as simple as that. 

 

We have some outlandish statements made, Mr. Speaker, about 

this job creation of the government. And I think we need to set 

some of the record straight in this area. I think it's important 

that we do that because once in a while, even though we know 

what's going on and we understand what's going on, it doesn't 

hurt to have our memories refreshed so that we don't run into 

the peril of being brainwashed or having someone give us a 

snow job rather than a real job. 

 

It just seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we can look back at some 

of the history of this government, and we can do it through the 

throne speeches of the past, as to compare it to the throne 

speech of this year. 

 

I want to quote a little bit from the 1992 throne speech, Mr. 

Speaker. It says here: 

 

 In spite of Saskatchewan's financial problems, there is 

reason for hope and optimism. 

 

This is a quote from the throne speech of 1992: 

 

 In total, there are currently more than 700 companies 

which have expressed an interest in either relocating to  



February 14, 1995 

 

179 

Saskatchewan or expanding their operations here. If 

these businesses proceed with their plans, they will have 

the potential to create or maintain more than 16,000 

jobs. 

 

Now that was on page 3, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now isn't that an amazing thing. Seven hundred companies and 

here we are now, 1995, three full years later and we don't have 

anybody showing us any figures of any 16,000 jobs being 

created anywhere. And we certainly don't find any 700 

companies any place in the world looking to come to 

Saskatchewan to set up business. I wonder if we could even 

find seven. Well I'm sure if we looked really hard. 

 

Then we ought to go on and quote a little more from the 1992 

budget, and this is a quote: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, one of the most important priorities for 

Saskatchewan people is stimulating (the economy or) 

economic opportunities and creating jobs. 

 

And that was on page 17. Same old story that we have just 

heard in this address this past week. 

 

In 1993 the throne speech echoes much the same, and I'll quote 

again: 

 

 Of the hundreds of new, expanding and potential 

business projects in the province, more than half are 

outside Regina and Saskatoon. Those outside our two 

largest cities have the potential to create or maintain . . . 

8,000 jobs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's the end of the quote but here we have 

just a year later, 1993, we cut that estimate down from 16,000 

to 8,000. At least they started to face some reality. But again the 

theme will develop as being the same year after year with no 

success and with nothing really happening. 

 

In 1993 we had from the budget debate: "Jobs are our first 

priority." is the quote on page 3. Jobs are their main priority. 

Well at least they're consistent. They started way back right 

after the last election, then they've continued to say the same 

thing. But again, no success, no reality. 

 

In 1994, just last year, the throne speech, and I'll quote from it 

just to make my point. 

 

 The economic development strategy which my 

government introduced in 1992 — Partnership for 

Renewal, has three key goals: to create a positive 

climate for economic renewal, to build on existing 

strengths, and to seek full employment. 

 

 The partnership is working. 

 

Page 2 that was on. That was a direct quote from the throne 

speech of 1994, just a year ago. Still, Mr. Speaker, I will point  

out for the benefit of the people of this province, that we've had 

this same trend of opinion of what the government is going to 

do coming from the Premier and his government and his 

cabinet. They've had the same theme with no results. The same 

theme — a good theme — job creation's fine. We agree with 

that. But after this many years, you would think that they would 

look for some measure of success in order to continue to use 

this as their selling gimmick at the start of each session. 

 

(1445) 

 

From the budget of 1994 I will quote, just to bring this fully to 

the attention of the people. And I quote: "This Budget shows 

that jobs are also our number one priority." Page 3. 1994 budget 

projections, 5,000 new jobs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government failed to produce on each 

and every one of these grandiose promises. All of these years 

they have made promise after promise after promise to this 

province and to the people of this province. Promises that they 

would deliver jobs. That there would be something with dignity 

and respect for each and every person in this province to look 

forward to. A reason for our children to be able to stay in this 

province and to work and to develop and to become good 

citizens in a place that they could call home. 

 

That hasn't happened, Mr. Speaker, because we have in this 

province a government that can't deliver on jobs because of 

their fundamental direction in philosophy  the fundamental 

direction in philosophy that directly counteracts the philosophy 

that is being used in Alberta. And if people are going to say to 

me, as some of the government members have, try to think for 

yourself, don't always look at somebody else, don't look at 

Alberta; this is Saskatchewan, we've got to be different here. I 

say to that, that's bunk. Pure bunk. 

 

If something else is working across the border, I'm not afraid at 

all to admit that they're doing better than we are and I'm not 

afraid at all to say we'll go and borrow their ideas and use the 

philosophy that they use and make things better for ourselves. 

And that's what the government of this province had better do 

before there's no one left to impress or to bring back. 

 

We wonder, Mr. Speaker, why, after four years, four different 

addresses at least, the government has continued to say that they 

are going to create jobs. And then we have to ask the question, 

why would the people of Saskatchewan at this time start to 

believe them? How could they believe them when you've struck 

out four times already? Why would they start to believe them 

now? 

 

And that's what's so amazing about this whole process of this 

throne speech. You've struck out four times, and you've come 

back with the same throne speech with the same theme and 

hang your hat on it as your reason for being in government and 

your reason for the people to re-elect you. And really what it is 

is a record of failure — a record of failure that they keep 

bringing up themselves by reintroducing it year after year. I 

would have thought by now even they would have caught on to  



February 14, 1995 

 

180 

having a new theme. But obviously not. So we live with this 

disastrous approach to government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the people of this province do 

believe the government any more. I don't think they believe 

them one little bit. And I think they're going to keep on going to 

Alberta to shop and they're going to keep on going to Alberta to 

look for jobs. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the stats on this job creation 

because there was so much talk about it through question 

periods and other forums in debate here in the last few days. 

 

Particularly we would like to look at the StatsCanada figures 

here which refutes what was said in the throne speech. I kind of 

hate to even get into all these figures but somebody's got to do 

it, I guess, and so I might as well take a shot at it. It's all rather 

confusing and I'm going to explain to the people of this 

province when I finish with this number crunching why this is 

so futile. And so I'm refuting my own arguments here, but I'm 

going to do that because it has to be done. 

 

Now StatsCanada's revised numbers credit the NDP with 7,000 

jobs since 1992. I don't know if we can believe StatsCanada or 

not but that's what we got. Well the Minister of Economic 

Development takes great pride in quoting these numbers. So 

that's fine. If he wants to use that set, I'm sure there's five or six 

other sets that we can use from somebody else somewhere and 

probably it'll be a hodgepodge like you've never seen before, 

and of course that's what we've been seeing this last while. 

 

Now however we must keep them in perspective, these 

numbers. After all in 1992 the government claimed that more 

than 700 companies were considering relocating to 

Saskatchewan and that these companies had the potential to 

create the 16,000 jobs that I alluded to earlier. 

 

In 1993 they indicated that there was the potential for 8,000 

jobs in the communities located outside of the major centres. 

And we talked about that a minute ago. 

 

Now in 1994 the government's administration promised 5,000 

new jobs for Saskatchewan. In total the NDP have promised to 

create close to 30,000 jobs since forming government. They 

have made little progress, Mr. Speaker. In fact if you factor in 

the 1991 employment figures, the NDP are still a thousand jobs 

in the hole. 

 

Now let's look at the facts according to the StatsCanada. Last 

year the NDP created 2,000 jobs, not 5,000 as promised in the 

budget, and certainly not 12,000 that they claimed in the throne 

speech. 

 

The members opposite jeered when we, on this side of the 

House, make reference to our neighbours to the west, but there 

is a relevant point to be made, Mr. Speaker. And while the 

Saskatchewan government is patting itself on the back for 7,000 

jobs since 1992 . . . For the sake of argument, let's give them the 

fact that maybe they did create 7,000. I don't at all believe  

that in reality the people out there believe these figures at all, 

but just suppose they did. 

 

The reality is that at the same time in Alberta they created 

30,000 in one year alone. One year alone, Mr. Speaker, Alberta 

outdoes us by creating 30,000 jobs. That alludes back to the 

comparison that I made earlier that we are going in different 

directions with different philosophies driving the machine of 

government and the machine of the province  the machine of 

our province against the machine of their province. And ours 

has sputtered and failed and gone dead while theirs has chugged 

along quite nicely and they have a philosophy and a direction 

that is working. 

 

During the span of one year, Alberta realized that Saskatchewan 

. . . or during the span of one year, rather, Alberta realized what 

Saskatchewan is hoping to gain by the year 2000. And this, Mr. 

Speaker, is a reality. 

 

We might get there by the year 2000. But Alberta said, no, we're 

not going to wait that long; we can't wait that long. So they put 

their philosophy to work and they created in one year what 

we're going to wait another five years to attain. 

 

I think that's too long, as well. I think we've got to smell the 

coffee, I guess some people would say, and get with it and do 

what Alberta has done, purely and simply. If it's been luck, then 

the same luck should have attributed to us because our base is 

the same in terms of what our provinces do and what we have 

available to work with. We can talk about resource industries 

and all kinds of stuff like that as we go along, Mr. Speaker, but 

the reality is that by the year 2000 it's going to be too late. 

 

Now Alberta has been able to make these kind of economic 

strides by reducing government spending, by cutting rather than 

by taxing. Now the other day we had talked a little bit about 

reducing government, and the Premier of this province sat is his 

seat and he said, all you guys want to do is tear down 

government. And we agreed. He thinks that's terrible; we don't. 

We're different. We're very much different. 

 

We do believe that tearing down government can be an 

advantage because we've got too much government already. 

 

In the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, very quickly, in 

the 1930s and '40s  I was looking at some statistical 

background  we were looking at about 800,000 people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. In the '50s and '60s we got up to 

close to the million, 900-and-some thousand. The last 10 years 

or so we did come over the million, and back down a little, and 

up again, back and forth. But we hover about that. 

 

Reality is that Alberta has gone from about 800,000 up to 3 

million. They've tripled us over the same period of history. Now 

what has changed in Saskatchewan? That is my point. 

 

Our population has marginally gone up, but what has really 

changed is that in the 1930s and '40s we had nine members of 

cabinet — only nine. I could find no more in the history book I  



February 14, 1995 

 

181 

was checking on. But now we've got more than double that 

many almost. 

 

See the reality here, Mr. Speaker, is that there's a message here. 

The only thing that has increased very significantly in 

Saskatchewan is the size of government. And that little example 

about cabinet you see reflects all through the bureaucratic 

structure of our entire province. It reflects through the entire 

structure of everything that we do that is bureaucratic or 

government related through our province. 

 

So what should we do? Reduce it. Tear down the size of 

government. Cut costs. Cut spending. And start at the top and 

work down through society. Alberta has done it. I'm not saying 

that they've done it exactly right. But certainly it has worked 

much better than what we're trying. And we'd better take a real 

careful look. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, in fairness the government ought to 

take a look because we now have a Premier who told us he's no 

longer an NDP. He doesn't believe in that philosophy at all, he 

tells folks outside the province. So if he's not NDP, he could 

come and join our party and we'd be glad to have him over here 

and we could go on and do the right things. But I don't suppose 

he'd do that. So the best advice we could give him then is to 

pull his socks up and get the rest of his colleagues to go along 

and introduce those kinds of philosophies and those kinds of 

policies that are used in Alberta. And I think there's possibly a 

good chance he may have to do that. It's either that or face the 

electorate with a plan and a program that will be rejected and 

will put him into the ranks of the unemployed along with the 

other thousands of people in this province. 

 

If you want to create jobs, Mr. Speaker, it has become plainly 

evident that cutting taxes and reducing utility rates is the way to 

go, because then you attract business and development. That's 

how you create jobs that are long lasting. 

 

Higher taxation means that you've got to adopt the philosophy 

of bigger and stronger government. And that can create jobs at 

the start but it can never sustain itself, Mr. Speaker, quite 

simply because you don't have a tax base to pay the bills any 

more. And that's why Alberta's example is going to work and 

our is destined to fail, because there they're building a job base 

based on industry, based on manufacturing, based on creativity, 

based on business development — things that are long and 

sustainable and will continue into the future. 

 

And so we're suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

ought to follow that example and to start to cut taxes. And 

reality is this: that the government will come out very quickly 

here now with a budget speech and they will no doubt balance 

the books for a year on paper. So that's a fine time to start then. 

If you've got things lined up and you've got your ducks in line 

in that way, then we throw you the challenge: start cutting 

taxes; reduce the utility rates; let's get it going back the other 

direction. Maybe it's not too late to turn this thing around. 

 

We have to do some other things though, Mr. Speaker, if we  

really want this to work. We would have to talk about The 

Trade Union Act and the labour standards legislation because 

these two things alone would keep most big job creators out of 

our province, and it will keep even many of the small 

businesses from coming into our province. No question about 

it. 

 

Why would you as a business person bring a million dollars, for 

an example, into Saskatchewan and start a business in, say, 

secondary manufacturing of some agricultural goods — an 

ethanol plant, or a soup manufacturing plant using lentils or 

something like that — why would you do that if immediately 

that you came to this province to do it, you were faced with the 

restrictions of the The Labour Standards Act and The Trade 

Union Act that would almost force you to be fighting with 

unions from the day you started, when all you had to do was go 

another 200 miles over to Alberta, locate on any piece of land 

you want to pick, and they'd welcome you with open arms and 

not have any of this restrictive type of legislation or these 

restrictive rules to fight with and worry about for the rest of 

your life? 

 

Why would anybody in their right mind ever want to do that? 

And obviously these people who have these dollars and they 

have these ideals are not going to do that. They haven't and they 

won't. It just makes eminent sense to me that they're going to go 

to Alberta or some place else; they're not going to come to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Who wants to have the union bosses immediately take over 

your business and run it for you? Why would you want to go 

into business to start with if immediately you had another, 

second boss taking over your own job? Absolutely makes no 

sense whatsoever. And so they won't do it. They'll just go some 

place else. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now I do believe though that in reality, to be fair about this, 

and I think we do want to be fair, business is pleased that the 

government has finally backed down on some of the provisions 

of the new labour standards. However, the reality is that they 

simply didn't go far enough. It was good to save what you could 

for those who are trapped in this province and can't get out. 

Save what you could, fight for what you could get, get some 

breaks, certainly. Business had to do that. They did it, and they 

did it very well. 

 

Chamber of commerce people and business people from all 

over this province worked long and hard hours to convince the 

government to back off just a little bit, to let them survive. And 

they got that concession — they got a small backing-off and 

they got some chance to survive. Because there's many people 

that just simply are rooted in this province too deep to be able 

to pull up stakes and move out. 

 

Take my farm, for an example. I can't pick it up and take it to 

Alberta or it would have been gone a long time ago and you'd 

have had one great big hole in south-west Saskatchewan  



February 14, 1995 

 

182 

because it would have been long gone. But I can't do that. It's 

not possible. So we're stuck here. So we have to stay and fight 

for what little bit we can get. 

 

That means that our population will stay and stagnate at that 

900,000 to a million people, because we're about the population 

that is rooted here and can't get away. So we fight to survive the 

best we can, and we stay on. But as far as growth and 

development or expansion or anything close to that, forget it. 

It's just never going to happen. If all my kids had to leave the 

province to find a job, yours will have to, too. No question 

about it. 

 

Now the government did back off on seniority rules for part-

timers and the onerous severance provisions. And for that we 

are grateful in opposition. We're glad that you did that. You did 

at least save a little bit of the potential for some people to 

survive and not just go bankrupt and have to leave the province 

altogether and leave us without the kinds of goods and services 

that these businesses and people provide. 

 

But there are many of these negative provisions that still do 

exist, Mr. Speaker. They just haven't been proclaimed yet. And 

that's another one of the problems we've got in our province, the 

fact that we passed legislation with regulations that can be 

brought in at the whim of the cabinet and the government. And 

that threat, you see, remains over people's heads. We have more 

regulations to come, more rules to come. 

 

How many people want to go into a ball game not knowing 

what the rules are, and knowing very well that you're going to 

play nine innings; that's one rule. Okay, we've got one set up. 

But we don't know the rest of the rules. Because maybe after 

the seventh inning, if the government's behind, they'll give their 

side a new rule and they'll have four strikes instead of three 

before they go out. And if you're getting ahead in the ball game, 

maybe you'll get two strikes instead. 

 

And that's just about the way this kind of thing works. You 

don't know what you're facing in the future. And so with these 

kind of threats remaining and hanging over your head, Mr. 

Speaker, nobody — I say nobody — is going to voluntarily 

invest their fortunes or their lifetime's ambitions and lifetime's 

works to come to Saskatchewan from some place else. They 

simply won't do it. And the people that are here are simply 

going to say, if I'm not rooted into the soil or rooted into the 

business community here in such a way that I can't get away, if 

I'm not rooted down, I'm going to get out of here. And that's 

exactly what's been happening and will continue to happen. 

 

In the throne speech it states that the government, and I'll quote 

here: 

 

 . . . will show the same focus and determination with the 

job challenge as it has already applied to the deficit . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say again is what have we seen for 

success out of this? Where is the proof? They say the proof is in 

the tasting of the pudding, and if it tastes good it is good, and if  

it tastes bad it is bad. Well, my friends, the taste of this is bad, 

because there is no positive result. You've done the same old 

thing here, over and over and over. You've claimed that you're 

going to do the same old thing again and again, but there is no 

proof of success, and there can't be because there is none. 

 

It all makes nice quotations, Mr. Speaker, but however, the 

taxation policies adopted by this government created the job 

crisis that we're currently experiencing. It didn't improve it, it 

didn't solve it; it created it. 

 

And you would say, what can we do about this? Well certainly 

it is clearly evident again that we must go to a jurisdiction that 

has success and follow their example. 

 

Taxation. I want to talk a minute about taxation. There's so 

many subjects to be talked about here, but we have to squeeze it 

all in. In my constituency the high education and health tax 

continues to drive people across the border to shop — very 

simply a fact of life. Medicine Hat malls target the south-west 

communities to draw them across the border. And this is a 

problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not unique only to my 

area, but it happens all across the western side of the province. 

 

If the government wanted to create jobs, they could remove the 

barrier of the E&H (education and health) tax. And this would 

help a tremendous amount. There's no question in my mind that 

if we got rid of that tax or somehow could get on a playing-field 

that is level with Alberta, we would solve so many of our 

problems in south-west and along the western side of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is someone that has finally taken note of the problem that 

exists in the western part of the province and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, Dale Eisler wrote on this very matter on February 13. 

And I want to just allude to that commentary made by Mr. 

Eisler because it was my good friend, George Kushner, who 

was interviewed and who was quoted and had the input into 

that article. 

 

Absolutely a fact of life is the fact that people are taking trucks 

and trailers to Alberta and loading up and bringing them back to 

Saskatchewan. Nobody can debate that; it's a fact of life. Mr. 

Kushner proved it and if people want to read this article they 

will see how he demonstrated that proof. 

 

He got several appliances into his shop from Alberta, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Very simply put, he was the agent who was 

required to repair these pieces of equipment because he's the 

dealer for those particular companies. But before he has to do 

the work, people have to be able to prove to him that they 

bought it and where, and the receipts brought in showed that 

they were bought in Alberta. 

 

He became alarmed at that, notified his member, and let the 

world know, as well he should have. Because it proves the point 

that people have been questioning. It proves the point that once 

again the tax that we've got that should have been addressed in 

this budget, early in this throne speech, should  



February 14, 1995 

 

183 

have been an announcement of a total change in philosophy, in 

policy, to taxation — a reduction in taxes across the board, but 

most importantly dealing with the E&H tax. 

 

If that had been done, we could have stimulated our economy 

and started the correction in this province that is desperately 

needed. If Mr. Kushner can stay in business now, can you 

imagine what kind of expansion he could do if he could stop 

the exodus of shoppers to Alberta and bring them back to his 

store and supply the jobs for his community. It's amazing to me 

some days that there's anybody left in business at all in south-

west Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we could go on about this taxation problem 

and the many problems that we have for a long time, and we 

will. When the budget comes out we're going to talk a lot more 

about that. 

 

But there is a solution to our problem. It might sound like it's a 

bit off the wall. But we just have the native community getting 

special consideration for gambling. The thought crossed my 

mind, that after studying the documentation of how the land 

claim settlements are made . . . and believe me it's no small 

task; it's a document about that thick, about 3 inches deep. I'm 

sure there's 3 to 400 pages of it; there's a lot of stuff in there. 

 

But anyway, one of the things it does say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is that if the native community buys a certain proportion of land 

in a municipality in rural areas, they then become qualified to 

buy property in an urban area. 

 

So it seems to me that maybe the solution is for the business 

people in Maple Creek, for example, to get together with the 

native people and help them to find enough acres of land rurally 

so that they will qualify to buy some in town, and voluntarily 

offer to sell them a couple of square blocks of the business 

district, make it into a reserve, and then have the business 

people lease back the property and work as agents for the Indian 

band, whichever one it happens to be — I'll say Maple Creek, 

that would be the Nekaneets. 

 

They could own and control the reserve. The agents, now the 

old former retailers that were there before, could now be 

exempt from both GST (goods and services tax) and PST 

(provincial sales tax). We could escape both taxes. And they 

could offer to the Indian band 6 per cent profit off the retail sale 

value of everything they sell — certainly a nice attraction for 

the native community. And I'm sure that they would say: hey, 

this is pretty good, everything that's sold we're going to get 6 

per cent — do nothing, just handle the paperwork; sounds good 

to me. I'll bet they'd go for it. 

 

And yet because both taxes are eliminated, they could sell — 

believe it or not — for less than what people are being charged 

in Alberta then because we'd be 1 per cent under the Alberta 

price and we'd have an advantage. They don't have a PST right 

now so we'd cancel that; that's even. We give the natives 6 per 

cent off the GST and we've got 1 per cent left as an incentive 

for people to come back from Alberta to shop in Saskatchewan. 

Now it seems to me that maybe that's the solution to our 

problem. I'm not sure how the government will survive 

financially when all of this happens. But surely under the rules 

that are being developed and the way that they're being applied 

in gambling and all these other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

sure as there is snow up North and dust down South, I will bet 

you that this is going to happen — that people are not sitting 

around sleeping for very long. They're going to say: hey, our 

native friends have got a break here that we can capitalize on, 

and we'll go and make a business deal with them and we'll solve 

this problem for ourselves. 

 

I don't know how we can survive as a province when those kind 

of things start to happen, but that's the kind of mess we're 

developing ourselves into — empty documents that isolate us 

from the rest of the world, stagnation for our province and our 

people, absolutely no future and no hope in this document that 

we talk about today. 

 

I want to quote a little more to make my impact before I leave 

this. I'm not as optimistic considering the Finance minister's 

comments to the Macklin Chamber of Commerce either. And so 

I want to quote from that and deal with that for a minute, and 

I'll give you the quote first: 

 

 While increased investment in job creation that result 

from the E&H tax rate reduction would translate into 

higher tax revenues that could offset provincial revenue 

loss associated with E&H tax rate reduction, federal 

equalization payments would be reduced, leaving the 

province worse off fiscally under the equalization 

program. New economic activity in the province means 

that Saskatchewan has an increased capacity to raise 

revenues and requires less federal financial support. 

 

What a defeated way to look at things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

other words if she cuts the E&H tax we would see a reduction 

in our welfare payments from the federal government. I say we 

get off of welfare and start supporting ourselves. Welfare 

mentality will never, ever get you any place. 

 

It's a pure fact of life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government 

doesn't understand how to create jobs. They don't understand 

how jobs are stimulated and they don't understand how an 

economy really works. 

 

And I will tell you quite simply how you have to start. Because 

you will say, well it's so massive and it's so complicated. And it 

is. But there's a simple way to start and that simple way is to 

repeal your labour legislation and to reduce taxation. Two 

starters. Easy. Don't have to fight through the maze of all of the 

other things. Start with those two things and the rest will start to 

fall into place by themselves like dominoes. It will happen; it 

can happen. 

 

We've got the same kind of base in Saskatchewan that Alberta's 

got. And truly we do have good people with good roots in this 

province. And this province could spring to attention in a  



February 14, 1995 

 

184 

minute, and within a few months we could see prosperity 

return. 

 

We have talked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the things that are 

in the throne speech and the things that the government could 

do to turn the direction around if they chose to. 

 

A couple of things that aren't in the throne speech are as bad in 

my opinion as the emptiness that is written in the document. 

The lack of comment on a simple issue like gun control, not 

even mentioned. A number one priority in most rural 

communities, if not all of the province. And I can certainly see 

that this issue would affect rural people a little more 

dramatically than it would many of the city people, although 

I've seen many city people out in my district hunting and fishing 

and enjoying the outdoors. So why not tackle this very real 

issue on this very real day in the history of the world? 

 

(1515) 

 

Gun control is something that's on now. Not next year maybe, 

not last year — because that's gone — but it's on right now. 

And we should have had a statement in the throne speech 

saying that we in this province are prepared to get together with 

Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia and form a union 

against this kind of dictatorship from Ottawa. And I think 

maybe we'll do that as this session progresses, but we should 

have started the session by making that statement clearly and 

out front in the throne speech. 

 

And so I encourage the government to pay attention to the 

things that are going on that are pertinent to the people of our 

province. It's almost like they wrote this document two years 

ago and dusted it off and said, well this is the same plan we 

plan to use for the next four years, so here it is, and pay no 

attention whatever to what's happening in the real world around 

them. 

 

Another thing, of course, that has to bother me about this 

speech is the fact that we have dealt so little with agriculture. 

Being of a farm background myself and knowing that this 

province has had as the chief engine of the economy of this 

province for so many years the industry of agriculture, it appals 

me that agriculture hasn't had some more attention. 

 

One of my neighbours asked me the other day, do you think if a 

government can take your GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) away retroactively under legislation, that if you got 

elected, you could bring it back retroactively? I guess we could; 

I don't know. We didn't even talk about it in the Speech from 

the Throne. We've just forgotten about farmers. Somebody said 

to me the other day though, they did mention a little bit about 

agriculture and said, well farmers are doing better because 

commodity prices went up. Well input prices went up too, I can 

assure you. 

 

And I can assure the government of another thing. I talked to a 

lawyer in our area who deals with farm crises, financial 

problems. He told me that he's getting three to four new farm  

cases each week in his office. Right now, this month, this year, 

today. Not two years ago, not last year, not in the 1980s, — 

1995 — right here, right now, right today. That's how many 

farmers are in financial trouble. 

 

And this government totally and completely ignores them and 

cuts out the best support program they ever had, costing this 

province not only millions of dollars but probably hundreds and 

maybe even thousands of farmers. After a while the land will be 

farmed, but it won't be farmed by families owning and 

controlling their own units, owning and controlling their own 

businesses. It will be done by big corporations or by 

government. And this government totally ignores the problem 

and totally ignores the industry. 

 

Health boards and health issues are alluded to as though the 

greatest thing in the world that ever could have happened to us 

has happened when this government got elected and brought 

about the health changes. That's what you'd believe if you read 

the throne speech and listen to the rhetoric from the government 

side, Mr. Deputy Speaker; when in reality the health system in 

this province is in absolute, total chaos. There's absolutely no 

question in my mind that health will become a major issue in 

the next election. And ironically the party that claims fame to 

have brought this great program into effect is the party that's 

going to be defeated because of their moves that are destroying 

the fundamentals of health care. 

 

I'll bring to the attention of the members in the government the 

reality of where Tommy Douglas got the idea from. He got the 

idea from Germany because they've had a medicare system in 

the country of Germany since the 1800s. And even a terrible 

person like Adolf Hitler did not have the nerve to tamper with 

the health care system in Germany when he was in power. 

 

That was brought to my attention from a person who had 

immigrated from Germany just a few days ago. They lived 

through that period of war and said they had their medicare 

system in effect all through that and Hitler never dared touch it 

because he could never have faced an election and won if he 

had tried to tamper with the health care system. 

 

So nothing is new in the world, and certainly not much new in 

Saskatchewan. But what is going to be a reality is that the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to reject you because you 

failed to stick with the old tried and proven methods that 

worked. 

 

And I'll talk to you a little bit for a minute about the health 

region number one, just to give you some ideas of what you 

should be doing in this throne speech. You should have been 

talking about going back to a plan that worked. The old 

experimental plan, health region number one, was done in 

south-west Saskatchewan. It had elected people. 

 

I know that's a terrible word to you folks, but this is how it 

started. At the municipal level they had elected people, people 

elected by the folks around them, who went on the health board. 

Every municipality had one. I think there was 80 or 90  



February 14, 1995 

 

185 

municipalities. And from that group of 80 or 90 people, they 

elected a board of directors who hired an administrator and they 

handled the whole thing for the south-west corner of the 

province. The program worked. It worked then; it could work 

now. 

 

Revisit the past in this area, my friends, because there is a 

master plan that was used as an experiment in this province that 

worked well and could save you hundreds of millions of 

dollars. And you simply could do it by having your elections 

along with your municipal elections in the fall. The person 

elected could either be a councillor or a reeve or someone from 

the general community, but the election would be held at the 

same time. No extra cost, just an election at the same time that 

municipal things are done. 

 

And those people select from them an executive board that 

would direct health care and you could do it on the same six 

districts that you have in this SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) method of organizing their 

assembly. The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, that's how their districts are set up — six of 

them in the province. You could do it with health care, six 

major boards. The city of Saskatoon and Regina of course 

would have to have their own, as they do. 

 

So, my friends, it worked in the past; it could work again. You 

could get rid of half of the people you've already got hired and 

the municipalities would probably once again pay for their 

delegate to go. You could save yourself hundreds of millions of 

dollars and have a health care system that would bring some 

comfort to the people, some comfort that they had personal 

access to the control of the way things are run. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't expect that the folks opposite 

are listening that carefully, but I had to say it in order for them 

not to be able to say that they've never, ever had anybody 

suggest that we go back to a tried and proven thing that could 

work. And so I've said it and now I'll rest easier tonight. But 

tomorrow I won't because I'll know we'll have to work harder to 

try to get them to see the reality of how the world in 

Saskatchewan should be working. 

 

And that reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simply this. If it works 

in Alberta, let's do it in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Of 

course I'm very optimistic about the Speech from the Throne. 

It's a little hard, mind you, after listening to the member from 

Maple Creek go on and on and on with his doom and gloom. 

And actually the member from Nipawin and myself invite him 

to Love, Saskatchewan, next year during the winter festival. 

Maybe he'll change his attitude and he'll see what this province 

is really made of and all the good things that are in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm honoured to stand in this House to speak in support of the 

motion before us and I would like to congratulate the mover 

and the seconder of the motion, the member from Bengough- 

Milestone, and the member from Saltcoats. I would also like to 

recognize you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the staff of the Assembly, 

and the pages, because the session is as hectic for you people as 

it is for us. And we depend on your skills to make things run 

efficiently. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the members from Regina 

Lake Centre and Athabasca on their appointment to cabinet. I 

would like to thank the member from Regina Hillsdale and the 

member from Swift Current, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for all of the 

work that they have done in cabinet and for this government. 

We can be very proud of their accomplishments in the public 

service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am also very proud to be part of a 

government which has laid out such a positive plan for this 

session of the legislature. And I know the members opposite 

have a hard time understanding plans, but this government in 

fact has laid out a very positive one. 

 

When I was elected a member back in 1991 for the constituency 

of Kelsey-Tisdale, the people in that area were seeking 

assurances of the province's desperate financial situation, 

assurances that it would be looked after. They wanted their 

government to get control on the escalating deficit, the 

mounting debt, which really threatened the economy of the 

province as a whole. 

 

They were worried about annual deficits in the hundreds of 

millions of dollars. They were worried about the interest 

payments, now over $800 million a year. They were worried 

about the impact of our deficit on our ability to fund important 

things like health care, like other crucial services, education for 

an example. And they were worried about the impact of the 

debt on their children and on their grandchildren. 

 

They were worried about a government that was completely out 

of control, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that had lost sight of their 

priorities. And I'm very happy to say today that, three years 

later, the budget deficit has been reduced from over $800 

million a year — nearly a $1 billion a year — to zero. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — This session, in fact later this week, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the Finance minister will table a balanced 

budget — the first since 1982, when the hon. member for 

Regina Dewdney was Finance minister. 

 

The actions that had to be taken to achieve this balanced budget 

were difficult. Certainly there were some taxes that went up. 

There were some government programs that were cut. The 

people of Saskatchewan made sacrifices to balance that budget, 

but they pulled together and they made it happen. And I want to 

take this opportunity to thank the people of our province and 

especially the people of my constituency, the constituency of 

Kelsey-Tisdale. With their support, with their understanding, 

we have been able to clean up the mess that we inherited. This 

is partnership. There really isn't any other way of doing things  



February 14, 1995 

 

186 

like that in Saskatchewan. We work in partnership, we work 

together, we join when things get rough, and that's what we've 

done in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, and in fact the member from 

Maple Creek, points to Alberta as a model. I would suggest that 

he talk to the people that are moving back to Saskatchewan 

because they can't tolerate the hack and the slash approach that 

has been taken in that province. That's not our approach in 

Saskatchewan; ours is a balanced approach. Our approach is a 

partnership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that we're introducing a balanced 

budget legislation in this session so that no government can 

ever get us back into that position that we faced in 1991. 

 

I want to make one thing clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

legislation is not for the NDP; we don't need it. CCF (Co-

operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP governments 

have always strived for a balanced budget. We have always 

lived within our means. It is the parties opposite, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is the Liberals and it's the Conservatives, and it's 

their natural urge to waste public funds. 

 

So a dark cloud that was floating over the province of 

Saskatchewan is dispersed; it's disappearing, except for a small 

portion which still floats around over the Liberal benches 

opposite. The Leader of the Third Party goes around the 

province preaching doom and gloom. But really there's a new 

day of hope and that new day is here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As the financial situation of the province has improved, so has 

the optimism of the people of Saskatchewan. In the farm sector, 

farm income is up nearly $975 million this year. That's almost 

double of the 10-year average. Now there are certain sectors of 

the farm sector that still has some concerns and rightly so. 

Employment is up. Retail sales are up. Housing starts are up. 

And people, especially the young people, are coming back to 

our province. For the first time in a long time, we are seeing a 

net in-migration, and our numbers are growing — population 

now 1,016,200, according to Statistics Canada. 

 

Now I can understand, I can understand . . . the Liberal member 

laughs. Well I can understand why he laughs . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well yes, he doesn't understand those kinds of 

figures, but he just has to look at the government next door — 

the Klein government. And people are moving back, and rightly 

so. And we look at other governments and their hack-and-slash 

approach. They want to move to a province where there is 

something happening. 

 

(1530) 

 

Saskatchewan economy is entering a whole new era, and we 

know that things are good. And we know that we have 

something to offer. We are selling our knowledge, and our 

products, around the world. 

 

One example that has been cited here is the implement 

manufacturing business. Saskatchewan companies like 

Bourgault in Melfort, Flexi-Coil, to just mention a few, are 

expanding at such a rapid rate and making equipment that was 

designed with Saskatchewan conditions in mind, and designed 

by Saskatchewan people. We also note that this equipment is 

just as applicable in Australia; it's just as applicable in the 

United States as it is for the Canadian prairies. And this is the 

key to our success. 

 

This kind of dedication to quality and innovation is not 

confined to the private sector either. SaskTel, for an example, 

won the contract to install fibre optics in the Channel Tunnel. 

Sask Forest Products has built the most modern and efficient 

saw mill in Canada at Carrot River. Combine all this 

innovation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a motivated and a skilled 

workforce and we can actually see results. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, we face a shortage of production 

welders in the province because of this rapidly developing 

market for made-in-Saskatchewan product. I am proud that this 

government is introducing an Act to set up the agri-food 

innovation fund to encourage diversification and new processes 

to make the most of our farm products. 

 

These are some positive things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and all we 

hear from the parties across is negatives, doom and gloom. I 

just want to read you a few things. Actually there's a whole 

stack of them but I'll just read to you a few — just the 

headlines, in fact, of newspaper articles in this province that 

have appeared in the last little while — I would encourage them 

to listen and maybe they can see the bright side of 

Saskatchewan for change: PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.), post-banner year; RV (recreational vehicle) 

firms gear up to satisfy demand; UGG (United Grain Growers 

Limited) plans to build concrete grain terminal; Town 

welcomes Micada industries; Environmental technology firm 

nabs community bond; Glory days for Dutch Industries; South-

west booms. 

 

And the member from Maple Creek was complaining about the 

doom and gloom in his own area in south-west Saskatchewan 

and here there's a letter, or an article in the Swift Current 

newspaper that says: South-west booms; oil, agricultural wealth 

spreading out. 

 

And it goes on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don't know where 

these people are coming from. Open their eyes, listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan, listen to the positives that are out there 

— in my area, Mr. Speaker, the kind of innovation that I was 

talking about earlier and the skills that has led to the canola 

boom. Canadian plant scientists took a plant with a fairly 

limited use and developed it into one of the highest quality oil 

seeds in the world. And the farmers in the north-east took this 

new crop and after 20 or 30 years became the best canola 

growers in the world. Now the value of canola sold is higher 

than that of wheat. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

187 

And Saskatchewan farmers and especially those in the north-

east of Saskatchewan are leading the way in diversification 

through alfalfa processing, high quality honey, flax, and a 

number of other products. And, Mr. Speaker, our province's 

farms still produce the highest quality wheat, milling wheat, 

durum, and the best malting barley and the best pork and beef 

of any place in the world. 

 

This is clear when the millers and the pasta makers around the 

world demand our wheat. And this is being recognized when 

livestock companies like Dalland and National Pig centre their 

breeding operations right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

In my term as minister for Sask Water I saw the development of 

new industries in irrigation areas which hold a great deal of 

promise. We are selling seed potatoes to Idaho, if you can 

imagine, and pinto beans to Mexico. 

 

We drive through . . . drive through Outlook and I invite the 

opposition, both the Liberals and the Tories, to drive through 

Outlook, smell the mint, smell the dill that's being distilled into 

high valued essential oils. Drive by Lake Diefenbaker south of 

Lucky Lake and you will see Agpro Fish Farm which is 

marketing fish to Halifax, Montreal, and Toronto, and, Mr. 

Speaker, they are now working on salmon as well. 

 

The future of agriculture is built on these diversification success 

stories, not the doom and gloom of the members opposite. The 

biotechnology centre at the University of Saskatchewan is going 

to create entirely new possibilities for the development of new 

crop varieties and existing crops which will keep our producers 

at the leading edge of world markets, in fact like canola we are 

going to create whole new markets. 

 

The success of diversification as a success story is built on 

partnerships in Saskatchewan between skill producers, talented 

scientists, private business, and a government with 

commitment. We have a skill and motivated work force and we 

have a tremendous resource base. And we have a government 

that is prepared to assist Saskatchewan people to do what we do 

best. 

 

I think of tourism in my area in the north-east of Saskatchewan. 

We have some of the best recreational resources offered 

anywhere in North America. Hudson Bay is the moose capital 

of the world. Tobin and Codette lakes have renowned fishing. 

 

Drive through Nipawin. The member from Shaunavon, I invite 

him to drive through Nipawin and take a look at the vehicles on 

main street; 50 per cent of them are from out of the country. 

They're there to enjoy the tourism of the fine province of 

Saskatchewan. Instead of being pessimistic and looking at the 

dark side of life, try looking at the bright side for a change. 

There's a lot of good things happening out there. 

 

Last week I had the honour to join hundreds of people in 

Hudson Bay, Mr. Speaker, and you know the area I talk about. 

They come from all over North America for the Wildcat 

Mushers Marathon which is one of the top dog sled races in the  

world, Mr. Speaker. Miles and miles of beautifully groomed 

trails through magnificent forests. These are tourism success 

stories that have been built by local people promoting their own 

attractions. 

 

It is for destinations like these that Saskatchewan government 

has worked in partnership with tourism operators, Mr. Speaker, 

and local governments to set up the Tourism Authority. We are 

now in a much better position to expand on our billion dollar 

tourism industry. 

 

This throne speech looks at the future. Mr. Speaker, the high-

tech industries that are the future for many of our young people 

will be encouraged by software technology centre. We have 

excellent computer software designers in this province and we 

want to encourage the growth in this industry as well. 

 

Our access to the world of information and contracts around the 

world will be enhanced by SaskTel's plans to make the Internet 

universally available both in urban and in rural Saskatchewan. 

This one step will help put our farmers and our rural businesses 

on an even footing with businesses in more concentrated 

population centres. So there is much to commend in the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Now the Liberals and Tories say, I guess it's luck. They use 

luck. And that's very interesting. The member from Maple 

Creek said, well the NDP are lucky. I heard the Leader of the 

Third Party in question period say, well it's luck; this is why it's 

happening. 

 

I don't know why they will not give credit to the Saskatchewan 

people. Why do they think these positive things are happening 

in the province? It's because the people of Saskatchewan are 

determined to succeed. So you should be giving credit to them 

instead of looking at the dark side and the doom and gloom. 

 

I don't understand it. And the people of Saskatchewan do not 

understand that neither. I mean they're very confused. They see 

good things happening and they listen to the opposition 

members say, well it's not good. Very hard for me to understand 

that. 

 

They listen to members of the Progressive Conservative Party 

who have absolutely no credibility when it comes to talking 

about financial management of this province. You know, they 

tell us, they get up there in their chairs now and tell us how we 

could save money. And I appreciate their points of view but I 

certainly wish they would have thought about that over the 

period of time from 1982 to 1991. But they forgot about it then. 

 

I appreciate their points of view and certainly will take them 

into consideration. But again, like I say, Mr. Speaker, I wish 

they would have thought about them a little earlier. That $850 

million in interest payments that we have to make each and 

every year. Now it's hard to take and it's hard to do, and it 

would've been much easier without that. 

 

We've stood up in the House, as an example, Mr. Speaker, in  



February 14, 1995 

 

188 

the last several days, and presented many, many petitions from 

the people of Saskatchewan, asking more to be spent on 

highways in this province. And I understand the people writing 

in and wanting that. I'm wondering if the people of the . . . or 

the members of the Progressive Conservatives have told them 

about the amount of interest that this government has to pay on 

their . . . because of their spending spree. I doubt it very much. I 

don't think they have. 

 

I wonder if they told them, Mr. Speaker, about where they spent 

their money — hare-brained ideas like GigaText and Supercarts 

and Promavia. I don't think so . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We shouldn't forget those either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — No, I don't think we can forget those. 

 

Well I want to ask the members opposite, while they were 

spending money like drunken sailors, they didn't spend money 

on projects like twinning of the highways? At least now, when 

we're faced with that $850 million a year interest payments, we 

would have something to show for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I keep reminding them, and I wish they would tell 

the people of Saskatchewan, that $850 million would twin Gull 

Lake to the Alberta border 25 times a year, Mr. Speaker — 25 

times each and every year until the debt is paid. And the 

member of Shaunavon doesn't understand that, I know, but I 

will mention it one more time. It's actually 25 times a year — 

$850 million would twin Gull Lake to the Alberta border 25 

times a year, each and every year, till the debt is paid down. 

 

You know, I would dearly love to be able to announce highway 

tender schedules which would repair and improve every road to 

the best possible condition. But we cannot cry over spilled milk. 

We have to live within our means. So we can't do this. So we 

have to be very careful with our budget, to get the most work 

done for the least cost. We have to be creative, we have to build 

partnerships with other levels of government and with the 

private sector. We have a common interest in improving the 

roads. We share the effort and we both benefit. 

 

And this is what this government is doing on Highway 102, 905 

in the North, where the mining companies are funding 

improvements that will allow them to carry bigger loads more 

safely. The benefit of that is not only to the industry, not only to 

the economy, but also to the local people and the tourists of that 

area. Two million dollars from the mining companies will flow 

into these two highways, 102 and 905, over the next 10 to 15 

years to upgrade them, to make them safer. This is what we 

have to do. We have to be innovative. And what do I hear from 

the Opposition benches? Doom and gloom. 

 

Later this session, Mr. Speaker, we're going to be introducing a 

new transportation partnerships corporation, the legislation 

framework to work in partnerships like the 102-905 partnership 

to improve our transportation system. And I hope at that time 

that the members opposite would show some support for this 

innovative idea. 

This kind of creative thinking is how the government is doing 

more with less. I also want to say we're doing more with less 

and at the same time we are going to be able to announce a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — A lot of credit for sound financial 

management has to go to the people who work for the people of 

Saskatchewan at the Department of Highways. Mr. Speaker, our 

Highways' welders are building innovative snowploughs which 

are cheaper than those used to be purchased from outside the 

province and these ploughs work better. 

 

The department employees have set up a computerized vehicle 

maintenance system which will save money by scheduling 

preventative maintenance on our vehicles. Mr. Speaker, we 

have wellness for the Department of Highways' vehicles and the 

concept is working. 

 

There is another partnership, Mr. Speaker, that needs pointing 

out and that is the partnership between the people who work for 

this government and the taxpayer, because many of the 

innovations in government programs come from the public 

servants in this province. 

 

Public employees in this province have had to make sacrifices 

like everybody else. Everyone is being asked to do more with 

less, and the public service of this province has taken up that 

challenge. The fact is not being recognized by the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, of course. She wants to cut that. She 

wants to cut back more. 

 

And I point out, Mr. Speaker, that quite contrary to the 

impression given by the members opposite, highway workers 

are not just people standing around leaning on shovels. The 

members of this House might remember last spring, Mr. 

Speaker, when we had a wet fall and some very cold nights, 

many of the thin-surface highways in this province literally 

blew up from frost boils. Some of our highways were in very 

bad condition. 

 

The Department of Highways' employees worked long and hard 

to repair those roads and by last fall they were back in shape. 

And they did it for the lowest possible cost. This is indicative of 

the spirit of the Department of Highways' workers in our 

province. Their hard work was appreciated. The member from 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster in fact made a point of writing to me to 

let me know what a good job they had done. This is quite a 

different approach from the Liberal Party opposite. 

 

The Liberal Party, the leader of that party, is quite fond of 

taking shots at the public service lately. Somehow the Leader of 

the Third Party would lower the taxes, increase government 

services, reduce the size of government, and balance the budget 

all at the same time. Well, that's quite interesting. It is exactly 

this kind of economic strategy that followed by the members of  



February 14, 1995 

 

189 

the previous administration. And what did that get us? A 

financial mess that we inherited in 1991. 

 

It is not really surprising when you consider who's been 

flocking to join the Leader of the Liberal Party in her campaign 

to finish what that government started. I ran into this Liberal 

kind of economic brilliance the other day in Val Marie in fact. It 

was my understanding that the member from Shaunavon would 

spend the entire Highways budget in his constituency. Now he 

is one of 66, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder what the other 65 

constituencies would say about that. I wonder what the Leader 

of the Liberal Party would think about that. It's a very 

interesting concept. It's sort of, I guess, the new Liberal politics, 

the new Liberal style of economics. I'm not sure. 

 

In her speech in reply to the throne the Leader of the Third 

Party takes the government to task for promising to run the 

operations of government on $4.5 billion a year, and then she 

accuses us of failing. Well I know she's not perhaps that good 

in mathematics, Mr. Speaker, but if you take $842 million in 

interest payments and deduct it from what the government did 

in fact spend, our operating expenses were under $4.2 billion. 

So I'm wondering if she would consider that. If you consider 

the offloading that the government — the Conservative 

governments in Ottawa, and in fact the Liberal governments in 

Ottawa — have given to us or put onto our plate, this was no 

small achievement. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor said it all when he said: 

Saskatchewan people are justifiably proud of how far we've 

come. Today .we look to our Centennial in 2005 with 

confidence — confidence in our financial stability, in our 

economic recovery, in new jobs and low unemployment, and in 

the future of our health care system. But perhaps most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people look to the 

future with renewed confidence in themselves, and in their 

ability to build a better future together. 

 

I agree with His Honour, and I am proud to support the content 

and the sentiments of the Speech from the Throne. We have 

gotten to this point through partnerships and cooperation and 

it's because of our success at working together — every single 

soul in the province of Saskatchewan — that our future looks as 

bright as it does. 

 

I would invite the member from Maple Creek and I would 

invite the Leader of the Liberal Party to travel with me around 

the province of Saskatchewan to smell the mint in Outlook, to 

look at . . . to travel down a trail in the Hudson Bay area, to 

look at the oil boom in Estevan, to look at the mining activity in 

the North. Maybe they will better understand where the 

province of Saskatchewan really is. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 

hon. members of the Assembly, I rise today to reply to the  

address from the throne in this the fifth session of the twenty-

second legislature. I speak today on the first anniversary of my 

first reply to the throne speech last February after taking my seat 

representing the constituents of Regina North West. 

 

As I begin, Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge and 

welcome our new Clerk Assistant, Meta Woods, to the 

Assembly. I too have had an extended opportunity to work with 

Meta as we travelled the province during December and January 

on the Select Committee on Driving Safety. Her combination of 

competence and congenial personality contributed to the 

teamwork of the committee. 

 

I'd also like to comment on the teamwork that was built on that 

select committee. I believe it's a model for cooperative, non-

partisan, working relationships that we might emulate here in 

the Chamber. 

 

I also welcome the Assembly's new team of pages. I imagine 

their learning curve has been rather steep lately and I look 

forward to working with them this session. 

 

One other person I would like to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, 

someone we all tend to take for granted, is our Sergeant-at-

Arms, Mr. Bill Goodhand. His unobtrusive presence 

undoubtedly contributes to our most orderly behaviour in this 

Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am the rookie member of the legislature and I'm 

frequently referred to as such by members opposite — 

sometimes sympathetically and sometimes, methinks, with a 

touch of irony or criticism. The past year has been my 

opportunity to learn new tricks, and I appreciate the hon. 

members’ patience with my attempts at scaling that steep 

learning curve. 

 

A most significant portion of my lessons this year, Mr. Speaker, 

has been learned in my constituency of Regina North West. 

Between sessions I have spent many hours at the doors, in the 

homes, and on the phone with my constituents, learning that the 

only way to represent their concerns in the legislature is to 

listen and then carry those concerns to the floor of the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what I propose to do today. In my response 

to the Speech from the Throne, my purpose is to represent my 

north-west Regina's constituents concerns. 

 

Regina North West is a very special constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

Regina North West is the growing edge of Regina where a 

cross-section of families live and work. Regina North West 

consists of thousands of families who are concerned about 

rearing and educating their children in the north-west's six 

excellent elementary schools and our highly rated high school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost 10 per cent of my constituents are front-

line health care workers. They have been sharing with me their 

concerns about the government's health reform agenda. In the 

throne speech the government claims that the benefits of what  



February 14, 1995 

 

190 

they call their health renewal process are just starting to unfold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents who are front-line health care-

givers tell me they have come through a nightmare of cuts; fear 

for loss of their job; extraordinary stress because of 

understaffing and fears about the safety of their patients. They 

are telling me that despite the grand rhetoric about partnerships 

and empowering of health care-givers, the government and the 

Regina District Health Board did not consult with them 

concerning health care reform. 

 

They were told and are being told what will be, will be. The 

district board did commission a survey of health care workers 

last spring, Mr. Speaker. But what happened to those results? 

From the perspective of my north-west health care workers, 

they have been suppressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my health care workers are telling me that they are 

feeling very frightened by the agenda of their district health 

board. They are frightened by the agenda of this government. 

Not only have my health workers been calling me, but they have 

been sending me notes about their concerns and I would like to 

read into the record some of my constituents' concerns. 

 

I will paraphrase a couple of words in this one because this is a 

person who is very upset about what's been happening: 

 

 The government has really (messed up) our health care 

system (that's the part that I paraphrased). Our 

deductibles on prescriptions are way too high. Medicine 

is costly and this has brought hardships to many people. 

Eye examinations, chiropractic visits . . . all cost us each 

time we go to one . . . so lots of times we do without. 

(The) dental plan is destroyed. There aren't enough staff 

at hospitals and with closing down hospitals they are 

just making waiting lists longer. I am totally disgusted 

with what they have done to our health care system. 

 

From another constituent: 

 

 I work at a nursing home (CUPE Union) and (I) am very 

concerned about our job security and wages. 

 

 1) I'm concerned about the burgeoning bureaucracy that 

has accompanied health care reform. Instead of making 

management leaner and opening lines of communication 

with . . . workers, there seems to (have been an) . . . 

increase in levels of management, which makes 

communication more difficult. 2) I'm also concerned 

about the nepotism that was involved in hiring the 

managers (particularly at Wascana Rehab Centre). 

 

Another constituent: 

 

 There is a definite need for health care reform. 

 

And I'd like to note that not one of the people who wrote to me 

indicated that they didn't believe we needed reform. This 

constituent says: 

  

There's a definite need for health care reform. I do feel 

though that the plans of our present Regina District 

Board and our government are either done without 

thought or the plans are non-existent. If the people who 

delivered the health care, such as doctors, nurses, 

pharmacists, etc., were involved in the planning, 

decision making, we would have had a much more 

workable situation. 

 

(1600) 

 

This one says: 

 

 I am a nurse in an acute care hospital. There always is a 

shortage of beds. Patients are sent home earlier and 

earlier. Often patients are placed on off-service wards. 

For example, gynecology's surgical patients are placed 

on an obstetrical ward. Medical patients are taking beds 

on surgical wards. This is not acceptable. We in health 

care are continually concerned about job security and 

deteriorating working conditions. 

 

This one says: 

 

 The cuts to nursing positions have caused a shortage of 

nurses in this city. The Plains Health Centre was calling 

staff back from holidays to fill empty positions in the 

last while. The nurses are being overworked and need 

their days off. It is common on these days off to be 

called in at double pay. Economically this does not 

make sense. As a possible future patient, I have no 

desire to have an overworked and overtired nurse 

attempting to deliver my nursing care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to remind the members opposite that these 

are all letters from health care workers and constituents of 

Regina North West. 

 

 There's definitely more administration, unorganized. 

When you want to find a person in charge of a program 

or department, they're not in the hospital. Ninety per 

cent of the time, you can't find them anywhere. Staff 

have become just a number. The hospital is run like a 

big corporation. Nurses who have been in administrative 

positions for years and know what's going on are being 

let go, and told they aren't corporate minded enough. 

 

 We disagree with what is happening in Regina as to 

closures of hospitals, cutting back on services and 

nursing staff, and the way our tax dollars are being spent 

on health care. There is no direction from the top, of our 

health care system. 

 

 I feel the patients are sent home far too soon. For 

example, my sister-in-law had a baby at the General 

Hospital. She was discharged after two days. Not even a 

doctor came up to see her. I find that they treat people 

like a bunch of cattle, herding them in and out. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

191 

This constituent says: 

 

 Our health system has served us well; however, it was 

crying out for change and renewal. It was the way in 

which the system's policies and programs were reviewed 

and reformed, with little or no opportunity for public 

input, that really upsets us. It almost appeared that the 

government had decided that the public was incapable 

of contributing to the process so the public could be 

ignored. 

 

 If that wasn't enough, the government handling of the 

announcement that 52 hospitals in the province would 

be closed, was received like an iron fist had crashed into 

the face of Saskatchewan's people. Our people didn't 

deserve that kind of treatment. The emotions that 

surfaced following the announcement of the hospital 

closures reminded me of the 1945-46 time period, when 

larger school units were introduced, creating a similar 

shock wave. 

 

 Usually the cost of downsizing comes at the expense of 

clinical staff. Once this happens, administrators are left 

with less staff to supervise. Why not get rid of that top-

heavy administration? 

 

 I have been employed in the health care field for 15 

years, and have observed many changes, some good and 

some bad. However, over the past three years with the 

forming of the Regina Health District, I have never seen 

so many changes in such a short time. 

 

 I believe the quality of health care within the Regina 

Health District has dropped considerably for patients. 

The changes have also made it more difficult for the 

care givers to deliver quality care. On one occasion I 

was told that if I gave one less bed bath I would be able 

to complete my work. I believe this statement holds true 

to all aspects of health care. 

 

 Since I have been employed I have experienced 

cutbacks year after year in staff, always from the 

bottom. Hospitals have less beds . . . less workers and 

more management. The quality of care, food, morale 

and general concern for patients has hit an all time low. 

People who work in the health-care field in all levels are 

dissatisfied, doctors, nurses and service employees are 

all having problems coping with the changes occurring 

at the grass roots where the care is delivered. 

 

 There are a number of problems within the hospital 

setting revolving around the changes that have occurred. 

Many employees agree that changes have to be made 

but they were never asked for input. If they express 

concern about the changes and offer solutions, they are 

disregarded. In some cases people have been dismissed 

because they spoke against changes that were being 

made. 

 

  

Management looks after themselves at the expense of 

patient care dollars. When a position is deleted in 

management, very often another management position is 

created and the person in the deleted job is placed in the 

new job. So the end result is no cost saving to the 

taxpayer. Management staff that were employed prior to 

the forming of the Regina Health District who held 

upper positions were all given jobs in the Regina Health 

District in lesser decision making roles and new people 

were hired into their old positions under a new title. 

Again no savings to the taxpayer. 

 

 The results of the changes made so far to form the 

Regina Health District are very poor. The people in the 

Regina area are receiving a poor level of care and are 

not going to see any savings because of it. There are 

however some benefits in the area of purchasing goods 

and services for the district, instead of individual 

facilities buying their own supplies . . . Over all people 

agree changes have to be made, but would like to see 

change for the better. 

 

Another constituent says: 

 

 There is little or no satisfaction in the duties I do, due to 

the restrictions. Work situations are more and more 

unsafe for patients and staff. 

 

Another constituent says: 

 

 I would like to know how many board members there 

will be or are in each district and also how much they 

are being paid because I feel every area of government 

run agencies is top heavy with "management" — those 

who are friends and cronies of the current government. 

 

This one says: 

 

 There have been few cuts as far as administration is 

concerned. Yet nurses, lab techs, etc., positions have 

been cut to almost dangerously low levels. A lot of these 

workers feel unappreciated and have taken an "I-don't-

care" attitude. The patients suffer in the long run. 

 

And this constituent wants to remain anonymous in fear for 

their job. 

 

This constituent says: 

 

 Being an RN I feel very strongly that changes are 

needed . . . (and) Being on the inside, I can tell you that 

it is the patients who ultimately suffer from these cuts. 

 

Another says: 

 

 Administration has not suffered at all; in fact I am sure 

they have increased. I am a nurse, and some of the 

changes make me ill. 



February 14, 1995 

 

192 

 Let's not go back to the pre-med days. Let's not go back 

to the wives and mothers nursing their families with the 

aid of a doctor book. 

 

This constituent says: 

 

 As a health care-giver I am upset to see the 

responsibility of expense being put onto the shoulders 

of my clients. It's unfair and unrealistic to expect each 

person to have huge amounts of savings for old age 

health expenses. Not everyone has the same wage as a 

provincial government employee. 

 

 I am a nurse at the Regina General Hospital. We have 

absorbed the Pasqua Hospital's maternity cases with a 

30 per cent case-load increase and less than 3 per cent 

staff increase. We are working excess overtime. We are 

called back on many days. This results in very tired staff 

and the patient care suffers and at times is purely 

unsafe. 

 

And my last note is from a couple. It's from a lady whose 

husband was ill at the time of this writing and now both she and 

her husband have died: 

 

 As we have had family in hospital for several months, 

we feel we have personal experience. The nurses have 

been giving excellent care, but they are too busy and 

overworked. It was necessary to hire private duty nurses 

at critical times — very costly for anyone, especially a 

pensioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the voices of my constituents concerning 

the negative impact of this government's health reform process 

on their lives. Not one of them disagreed with the need for 

changes to the health care system. What they have been asking 

me and the government is, why did you rush ahead before you 

had alternative services established? They are asking, why did 

you refuse to listen to our ideas? They are asking, have you 

saved any money? They are asking, why has the bureaucracy 

grown? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents deserve answers to their 

questions. They deserve a government that not only spouts 

rhetoric about empowering citizens and health care workers, but 

actually has ears to hear what these most important stakeholders 

have to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents have been stopping into my office 

to drop off their résumés because they can't get a job. They have 

been calling me in tears because the only place their 

Saskatchewan-educated children might get a job is in Japan. 

They are calling me because their university-educated children 

are now enrolled in technical courses to develop marketable 

skills after receiving stacks of rejection notices after applying 

for scarce jobs. 

 

One of my constituents received a letter from a school board 

which told her that she was one of 150 highly qualified 

candidates for a teaching job and that unfortunately she had  

been unsuccessful. They told her that hiring these days is rather 

like a lottery; they might as well pull a name out of a hat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to my constituents and as Liberal critic 

for Education, Training and Employment I decided that it was 

critical for me to better understand and address the pressing 

issue of youth employment and training. As a result I travelled 

around the province from August to January consulting with 

stakeholders. I listened to university presidents, to SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

principals and instructors, to regional college directors, to 

aboriginal educators, to directors of various youth employment 

programs, to boards of education, to trustees, to various 

educational leaders, especially listening to youth. 

 

Yes, I even had work-experience students requesting the 

opportunity to get experience working in my constituency 

office. And yes, I also listened to the Department of Education 

officials on January 18. At that time I offered to share the 

results of my consultations with the departmental official in 

charge of youth employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I released the results of my consultation last week 

in this Assembly because I believe that the discussion paper I 

wrote entitled, Re-opening the Ground Floor Door: Addressing 

the Youth Jobs Crisis in Saskatchewan can be a catalyst in 

opening up the problem to province-wide discussion and a 

concerted effort to keep youth at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to share some of the findings of my 

consultation. 1995 is a special year for Saskatchewan because it 

marks our 90th anniversary as a province. In 10 short years we 

will be celebrating our centennial. This special year gives 

people across the province a valuable opportunity to reflect on 

what we are, and above all, what we want to become. We must 

ask ourselves if we want our children and grandchildren joining 

us for that 100th anniversary as residents of Saskatchewan, or 

do we want them coming home from another province or 

country for a visit, to celebrate with us. 

 

Important decisions must be made. We must decide if we are 

willing to simply continue as a have-not province, a province 

resigned to existing on hand-outs from Ottawa, a province on 

welfare, or do we want to take up the challenge of identifying 

the ways in which Saskatchewan can be the best and prepare 

our people for the future. 

 

(1615) 

 

Saskatchewan youth are finding their home province is a place 

where unemployment is rampant, where many of their friends 

have given up hope of finding work, and where 

underemployment, dwindling incomes, and poverty block their 

entry into the ground floor door of the work world. The youth 

of Saskatchewan are facing a punishing economic problem — 

the youth jobs crisis. To them, positive economic indicators and 

black ink government balance sheets are of little consolation. 

 

Since the government was elected in 1991, it has ignored the  



February 14, 1995 

 

193 

youth jobs crisis and its worsening social fallout. This inaction 

has demonstrated a lack of awareness of the crisis, at best, and a 

lack of commitment to finding solutions. 

 

As an MLA, I am in daily discussion with my constituents. 

They tell me that they are deeply concerned about their children 

and the fate of our youth. They are worried whether their 

children will be able to find the first job that will allow them to 

remain in the province. In their eyes, the Romanow government 

has been unable to create a climate of opportunity. Any 

economic recovery has been a jobless recovery, denying youth a 

reason to remain in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our paper explores the root causes of the youth jobs crisis and 

how the provincial government has failed to notice, let alone 

address, the problems before they developed into a full-blown 

crisis. The conclusion of this paper is devoted to several 

suggestions proposed by a variety of stakeholders. It is not an 

exhaustive list of solutions, but provides a context for groups 

and individuals looking for answers to the plight of 

Saskatchewan youth. 

 

Two key factors are contributing to the youth jobs crisis in 

Saskatchewan. The first and most important is our changing 

economy, and the second is the provincial government's failure 

to provide a vision and implement a plan of action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has produced some of the brightest 

and most talented people in Canada. Many young people were 

given opportunities on farms, in offices, and with small 

manufacturers to get their first view of the work world. From 

their early experiences, young people gained the skills they 

needed to succeed, skills they could market, and a network of 

friends and potential employers that could provide them with a 

job. 

 

In the post-war period, Saskatchewan's population was still 

farm based, and many of our communities had modest service 

industries, manufacturers, and tradespeople with small shops. 

Since that time the farm-based population has dropped from 

almost 400,000 people to less than 160,000. Furthermore, 

mechanization, centralization, and automation have resulted in 

the loss of many other businesses which once provided quality 

work experience for youth. 

 

One area of work which gave many youth their start was the 

clerical occupation. In the 1950s this was the ground floor 

bastion of 40 per cent of all employed youth. By the 1990s, 

only 20 per cent of working young people are finding jobs in 

this field. Today approximately 35 per cent of young people 

find work in the service industry, much of which is in the fast 

food business. 

 

While all of these changes have been happening, the provincial 

government has been sitting idly by and doing nothing. 

Saskatchewan youth receive some of the finest academic 

training in the world from well-qualified teachers. But despite 

spending $900 million on education, this provincial 

government's lack of a strategic plan is allowing youth to  

graduate from Saskatchewan high schools and post-secondary 

institutions, lacking marketable skills. 

 

The Romanow government has had every opportunity to read 

the signs of the developing crisis, but has chosen to close its 

eyes. It has not adjusted its education, training and employment 

opportunities for youth so that youth could gain the experiences 

lost to economic changes. 

 

It is the government's job to harness the resources, ideas, and 

energies of everyone in the province toward this goal. Instead 

this government took note of the financial deficit and ignored 

the real deficit of opportunities for young people and the threat 

it poses for the very future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some of the problems besetting the youth of Saskatchewan are 

unemployment. When I introduced this paper, the Premier 

objected to my statistics, claiming they were StatsCanada 

statistics. But, Mr. Speaker, these are statistics from the 

Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics. And what those statistics 

say is the net job loss for youth versus all other groups between 

1991 and 1994 — the term of this government — has been 

4,000 jobs out of the 9,000 jobs, lost to youth. Job losses 

among those aged 20 to 24 years are most alarming. This age 

group lost over 5,000 jobs. Such a severe drop in employment 

in this age category should be a serious concern to all 

Saskatchewan people. This is normally the age at which young 

people search for full-time employment. 

 

While the unemployment rate for the population as a whole in 

1994 was 5.6 per cent, it was 10.2 per cent for those between 

the ages of 15 and 24 years. If one compares the youth 

unemployment rate to the unemployment rate for those over 25 

years of age, the difference is even more dramatic. The 

unemployment rate for those 25 and over is at 4.7 per cent and 

is less than half the 10.2 per cent experienced by youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, young people are losing their faith that 

Saskatchewan is a province with a future. This fear that the 

ground floor door is closed is evident in the falling number of 

young people working and are actively seeking work in the last 

four years. 

 

Another problem affecting young people that has been 

overlooked is the under-employment of young people. Getting a 

job, Mr. Speaker, is no guarantee that youth will find the door 

to the ground floor wide open. Many youth graduating from 

post-secondary training at our regional colleges, universities, or 

the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology 

and other post secondary programs, avoid one pitfall only to fall 

into the trap of under-employment. 

 

One clear indication of the difficulty of under-employment is 

provided in a SIAST survey of its own graduates. The survey 

demonstrates a serious problem with under-employment. Of the 

1,319 responses, only 507 graduates managed to find full-time 

jobs in the occupations related to the training they took at 

SIAST. This represents only 45 per cent of all the graduates 

who responded to the survey. A majority of 55 per cent were  



February 14, 1995 

 

194 

either unemployed or under-employed. 

 

The actual figures may be worse, because many of the graduates 

without any good news may have chosen not to respond to the 

survey. One way to lose the key to the ground floor door is in 

poverty and declining incomes. And poverty is a direct 

consequence, Mr. Speaker, of locking youth out of the ground 

floor door. 

 

In 1991 only 24 per cent of all social assistance claims were 

made by youth. That's at the beginning of this government's 

mandate. By September of 1994, however, the number of youth 

on welfare grew to 28 per cent of all claims. Both of these 

figures are well above the Canadian youth average of 21 per 

cent. The government has not read the writing on the wall. 

 

In 1991 there were 6,844 youth claiming social assistance. By 

September of 1994 there were 10,922. And that's a figure which 

does not include the dependants of single mothers. In other 

words, Mr. Speaker, the welfare rates for young people in the 

mandate of this government have risen 43 per cent. 

 

A statistic again, a Revenue Canada statistic, about the loss of 

taxpayers in Saskatchewan. Between 1981 the Canadian 

average earnings among young people between 16 and 24 

experienced a 17 per cent decline. But the youth jobs crisis in 

Saskatchewan is forcing youth to drop out of the ranks of 

taxpayers at a rate 19 times greater than for the population as a 

whole. Between 1990 and 1992, Saskatchewan lost 3,470 

taxpayers as a whole. 

 

The loss of youth taxpayers, however, was dramatically higher; 

7,020 fewer Saskatchewan youth were paying income tax in 

1992 than in 1990. In their first year in office, Saskatchewan, 

under the Romanow government, lost 4,000 youth taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I had thought the member from 

time to time was reading from a direct quote, but I think this is 

the fourth time that she has used the term "Romanow 

government." And I think she realizes that by the rules, that is 

not permissible. She must refer to the member's constituency or 

to the Premier. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll be more 

careful. 

 

Another effect of the youth jobs crisis is the prolonged 

dependency of youth. Mr. Speaker, pessimism about the 

potential to get jobs helped to create another phenomenon 

symptomatic of the crisis. Too many youth are trapped in what 

we call prolonged dependency. Many youth are forced into 

putting off independence from family, finding productive jobs, 

marrying and having children and purchasing homes. 

 

One clear indicator is the growth in post-secondary education. 

Between 1950 and 1990 the number of young people enrolled 

in post-secondary education increased ninefold. Most of that 

growth occurred during the 1980s despite being the decade  

during which the baby boom generation departed post-

secondary institutions for the workforce. 

 

In Saskatchewan certain faculties and colleges whose 

enrolments were never limited soon became the subject of 

quotas. Foremost among those was the College of Arts at the 

University of Saskatchewan. While quotas were introduced at 

some colleges and faculties, others saw admittance grade 

averages increase. At SIAST, application dates became strict 

deadlines. Students became part of long waiting lists. 

 

Youth also started staying in school longer. Some did so in 

response to the new technology; others, however, chose more 

formal training as an acceptable alternative to having no job in 

a dismal looking work world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, youth have been led to believe that a university or 

a post-secondary education is a ticket to success. But young 

people, having acquired degrees or diplomas, are finding 

themselves unable to get work related to their training. 

 

Youth dependency is prolonged with further education when 

education by itself may not be the answer. Without meaningful 

work-related experiences, further education may only pull 

people into the trap of higher student debts, increased education 

inflation, and ultimately, waste scarce human resources and 

patience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across Canada, approximately 60 per cent of all 

women and 70 per cent of all men between 20 and 24 years of 

age are living at home while 30 to 40 per cent are in their late 

20s, continue to live at home with their parents. And these are 

figures that are in stark contrast to my generation, the baby 

boom generation, when we all left home quite early. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the continuing youth jobs crisis is partly fuelled by 

Saskatchewan's dismal record of developing and offering 

apprenticeships which combine academic instruction with paid 

work experiences. In Canada only 1.3 per cent of the workforce 

is involved in apprenticeship programs while 7.4 per cent of all 

German employees are involved. Saskatchewan's record is even 

more dismal with only .8 per cent of all employed persons 

registered in an apprenticeship program. 

 

This is a tragedy, considering that two-thirds of high school 

graduates will not move on to SIAST or university education. 

That's two-thirds, Mr. Speaker, that will get no post-secondary 

training. If available, an apprenticeship could be the only 

training they will receive. The government's lack of action in 

this key area is a clear indication of its failure to understand the 

needs of average people, especially youth. 

 

The Economic Council of Canada noted in 1992 that 

apprenticeship programs enable 96 per cent of their graduates to 

find long-term work related to their occupation. A downside to 

apprenticeship programs is that they are underutilized in terms 

of numbers and in the range of occupations they represent. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

195 

You know, Mr. Speaker, presently in Saskatchewan, students 

who graduate from high school and want to enter an 

apprenticeship program are increasingly being forced to go for 

upgrading before they can even read the text of the 

apprenticeship program. The Department of Education is 

devising ways for them to be upgraded so that they can benefit 

from the apprenticeship programs that now exist. 

 

At present, of the 34 apprenticeships functioning at the 

moment, at least half involve the construction trades, while the 

overwhelming majority are too confined to traditional trades 

and services. Not enough is being done to prepare 

Saskatchewan apprenticeship programs for the new 

technologies in a changing economy with different labour 

needs. 

 

The lack of emphasis on workplace experience is not confined 

to the provincial government's policy on apprenticeships. Work 

experience programs and co-op programs are rare at a post-

secondary level. Among SIAST campuses, only Moose Jaw 

Palliser offers such a program, and it is utilized by only a 

minority of students. 

 

At the university level, only the University of Regina offers co-

operative education, and it is mainly confined to administration, 

computer science, and some sciences. Work experience 

programs which offer unpaid opportunities are few and far 

between at the post-secondary level. 

 

(1630) 

 

At the high school level, work experience programs, although 

very beneficial for students, are still considered to be 

alternative, not mainstream programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while young people have been enduring this crisis, 

the government has been barricading the ground-floor door by 

cutting funding for programs that help young people to get 

started in the work world. 

 

Increases in taxes and utility rates form a big plank in the 

government's barricade. When the government single-mindedly 

sought to balance its books, young people were among those 

who suffered most. In their tax grabs, the government 

disregarded ability to pay. Within three years, the government 

has implemented increases in natural gas bills, 12.7 per cent 

increase to SaskPower rates, and several increases for local 

phone service. 

 

The reason I make these points, Mr. Speaker, is that these direct 

increases in utilities affect those at the lower end of the income 

scale, where youth rest. 

 

Cuts to school divisions have also taken their toll. But in 

addition to cuts at the K to 12 level, the government also 

victimized youth venturing off to post-secondary training. The 

government spending on post-secondary education in 

Saskatchewan has dropped sharply since 1991. As a result, the 

students' direct share in education costs, paid through tuition  

fees, has increased to help cover some of the shortfall. Between 

1991 and 1995, Mr. Speaker, federal spending on post-

secondary education increased from 54.1 per cent of the total to 

57 per cent share of the overall cost. 

 

In contrast to what they claim, the provincial government share 

dropped drastically from 30.9 per cent of the total to 23.3 per 

cent. In dollar terms, total provincial spending on post-

secondary education plummeted from 121.466 million to 

87.674 million — a cut of almost $34 million. While the 

provincial government's share dropped dramatically, the portion 

paid by students rose rapidly as administrators sought to make 

up the difference. 

 

In 1991 students paid for 15 per cent of post-secondary 

education costs. By 1994-95 they were paying 19.8 per cent of 

the total bill. In terms of raw dollars, the students’ share 

increased from nearly $59,000 to $75,000 . . . $75 million, 

excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Lately the government is growing more reluctant to provide 

money to student loans. In 1993-94 the government estimated it 

would receive $28.5 million in repayment of student loans. To 

its surprise it received $37.979 million — well above what was 

estimated. 

 

Despite that windfall and the government's improving fiscal 

situation, this year's student loan budget did not see at all the 

windfall money returned to increase available student loans. 

Rather than placing the entire $9 million windfall into more 

loans, the government only increased lending by 4.1 million 

with the remaining 4.9 disappearing into government coffers. 

 

Another area in which the government's cuts strike directly at 

youth is through reductions to student employment programs. In 

1991 the Saskatchewan government spent $1.884 million 

helping students find summer jobs and subsidizing business to 

employ them. According to Public Accounts, under the 

government, by 1994, the summer of 1994, this spending was 

cut by 43 per cent to $1,070,978. 

 

With those cuts went valuable opportunities to acquire 

experience, to network, and to defray overall education 

expenses. For this government this program was treated as an 

expense rather than an investment in a precious resource. 

 

After reeling against the cuts made by the previous government 

to education and training programs, the government went on to 

outdo their predecessors in the cutting department. Other 

programs which benefit youth less directly were also placed on 

the deficit altar. 

 

Among those are programs offered by cultural and recreation 

groups. An increasing amount of money once collected by these 

charitable groups through small gaming activities is removed 

daily from the communities by the government's extensive 

system of video lottery terminals. With each dollar disappearing 

into government coffers, valuable opportunities for youth to 

participate in culture and recreation experiences are lost with  



February 14, 1995 

 

196 

the dollars of thousands of other charitable groups. 

 

One example of the government's flagrant lack of concern for 

the youth jobs crisis can be seen in its spending on training for 

its own senior, departmental, and Crown corporations staff. 

 

In the summer of 1994 various government employees were 

sent to another annual effective executive program at the resort 

town of Waskesiu where they took courses like personal 

financial management, and even effective executive golf. This 

government decision cost taxpayers a tuition fee of $4,750 per 

government employee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is an amount equal to the full-time tuition fees 

for two post-secondary students. No less than 15 of the 28 1993 

participants were from provincial government departments or 

Crown corporations. 

 

Paying for the training and recreation of well-paid and well-

qualified senior officials in personal financial management and 

effective golf, while many Saskatchewan youth go untrained 

and unemployed, is shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the youth jobs crisis in Saskatchewan has an 

impact on all of Saskatchewan young people, but none are more 

deeply affected than the Saskatchewan's first nations people and 

Metis youth. 

 

Only 1 per cent of the first nations and Metis population are 

university graduates compared to 9 per cent for the non-

aboriginal population. Saskatchewan Indian and Metis youth 

population is expected to grow by 50 per cent by the year 2011. 

With full participation of first nations and Metis people, 

appropriate reforms must be made to provincial social policy to 

ensure that the future for aboriginal youth is more hopeful than 

that of previous generations. 

 

While rates of unemployment and poverty are significantly 

higher among Indian and Metis youth, many jobs both in 

aboriginal communities and in other parts of the province go 

unfilled because of lack of training. The FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and the University of 

Saskatchewan estimate that 700 to 800 training jobs, not 

including reserve schools, that could be filled by aboriginal 

youth are not being filled because of an under-supply of 

qualified Indian and Metis teachers. 

 

Other opportunities in agriculture and the growing agriculture 

service industry are also being missed because of lack of 

training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this our 90th anniversary year we have a chance 

to decide what sort of future we want for both our province and 

our children. The youth jobs crisis is wreaking havoc on the 

lives of many young people and shattering their dreams. It is 

also undermining our hopes of ultimately becoming one of the 

have rather than the have-not provinces. This is clearly not the 

future we want for Saskatchewan. 

 

Our future ability to sustain ourselves and build our reputation 

for social innovation depend on our success in reopening the 

ground floor door of the work world to youth. To help reopen 

that door, we need to work together. And after the release of 

this discussion paper, the Liberal caucus has distributed the 

paper to stakeholders across the province. We have asked them 

to study the suggestions provided in this paper and offer their 

feedback so an alternative can be developed to conquer the 

youth jobs crisis. 

 

We look forward to hearing from and meeting with as many 

concerned people as possible, especially Saskatchewan young 

people. Together we know we can keep our youth at home in 

Saskatchewan. We will of course be offering this feedback to 

the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, moving on to . . . I'd like to say when I was elected 

as MLA for the Regina North West, I declared that I would not 

accept per diems paid to Regina MLAs because I found it 

unseemly to accept money that was ostensibly paid for 

accommodation and expenses which Regina MLAs do not 

incur. Mr. Speaker, I have continued not to accept the per diem 

and I am disappointed that none of my Regina colleagues have 

decided to forego this allowance. 

 

In conclusion, I have just related the most pressing of my 

constituents' concerns. This, my first year as a member of the 

legislature, has been an extraordinary year for me. It has been a 

deeply moving experience for me as I have begun to understand 

and to carry out my role as a representative of my North West 

constituency. 

 

While I understand the enormity of the financial disaster faced 

by this government when confronted by the excesses of the 

previous government, and give them credit for managing and 

taking credit for the sacrifices we as taxpayers have made to 

eliminate the deficit, I do not agree with the process they have 

used to implement health care reform. I do not agree with their 

lack of attention to the youth jobs crisis and commitment to our 

children's future in Saskatchewan. I cannot support this throne 

speech. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to address in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne and I don't think it's a secret to anyone in this House or 

those who follow politics that this is probably my last chance to 

address this Assembly on this issue. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to start by thanking first 

of all, the residents of the constituency of Regina Rosemont, 

north central Regina, for giving me the privilege, the very, very 

deep privilege of being able to represent them in the last two 

sessions of this Legislative Assembly. 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

197 

It's obviously, Mr. Speaker, an experience which very few 

people ever get the opportunity to experience and it's a deep, 

deep privilege and a deep, deep opportunity to be able to, in 

fact, serve the people who are your friends and who are your 

neighbours and who entrust you with carrying their message to 

the highest level of political body in the province. 

 

And so it's with great pride that I thank the residents of Regina 

Rosemont for that privilege. I'd also, Mr. Speaker, like to take 

this time to pay tribute to two individuals — one, Malcolm 

McKinnon, who is a personal friend of mine and has also 

served as my constituency president, passed away suddenly in 

the last month. Mac to me represented the kind of individual 

that has built Saskatchewan. He was 72, 73 years old, he 

worked as a farmer; was born in the south-east part of the 

province; was injured in a farming accident; moved to the city; 

became a mechanic; worked at the Sherwood Co-operative for 

25 years; was the chief steward of his union; was a 

representative of his fellow workers on negotiations with his 

employer; was active — very, very active in his community; 

found time to act as a volunteer at the Wascana Rehabilitation 

Centre. 

 

(1645) 

 

And to me, Mac was not only a political colleague in the sense 

of seeing eye to eye on a great many issues, he represented to 

me the kind of people who went through a whole period in the 

development of Saskatchewan; who made sacrifices in the early 

years; who worked to bring up his family, all of whom stay in 

Saskatchewan; were employed, some in Moose Jaw as teachers, 

some in Saskatoon as steeplejacks; but who have all contributed 

to the community. And I want to pay public respect to my 

friend, Malcolm McKinnon, and his passing. Also want to 

express my condolences to his wife Grace, and to the other 

members of the family. 

 

The second resident of Regina Rosemont I'd like to pay tribute 

to, Mr. Speaker, is a young man, and his name is Patrick 

Fleming. And Patrick Fleming is a grade 12 student at Riffel 

High School. And when Patrick was in kindergarten and in 

grade 2, he was held back by the school system because of a 

learning disability that he was unfortunately born with. And 

Patrick followed in the footsteps of his older brother, who has 

represented Saskatchewan several times on international track 

and field meets, and became an athlete, and is an athlete, and 

participated in sports at Riffel High School, and in fact in the 

community basketball association, and in the junior football 

program; and his greatest wish was to participate fully in 

sporting activities, because for Patrick this is one of the things 

which brought him a sense of self-worth and internal reward. 

 

Patrick had the courage this year to challenge the rules 

governing high school athletics in this province. There was a 

rule which limited high school athletics to 18 years of age or 

over, regardless of any circumstances of how you proceeded 

through high school. And Patrick challenged that ruling, took it 

to the Human Rights Commission, and despite some pretty 

vociferous opposition from people in the athletic community  

around Saskatchewan, was unanimously seen to be in the right, 

and to have been discriminated against because of his age. 

 

Also I may say, as a corollary to that, Patrick's struggle to 

change the rules under which he would participate in sports 

allowed other people in similar situations to participate, and 

allowed them . . . In fact I remember a comment of a young man 

from Campbell high school, who said: the only reason that I 

stay in school and learn is because I'm allowed to exercise and 

to participate in high school athletics, and that the school 

represented an important part — that athletics represented an 

important part — of his school experience and a way of 

defining himself. 

 

So I'd like to publicly recognize the efforts of Patrick Fleming, a 

young man who had the courage to stand up, despite the fact, as 

I say, considerable pressure was exerted upon him not to 

challenge the powers that be in athletics in this province. But he 

had the courage to carry forward in his convictions and I think 

has changed and provided a positive change for the way in 

which people are looked upon — the way that they're looked 

upon as they participate in athletics at the high school level. 

 

I'll return to this issue again in a few moments. But I say that 

because, Mr. Speaker, Patrick's ability to motivate himself and 

to motivate others, to support him in this quest of changing the 

rules, is at the fundamental heart of how I see change occurring 

in this province. Of how I see that the way in which this 

province was developed and in the way in which the institutions 

of this province respond to the needs of every day, at an 

everyday level of people, comes not necessarily through this 

institution, but in fact comes through the efforts of the mass of 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When the people of Saskatchewan decide that something needs 

to change, there is a history and a record of courage in this 

province, of people being able to stand up and take a stand and 

go after the change that they want to do. 

 

And I think that Patrick, like Malcolm McKinnon, represents a 

continuation of people who are trying to build a better life for 

themselves. This is after all is what change occurs. People say 

there's got to be a better way of doing what we have to do in 

order to live at a better quality of life. 

 

And I feel quite privileged to have known both individuals 

while I've served them as their representative in the legislature. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm no friend of the press at this particular 

moment in time. I in fact have made it a rule over the last 

several months not to grant interviews to the press. So some of 

my friends in the media who have wanted to interview me over 

this subject or that subject aren't necessarily particularly 

friendly towards me. 

 

One of the questions they've asked me and taken considerable 

effort to ask me is: why is it that you're not running again; what 

is it that's caused you not to run again? 

 



February 14, 1995 

 

198 

I want to take this opportunity to explain my actions to the 

House. I find that that's probably the appropriate place to do so 

rather than at a press conference or rather than have it filtered 

through the media. 

 

I want to do a little bit of an apologist summa vitae; my good 

friend the reverend from Moose Jaw here would know that. The 

apology for my life, I think is the way it gets translated. Not that 

I feel I have to apologize, but in fact to explanation. Apologist 

summa vitae. Apologia. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all people who've been involved in politics 

know that there are majorities and minorities around any 

political question and any political debate, and that whether that 

debate occurs in the legislature or whether it occurs out in the 

Kinsmen Club or Kinette Club, or whether it's at the hockey 

team, or whether it's . . . wherever it is in terms of the 

organization where people are debating issues, you will find 

that there are majorities and minorities. And that's the way that 

the world works. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in a great many instances in the 

debates that we've had in this caucus I've ended up on the 

minority, which is a natural part of life. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it also becomes I think after a 

while a bit debilitating. I want to express this in a very personal 

way. After a while you get tired of being on the losing end of 

the debate. 

 

And we've had many debates, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say 

this, that the debates that have occurred in our caucus have been 

some of the finest levels of political argumentation that I've 

ever had the opportunity to experience. And I've been in 

politics, involved at one level or another, since the time I was 

18 years of age, the last 30 years. 

 

And I want to thank all my caucus colleagues, both at this 

caucus and also the preceding caucus, for the opportunity to 

participate in the kind of debates that have been carried 

forward. 

 

When people discuss the future of a province and the future of 

a jurisdiction in which they're entrusted to make those 

discussions, you find . . . or I have found that the level at which 

the discussion occurs generally is of a very high calibre, and 

that what happens in that debate, questions of intention become 

less important than questions of substance. Questions of what 

should be done, rather than why should we do it, takes 

precedence. 

 

I can remember several debates. I remember one debate around 

the constitution, in particular, which I think every person in this 

country would have benefited from had they been privy to 

listening to the kinds of discussion which took place in our 

caucus at that time. 

 

I don't think I'm breaching caucus confidence or solidarity when 

I say that. But I can tell you this, that had that debate been  

seen by everybody in this province, a great many of the 

constitutional issues which this country now faces would have 

been much clearer and would have been put in a much better 

perspective than we find ourselves once again facing. 

 

There is an argument, Mr. Speaker, for openness to be made 

and I would like to make here on the floor, that if there can be 

change, which I think there must be, that there has got to be a 

finding of ways in which real debate, not the partisan posturing 

that we find across the floor of the legislature, but real, honest-

to-goodness debate which occurs in the caucuses of the parties 

which sit in the legislature . . . If there was some way of finding 

public access to that kind of debate, I think that not only would 

this institution be better served, but the citizens of this province 

would be better served as well. 

 

So if I have any plea to make to my colleagues, not only on this 

side of the House but across the floor as well, that if we can 

find some way of getting real debate publicized and made much 

more public, we'll be doing the electors of this province a great 

service. 

 

And I think if one were to poll all the members of this 

legislature that you would find that there would be some 

agreement to that, that in fact that the need for open and honest 

discussion above and beyond partisan political wrangling will 

serve us all much better. 

 

Goodness gracious me, let me be the last one to claim purity in 

not engaging in partisan political rhetoric or victory, Mr. 

Speaker. But all that aside, all that aside, that in terms of 

solving some of the issues, I find that this institution can 

provide and I think must provide, a greater level of political 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've got a great many more things I'd like to say. I 

want to talk about the throne speech, about how I would 

characterize this throne speech, and leave some of my personal 

thoughts and become a little bit more political on some of the 

issues that are confronting us, but I don't believe I'm going to 

have time given the . . . even if the clock were to be stopped. I 

think I've got about another 30 minutes that I'd like to speak, so 

at this time, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move that we adjourn 

debate on this issue. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 

 


