






















































February 20, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 20, 1995 

 

 
297 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as you recall, I had spoken for about two minutes 
before we adjourned and I want to add just a few more 
comments to those short remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a very serious note, I do rise to repeat in 
support of this budget. Mr. Speaker, I had talked to 30 or 40 
constituents on Saturday last, took the budget around, the 
budget sheet, and talked to a number of people in my 
constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that they're very 
thrilled with this budget. They're very thrilled with the fact that 
after some very, very tough years, that finally after, I believe, 13 
years we've been able to balance a budget in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to commend the Premier, the Minister 
of Finance, all of my colleagues here in the House, our staffs 
collectively, and especially the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, because based on their advice, their input, their 
partnershipping, their understanding, and their sacrifices, we've 
been able to do something that almost seemed impossible. So 
it's taken three very tough years to get here, Mr. Speaker, and 
we did this together — the people of Saskatchewan with their 
government — by pulling together, which Saskatchewan people 
do very well. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, this is my seventh year here and 
I've . . . in those seven years I've seen a number of important 
events in this House, in this province — some positive, some 
not so positive. But, Mr. Speaker, it is hard to comprehend 
when we think back the three short years or when I first came 
into this House seven years ago, it's hard to comprehend that 
there could be this kind of a turnaround in the budget. Mr. 
Speaker, I'm not sure that I ever thought that I would see this 
but we've been able to do it together. I believe that. And I think 
a lot of the constituents I talked to on Saturday believe that this 
is truly a turning point in the long climb back to financial 
freedom but that this is a turning point in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people back in Eastview realize that this is the 
first time in 13 years that the budget has been balanced and they 
also remember that the last budget was balanced by a New 
Democratic Party government. And they haven't lost sight of 
that fact, Mr. Speaker, and they won't. So they know who has  

financial integrity when it comes to running this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a phenomenal success story for two 
important reasons — for many, but two that I would like to 
highlight — one is because when we assumed office on 
November of 1991, as is well known, we had the worst yearly 
deficit per capita in all of Canada. Now that's a matter of public 
record and that is a fact. And we've gone from that now, Mr. 
Speaker, to the best and the first province to balance its budget 
in the last five years. So I think that is an important reason why 
this balanced budget is very significant. 
 
The second reason is, Mr. Speaker, is unlike Alberta who the 
Liberals and the Tories like to quote, we have balanced this 
budget not on the backs of poor people and unemployed people. 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta, as was confirmed — I know this to be 
true, but it was confirmed last Thursday by the hon. member 
from Wilkie. He confirmed with some pride  that in the last 
two years the Alberta government has been able to cut 
expenditures, and that 70 per cent of the expenditures have been 
on the backs of the social programs in Alberta. In other words, 
70 per cent of the money to fight the Alberta deficit has been 
taken from unemployed and low income people and he's proud 
of that, and he says that that should be the model for this 
government. Well we reject that, Mr. Speaker. That's the kind of 
savage, punitive budget making that we just don't want to be 
part of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's doom and gloom on the other side and so 
they obviously aren't going to stand up and support the budget 
and be in step with the rest of the public of Saskatchewan. So I 
think it's important to take a look at what some of the external 
people say about this budget and the turnaround. 
 
And I'd like to quote very briefly, if I could, from an article in 
the Star-Phoenix Thursday last, February 16, on the Forum 
pages by Mr. Dale Eisler, the editor of the Forum pages. And 
the title is, "Saskatchewan comes of age." Mr. Eisler says, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote . . . this was the day the budget came 
down, and he says: 
 
 There should be no diminishing the relative significance 

of today's budget. This is nothing less than a major 
turning point in the province's history. 

 
I would say that the 40 or 50 people I talked to on Saturday 
agree with Mr. Eisler, Mr. Speaker. Then he goes on to say, and 
I quote: 
 
 In 1992 when Saskatchewan was on the brink of a 

financial crisis, the danger was real and confronted us 
all. 

 
 The debt, most of it accumulated during the 1980s, had 

reached the point where Saskatchewan verged on being 
branded as a credit risk. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that too is a matter of open public record. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
298 

Then he goes on to say — and I'm just about finished — he 
says: 
 
 Our population was again declining, the farm sector 

remained in the doldrums and any significant economic 
growth seemed years away . . . But in three years, the 
unthinkable has happened. 

 
The deficit has been eliminated and the future looks bright 
suddenly. 
 
 There is talk of economic growth and gradual tax cuts. 

"The Romanow government deserves a great deal of 
credit for what it has achieved." (This is Mr. Eisler; he 
says:) This has been nothing short of a revolutionary 
period in Saskatchewan politics . . . Embedded in this 
budget is a commitment to fiscal responsibility and cost-
effective public administration . . . Finally we have 
come of age. 

 
This is Mr. Eisler, Mr. Speaker, whom I have a lot of respect 
for. 
 
So we have the Liberal leader standing up talking about a fat 
government and cutting back everybody's office but her own. 
And Mr. Eisler says that: 
 
 Embedded in this budget is a commitment to fiscal 

responsibility and cost-effective public administration. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that my constituents agree with 
him. 
 
So this is the story. Mr. Eisler has his finger on the story of the 
last three and a half years. And, Mr. Speaker, it makes it 
difficult for any opposition to get up and be critical of this 
story. And I understand why the Liberals and the Tories across 
are panicking about this, because there's really no room for 
them to go. And so there really isn't anything credible that they 
can attack on the budget, Mr. Speaker, but at least they're 
continuing to work at it, and I guess that's the role of the 
opposition. And I wish them luck. So that's what Mr. Eisler had 
to say, Mr. Speaker, about the budget. 
 
I might mention the situation that we inherited is also referred 
to in the Prairie Messenger, which has a very wide readership 
in Saskatchewan, as you know, and across North America, and 
further than that even. But on the January 30, '95 editorial — 
and this is an editorial — they say, and I quote just a brief 
comment here. It says: 
 
 We hear much about Premier Ralph Klein of Alberta. 

We are told we have a politician who will take the bull 
by the horns and get the government's economic house 
in order. We hear very little about the poor, who have 
been forced to go to economically much poorer 
provinces for social assistance. 

 
 And we certainly are not encouraged to study the  

 monumental ramifications of a two-tiered health-care 
system, which is certain to follow any acceptance of 
private medical clinics where the rich can receive 
speedy treatment without waiting in line with "lesser" . . 
. (poorer) citizens. 

 
 The current Saskatchewan government inherited a mess 

proportionately far greater than that bequeathed to Mr. 
Klein . . . Yet the success Saskatchewan has achieved in 
balancing its books makes its neighbour's 
accomplishment seem quite trivial in comparison. 

 
Now that's what the Prairie Messenger says, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Alberta is going to have incredible social, economic, 
and human costs for what they've done. Mr. Speaker, the social 
assistance recipients, the unemployed people of Alberta, they 
have driven 7,000 clients to other provinces — one-way bus 
tickets; 7,000 clients to other provinces. The member from 
Maple Creek smiles. Well that isn't funny, because these are 
unemployed people who are poor; they've got children, and this 
is . . . no, this is not a joke, Mr. Speaker. They have deceptively 
transferred 10,000 other clients to other dependency programs, 
playing games with the numbers. Now that is a fact. That is a 
fact about what Alberta has done. 
 
The third thing Alberta has done to bring down their case-loads 
is they have driven 12,000 . . . they've driven 12,000 first 
nations families back to the reserves. The minister from Alberta 
told me that himself personally. He's proud of it. They've driven 
these people back to reserves where there is poor housing and 
lack of jobs, which is why they went to the cities in the first 
place. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you drive people out of province, you 
drive them back to unhealthy situations; you basically export 
your problems to somewhere else. And I say that Alberta is 
going to experience incredible social, economic, and human 
cost for what they've done. And, Mr. Speaker, that is no model. 
That is no model to be proud of, and that is certainly not the 
model that we intend to follow, and we haven't followed that 
model. It's cold-hearted, and it's fraught with major, major, 
future problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I found it interesting last week that the 
Liberal leader and her party and the official opposition stood up 
to vote against the throne speech. Now the throne speech 
basically is a general plan which outlines the government's 
agenda for the next year or two or three years or whatever. Now 
this throne speech. . . . They hadn't even seen the figures yet 
that were in the budget. But the throne speech speaks to that 
commitment to financial stability and public accountability. 
Well I think that's where the Saskatchewan public is at. It 
speaks to balanced budget legislation so that no government 
could ever again do what the Tories did during the 1980s. 
 
The throne speech speaks to jobs and economic renewal. It 
speaks to setting in place the regional economic development 
authorities, getting all of those in place so that local people can 
partnership and determine their own priorities about how to  



February 20, 1995 

 
299 

create jobs in their area. What's wrong with that? They voted 
against it. They voted against the Transportation Partnerships 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker, to modernize our transportation 
system, again allowing for partnership and input from local 
people. They voted against sustainable resource development. 
They voted against the forest resource management Act 
designed to provide jobs to Northerners and young people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They voted against agricultural diversification. They voted 
against an agri-food innovation fund, an agricultural operations 
Act to help diversify livestock, Mr. Speaker. And they voted 
against new technology. They voted against bridges to 
independence like JobStart. They voted against ensuring a 
sustainable health-care system. Mr. Speaker, the opposition — 
Tories and Liberals — voted against the throne speech which 
outlined these things without even seeing the detail. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, had they been concerned about 
coming to grips with the real issues in Saskatchewan, they at 
least could have joined in and supported those general thrusts 
and saved their constructive comments for the budget. But no, 
they voted against these initiatives which they purport to speak 
towards and for. So, Mr. Speaker, that shows you that politics 
for them is more important than getting on with building the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to also focus on another matter because I 
think it's time and I think it's time that we conveyed to the 
Saskatchewan people some of the Liberal inconsistencies that 
we've seen, Mr. Speaker, because here is a Liberal leader who 
talks all the time about integrity in government. In fact she 
introduced a bill today to restore integrity and keeps talking 
about ethics, Mr. Speaker. Well let's look at a few examples and 
we'll see where the integrity is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she talks about more spending cuts. We're not 
cutting spending fast enough. Well, Mr. Speaker, we're keeping 
track of what she's saying on the other side of the ledger. She's 
also calling for about $300 million in new spending. You can't 
have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. Where is the integrity of that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader has been all over the waterfront 
on the issues of gaming — all over the waterfront and saying 
different things in different parts of the province. Where is the 
integrity in that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Liberal leader who claims that she isn't a 
politician . . . Delegates at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) convention told me that that was 
the most political speech that they have ever heard. Plus it 
played loose with the facts — it also played loose with the 
facts, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, where is the credibility and 
integrity of that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, she, without question, accepts the member who 
crosses the floor from Shaunavon. Now where is the integrity in  

that? There are a lot of people who believe that she accepted 
that member . . . If she was really concerned about integrity, she 
would have asked him to resign and had a by-election. There 
are a lot of people in my constituency who think that she 
accepted that member with open arms because that gave her 
another $240,000 to run her office. So she's talking to the 
Premier about downsizing his office and the cost of that, but 
she couldn't wait to get her hands on another $240,000. And 
she's still not satisfied — she feels that that isn't enough. Where 
is the integrity on that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the integrity on a leader — I might say, 
this is a leader? — who continues to flip-flop on the issue of 
the gun control business? First she's for it and then she's against 
it. She's all over the map there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she says she supports unemployed people, 
working people, low income people. Mr. Speaker, she has voted 
against — she has stood in this House and voted against  
part-time benefits for part-time employees, for example. She 
has voted against increases to the Family Income Plan for low 
income working families. She has voted against the child action 
plan  and she's a psychologist — the child action plan which 
helps develop preventive early intervention and support services 
for vulnerable families across Saskatchewan. Some 90 projects 
have been approved in partnership with the government and 
communities throughout the province. She voted against that, 
Mr. Speaker. And those programs are designed and developed 
to support communities and support families who need help. 
And as a psychologist she should be ashamed of herself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she has voted against our job packages, but she 
has no ideas of her own. She promised, I don't know . . . two 
years ago, that she would give us an idea as to how to create 
jobs — one idea a week. We haven't heard one idea yet in two 
years. Now this is the person who continues to talk about ethics 
in government, and integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as well a lot of public servants are also 
beginning to notice her vicious attacks on the public service. 
They're beginning to notice those attacks in the public service, 
Mr. Speaker, and they don't appreciate it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, low income people are beginning to wonder about 
a person who doesn't go near a food bank until the election's 
called and then gets her picture taken in front of a food bank, 
which she did last year. And they begin to wonder about 
someone who drives . . . who gets chauffeured around in a limo, 
trying to relate to business people who are struggling, and 
unemployed youth and so on. They kind of wonder about the 
sincerity of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the ethics and the integrity where 
someone accepts all the Tories who were part of the old regime 
as a flop-over to that party now, the Liberal Party. Where is the 
ethics in that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one final thing I will add is the critic for Social  



February 20, 1995 

 
300 

Services in the Liberal Party  whom I've talked to  she 
knows very well that the federal government has not released 
any day care, red book money yet. She goes up to Spiritwood, 
and she criticizes me for not asking for some of that day care 
money, that federal day care money that they promised a year 
and a half ago, because I hadn't asked for any yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've been negotiating and pleading with the 
federal government for the last year, trying to get them to 
partnership with us on some day care money. Mr. Speaker, 
again it's a matter of ethics. The Liberal critic knew very well 
that the money has not been released yet, and she goes up there 
to some other part of the province and says that if the Minister 
of Social Services would only ask for it, the federal government 
would make it available. 
 
Why doesn't she join me in writing to Mr. Axworthy or calling 
him or getting her leader to help with that to get some of the 
day care money which is badly needed here, as one of the tools 
to support people who become unemployed . . . or to become 
employed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is just a few examples of some of the 
inconsistencies from the Leader of the Liberal Party who 
continues to talk as if she has the . . . I guess as if she has the — 
what's the word I'm looking for? . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I know it but I don't want to say it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, if she has the corner on integrity, 
Mr. Speaker, as if she has the corner on integrity and ethics. 
She's got a long way to go, Mr. Speaker, and people are 
watching her actions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud of our record because we said we 
would restore financial integrity, and we've done that. We said 
we would work with local communities, with regions, 
partnershipping for economic development. We've done that 
through the Partnership for Renewal, a document which is 
bearing fruit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, we have reformed the health care system to 
allow for local decision making, local priorities. And this will 
be the first year, Mr. Speaker, where local health boards are 
elected across the province. Now the Liberals fought that, 
which was well articulated by the member from Pelly, by the 
way, on Friday. The Liberals fought medicare in 1962; they're 
fighting health care reform in 1995; two or three years from 
now they'll let on it was their idea because that's what they do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm proud of the government; I'm proud of the strides that we've 
made. Mr. Speaker, we've turned the corner economically, 
financially, on agricultural comeback, and on health care, Mr. 
Speaker. And we've done this. We've got our budget under 
control, Mr. Speaker, while continuing to provide service and 
support to those most in need. Mr. Speaker, that's what I'm most 
proud of about what we've accomplished over the last three and 
a half years. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that the member from Wilkie is 
speaking when I finish. And, Mr. Speaker, I would also 
challenge him to not continue to promote information that he 
knows very well isn't true. Now I had the chance today to 
respond to the question about the welfare recipient who is 
unemployable and disabled; the fact that that person has access 
to more and gets more automatically than a person who is fully 
employable. He knows very well that that's the case, yet he 
chose to put a different slant on that. And I would ask him not 
to do that in the future because it does a disservice to him as a 
critic and just simply isn't accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he also continues to promote — because he did 
this last Thursday so I assume he'll do it tonight again — that by 
and large people on welfare are cheating, because that's what 
Tories and Liberals do. They pit low income people and poor 
people against each other. Mr. Speaker, that is what they do. 
 
We are accountable, Mr. Speaker. The auditor is satisfied that 
we're accountable, but we're accountable because we treasure 
and value taxpayers' money. We've got a proud record of 
balancing budgets. We've got no lessons to learn from those 
people. But we're not bringing in controls and accountability 
measures in the social assistance program to be punitive. And 
that's exactly, Mr. Speaker, why they would do it — to be 
punitive, not to be accountable. And that's the difference, Mr. 
Speaker, between this administration and what they did in the 
1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of social assistance I want to reiterate 
tonight that the case-load was down in 1994 despite the two 
major offloads — the first nations offload by the previous 
federal government, the Conservative federal government, 
which has not been reversed by the Liberal federal government; 
and the other offload in February of '94, a major offload by the 
federal Liberals where they cut benefits in this province to 
people on UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) by $40 
million. By $40 million, Mr. Speaker — $40 million that the 
federal Liberals took right out of the pockets of low income 
people, unemployed people, in Saskatchewan. And of course 
that's meant that with the reduction in those seven weeks of 
benefits, it's cost this province $17 million in social assistance 
payments in the last year. 
 
But even taking those two major offloads, Mr. Speaker, the 
social assistance case-loads in this province went down last 
year, as I said today, from May of '94 to the end of January of 
this year, some 1,300 cases, or 2,800 beneficiaries is the 
reduction in case-loads, Mr. Speaker. And I might add that the 
case-loads in Alberta for December and January have gone up 
2,500 in that two-month period, Mr. Speaker. So I don't think 
we've got anything to learn there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the second lowest dependency rate in all 
of Canada right here in Saskatchewan — that is the number of 
people on assistance. The rate is the second lowest in Canada. 
We have the lowest percentage of people on unemployment 
insurance in all of Canada — the lowest, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada.  



February 20, 1995 

 
301 

And the number of unemployed employables on social 
assistance is a way down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing that because economic development 
is working. And I know that they didn't like to hear the revised 
StatsCanada figures — it shows that the number of jobs were 
way up — and they got off that track. But, Mr. Speaker, we've 
developed a long-term strategy which is the Partnership for 
Renewal. But we developed short-term strategies as well to help 
link people from assistance to training that they need, to 
educational opportunities, to skills development, and to actual 
jobs. Some 7,200 clients are beneficiaries of the New Careers 
Corporation program. We developed a new . . . the Future Skills 
program, Mr. Speaker, with $10 million to assist employers to 
train people to become marketable. And then the summer jobs 
and the JobStart programs, which I'm sure the Minister of 
Education, Training and Employment will talk about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the best social program is a 
job, a sustainable, well-paying job with decent benefits. So we 
have our financial house in order; our Partnership for Renewal, 
which is our long-term economic development strategy, is 
working; and we've got short- and medium-term strategies as 
well, Mr. Speaker. And there are really . . . We've looked 
around other provinces in Canada and the States. There are 
really no lessons to learn from any other province in terms of 
how we're trying to support unemployed people to make the 
links into the employment market. 
 
What we don't know is where the federal Liberal income 
security review is in this whole process. A lot of smoke and 
mirrors but we don't know just where that is at, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think a lot of Saskatchewan unemployed people are 
getting very worried about whether they were listened to. And I 
guess we'll know in the next week or two about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what I would do, I think the hon. member 
from Rosthern probably summed up very well how well things 
are going in Saskatchewan. And I happen to have here his 
viewpoint from The Village Press, Wednesday, January 4, 
1995. Now this is the member from Rosthern. He says, and I 
quote: 
 
 1994 was a good year that saw the economy rebound 

from several years of recession and stagnant growth. 
 
Well that's true, but that's a reflection on their record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Then the member from Rosthern goes on to say — I thank him 
and I agree with this — he goes on to say that: 
 
 Saskatchewan retail sales increased by 9.1 per cent, oil 

sales by 8.8 per cent, gas by 53.8 per cent, potash (by) 
27.4 per cent and uranium sales increased by 16.5 per 
cent in 1994. At the outset of 1995, there is every reason 
to believe that the recession is over and that the 
economy's strong performance will continue. 

 

Need I say more?. That's the member from Rosthern, Mr. 
Speaker. Now I'll send this over to his colleagues. This is what 
he's saying — the economy is turned around after many, many 
years of stagnant growth and there is every reason to believe 
that 1995 will be just as good. So I think the member from 
Rosthern shares the enthusiasm and the optimism of other 
people across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1930) 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, I did my sixth annual business survey this 
spring. Mr. Speaker, I've done six surveys now of the small-
business sector in my constituency. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the business people in Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain reflect 
the business people throughout the province. They're optimistic. 
They had a good year in 1994. Their business viability is strong. 
They're optimistic about 1995. And, Mr. Speaker, 67 per cent of 
the business people in my riding say that they intend to hire new 
people in 1995. 
 
So I agree with the member from Rosthern; we're back on track, 
and the economy is once again beginning to turn around. And I 
credit the government members here, and of course the people, 
as business people, and all the people of Saskatchewan because 
they've done it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year — getting more specific with regard to 
the social services area and the social sector — this year again, 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to Saskatchewan's action plan 
for children. Mr. Speaker, as you know, last year we designated 
$4.4 million towards the action plan for children which is a 
partnership with communities, communities across the 
province. I think some 90 projects have been funded, and those 
projects are available by a recent publication. Mr. Speaker, 
these projects are going a long way towards strengthening 
families, strengthening supports to families, providing 
preventive services, intervening early, and indeed strengthening 
communities. 
 
And I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to thank all of the thousands and 
thousands of volunteers and organizations across Saskatchewan 
who have come together to be in partnership to contribute to 
strengthening the network of services in their various 
communities. 
 
It's a belief that we have, Mr. Speaker, as a government, that 
solutions lie within communities. I think communities believe 
that, and they have responded to empower themselves to deal 
with the issues confronting them in an integrative and holistic 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many examples of the child action plan. 
I'll just mention two or three of them. But the Council on 
Children, which is a group of 25 men and women, young 
people, reflects the cultural, geographic, gender, age mix of 
Saskatchewan who are advising the government from their 
perspective on the kinds of children and family priorities that 
we should be looking at in terms of our social policy agenda.  



February 20, 1995 

 
302 

All the ministers have met with this group, and we take very 
seriously the suggestions that they're giving to us. 
 
A number of family violence initiatives, Mr. Speaker, including 
a pioneering legislation in terms of making it clear that we in 
Saskatchewan have a zero tolerance level for family violence 
. . . and allow women and children to stay in their home rather 
than being plucked out and have to go to some shelter 
elsewhere. We're trying to take services to them, Mr. Speaker, 
and there's been positive response to the family violence 
challenge which is a challenge across government and across all 
of the communities, Mr. Speaker, and will take the combined 
efforts of everybody to ensure that we continue through 
education, prevention, and services to deal with the issue of 
family violence. And I think that we're trying to deal with the 
causes as well that create the kind of stress in families where 
this is manifested. 
 
But a number of other initiatives related to youth, the school-
link services . . . One area that I'm very proud of is the work 
we're doing with first nations, Mr. Speaker, where we've now 
signed seven agreements, historic agreements. We're in many 
ways leading the nation in this area where Indian people are 
setting out their own Indian children and family services 
agencies to manage their own child welfare, Mr. Speaker. And 
we have a moratorium. There simply are no adoptions occurring 
outside of native people outside of the native community any 
more — long overdue. 
 
We shouldn't have been doing that, but, Mr. Speaker, we're 
trying to correct years of practice that was problematic. Mr. 
Speaker, our agenda towards support for first nations and Metis 
people to manage their own affairs is progressive, is done in 
partnership, and we're proceeding as rapidly as we can. And 
we're very proud of that agenda, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
cooperating with them in a way that has the support of both 
parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm proud to say that this budget will contribute this year — 
remember 4.4 million to the child action plan last year — this 
year it will be 6.3 million, Mr. Speaker. I think . . . I mean 
surely, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader and her party and that 
the critic, the critic and the official opposition will be 
supportive of the child action plan this year which they were not 
last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the new initiatives . . . I know others will 
speak to some of these in more detail, but I'll mention the child 
care, the day care package which puts $700,000 in new money 
into day care in this province — again one of the bridges for 
single parents, low income families, one of the bridges to allow 
them to access training, education, and employment options, 
Mr. Speaker. The reality is that 26 to27 per cent of the social 
assistance case-load are single parent mothers who need support 
in day care. Nothing was done in that area in the 1980s. We're 
doing a lot of catch-up. There's virtually no movement . . . 
 
Well the member from Shaunavon wants me to hurry up. Well  

I'll take my time, Mr. Speaker. I'm representing my 12,000 
constituents, and I'll just continue to talk as I wish, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would ask for him to support me in calling Mr. Axworthy 
to see if we can speed up the federal money so we can put our 
money together. If they're really serious . . . And by the way I 
might mention that many developments in day care are 
occurring in rural Saskatchewan. I would say that about 17 of 
the new day care centres that are coming on stream are coming 
on stream in rural Saskatchewan. So I need his support here. 
 
Now we've got our money up front, but the federal Liberals 
haven't put any money up front. We don't know what it's going 
to be. But we have put 700,000 towards day care which goes 
with the 825,000 we've already put up since 1991 plus the 1 
million we've put into day care through the social assistance 
program for people on assistance or accessing employment 
options and need the day care. Mr. Speaker, that's about a 15 
per cent increase to the day care budget since we came into 
power because nothing was done during the decade of the 
1980s, so we've got a lot of catch-up to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we released a major report on day care. We know 
what the parents want in Saskatchewan. We know what the day 
care community wants. They want affordable. They want safe 
care. They want a broad range of options, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to know how to pick a good day care centre, and they want 
to know how to monitor the care that the children are getting. 
 
Through this package they can do that. They're going to have 
the opportunity for some additional money for northern and 
rural projects in day care. We're enhancing the subsidies for 
infant and toddler day care. And we will also be putting about 
$220,000 into special needs day care, Mr. Speaker, so children 
with special needs will be able to go to day care, and the day 
care centres will be able to receive those children and provide 
them with the support so that their parents will be able to access 
employment opportunities for themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, what our minister 
was saying was very important to the youth in this province so I 
hesitated to interrupt him, but he did mention that he had a 
number of other items he wanted to discuss, and I know some 
of my colleagues have been looking forward to the introduction 
of our new guests this evening. 
 
They're the 64th Brownie pack from Regina, Mr. Speaker, in  



February 20, 1995 

 
303 

your gallery. They are 20 girls and five leaders. They're ages 6, 
7, and 8. I won't contemplate the ages of the leaders at this 
point. I'm looking forward to meeting with them, having a 
picture, and a time to speak with them in room 218. And I'd ask 
all members to join with me in welcoming them this evening to 
view the proceedings and to learn more about the operation of 
the Legislative Assembly and what goes on in the House. I'd ask 
members to join with me in a warm welcome for the 64th 
Brownie pack from Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I would like to join my colleague in welcoming the Brownie 
pack to the Legislative Assembly as well and hope you enjoy 
your visit. It's good to see you here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year as well, in addition to continuing the 
some 90 projects that were announced in the child action plan 
of last year, we will be putting about . . . through the 
Department of Health, I know the Minister of Health will speak 
more to this, but $330,000 into the successful mothers support 
program to assist, Mr. Speaker, in 10 areas of the province 
which will provide support and training to young moms who 
have children. This will address the issues of nutrition and 
parenting, lifestyles, skill development, self-esteem, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this will . . . this is a priority based on the 
way in which the communities throughout the province have 
priorized the needs that exist. We're trying to respond in this 
way. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, will be putting $112,000 this year into 
pilot projects to support and treat adolescent sex offenders in 
the area of assessment, treatment, and services. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a very complex area requiring additional resources and 
we'll be trying to provide the support as best we can there. 
 
We'll also be adding almost $200,000 in special project money 
to new housing needs, especially in the North to improve 
northern housing. Mr. Speaker, New Careers will be adding 
another — in addition to its budget now — another $600,000 to 
a pilot project that I'm sure the minister will speak to more  
but to single parents on assistance, to provide them with the 
support that they need, Mr. Speaker, to make that link to the 
first job or to the market or to the educational opportunities. But 
it will deal with the child care, again the education, training, 
career planning, and so on. Mr. Speaker, these are short term 
supports to allow our people to access and get the training they 
need to access the jobs. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are the right directions to be going in. I 
might say that we've had national interest  as we have in our 
health care renewal, as we have in our financial plan  we've 
had national interest in our child action plan because it's 
mobilizing communities across the province to take control of 
their issues and challenges and to develop solutions. Mr. 
Speaker, that's where the future lies so we're going in the right 
direction and developing the support with communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been in this field for 20 years. I was a social 
worker when you were the minister of Social Services many 
years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know from my years of experience there are no 
quick fixes; there are no magical solutions. These isolated, 
punitive suggestions will not work. What people need are jobs. 
They need opportunities. They need positive links and bridges 
to employment and educational training opportunities. They 
need adequate incentives. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague from Wilkie was 
saying in his throne speech last Thursday that we were not 
giving people who were on social assistance incentives to get 
off. In other words, if they make a dollar, they lose a dollar 
from social assistance. What he's forgetting, Mr. Speaker, is 
half the story, which is what the opposition was suggesting 
today about the budget, or the Premier's address. 
 
What he's forgetting, Mr. Speaker, because I was there in 1984 
and 1985 through their so-called welfare reform, what their 
former administration did, the member from Melville then, the 
previous member from Melville, what he did is he . . . it was 
him that brought in the rules that if you made a dollar you lost a 
dollar. In other words, he took away all the incentive, which 
trapped people on assistance. What the member from Wilkie 
has to remember is that we are the government that built back in 
the incentive. In other words, if you make a dollar, you don't 
lose it now. 
 
They took it away, Mr. Speaker, back in '84-85. If you made a 
dollar, you lost the entire dollar. You don't do that any more. 
We're building those incentives back in. So it's important that 
he understand the facts as they are, not as he would wish them 
to be. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize to 
the minister. But I thought that it was important to also mention 
the names of the leaders that were here, since they've taken the 
time to bring the Brownies. And I've been remiss to do that, and 
I want to just quickly mention the names to the members who 
are present and who had viewed the leaders. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has to ask for leave if she wishes 
to. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I beg leave, Mr. Speaker, to mention the 
names of the leaders. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
304 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the leaders 
have taken their time to not only lead the Brownie pack, but to 
accompany them today, I wanted to also mention to the 
members present that the leaders that accompanied the 
Brownies, the 64th Pack from Regina, were Mary-Ann 
Ratushniak, Lori Skogberg, Kathleen McAllister, Janet East, 
and Tracy Boehm. And I congratulate them for the work and the 
involvement that they have in their community, for it's the 
volunteers within our community that make the quality of life 
here so exceptional and make our community strong. 
 
Thank you very much for your indulgence in allowing me to do 
that this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I will echo that, for those comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to make just a few comments again. I 
know the member from Wilkie is going to follow me, and I 
know that he's going to promote what's happening in Alberta. I 
know he's going to promote what's happening in Alberta, so I 
want to just make a few more comments about our approach 
and our budgeting relative to Alberta's. And I know he'll be 
listening to this. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, he compares the Alberta model to Saskatchewan. 
What they forget, Mr. Speaker, is that in Alberta, as was raised 
today, since in the last four years the power rates in Alberta 
have gone up 22 per cent. Power rates in Saskatchewan have 
gone up 11 per cent or one-half of what they've gone up in 
Alberta. Now I ask him to consider that and the impact on low 
income people. 
 
Second comparison I would make to Alberta, because they keep 
saying Alberta's tax free, Alberta has a . . . it costs families $450 
a year to send their children to kindergarten — $450 a year to 
send their children to kindergarten. It does not cost that here. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you can't say that that's tax free to families. 
Imagine the impact of that on low income families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a family of four in Alberta pays $1,350 in health 
care premiums. You can't say Alberta's tax free. Mr. Speaker, 
car insurance in Alberta is almost twice the cost as it is in  

Saskatchewan. You can't say that that is tax-free Alberta. Mr. 
Speaker, in those four areas, that represents several thousands 
of dollars, potentially, depending on how many children you 
have in kindergarten. But that represents 2 or $3,000, so don't 
tell us that Alberta is tax free. It isn't tax free. 
 
It's a matter of public record, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
matter of public record — and I know this will be 
acknowledged because the member from Wilkie is a man of 
integrity — that if you earn $25,000 a year as a low income 
person, that you pay the lowest level of taxation right here in 
Saskatchewan. That's a matter of public record; it's a matter of 
public record, and that can't be denied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I ask the member from Wilkie, when he's 
speaking, to consider the following as well in terms of what's 
happening in Alberta in terms of welfare. Mr. Speaker, do you 
know that this year the Alberta government, to people on 
welfare, cut extra food allowances? They restricted dental and 
drug benefits for diabetics and women who are pregnant. That's 
what the Alberta . . . that's the model they're promoting. That's 
what they did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also slashed school supplies and 
transportation costs for children going to school. They have the 
lowest minimum wage in Canada, the lowest minimum wage in 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, they eliminated benefits to low income 
people, to unemployed people, on utility connections, on any 
moving expenses, on damage deposits. Now in Alberta the only 
way that anybody on assistance gets a damage deposit as of 
October of 1993 is if it's an abused woman fleeing a situation. 
Any other welfare recipient does not get a damage deposit in 
Alberta. And, Mr. Speaker, they've also eliminated benefits for 
telephone installation. They've eliminated benefits for telephone 
installation and operations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, things are so bad in Alberta that the Children's 
Advocate, who by the way was accountable to the Minister of 
Social Services, resigned. The Children's Advocate resigned 
because of the deplorable situation in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. So 
you combine that with the fact that they drove 7,000 welfare 
recipients out of province, 12,000 families back to reserves, and 
eliminated those benefits, Mr. Speaker, and that that is the 
model being promoted over there, Mr. Speaker, I can hardly 
believe it. Mr. Speaker, on Alberta . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well Ralph's at 60 per cent. What's Roy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well he's . . . because it's politically 
expedient, that's what he's saying. Ralph's at 60 per cent. But, 
Mr. Speaker, there's no principle there. There's no principle in 
Alberta. That's the difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a copy here from The Edmonton Journal, February 17. 
This is from The Edmonton Journal, February 17, and the 
headline is, "Welfare demands leave woman worried for 
future." Did you hear that? Welfare demands leave woman 
worried for the future. And I quote, and it says: 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
305 

 Take retraining or be cut off welfare. The ultimatum 
from Social Services worried Fern Donovon, struggling 
to look after her severely handicapped daughter. 

 
 Last month, Fern was told . . . that she had to take 

retraining . . . or (she was) cut off welfare . . . (but get 
her) friends or neighbours to look after Janine or put her 
into a day-care program or a group home so she could 
work. 

 
 Home care agencies have told Fern they won't accept 

Janine in their day (care) programs because she needs 
one-on-one support and they don't have the necessary 
staff due to government cutbacks. 

 
An Hon. Member: — That was in Saskatchewan that 
happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — No, that's in Alberta. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It happened here too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That's a hypocrisy here. This is in 
Alberta. Now this is in Alberta. Now I have my colleague from 
Souris-Cannington, who comes from my home area, talking 
about all the good things Ralph Klein is doing. I have a copy, 
Mr. Speaker, of his Christmas greeting, the Carnduff Gazette. 
Now he's supporting Ralph Klein's ravage attack on low income 
and unemployed people. He's doing that here tonight. And I 
have a copy of his Christmas greeting to his constituents and he 
says, and I quote: 
 
 The celebration of Christ's birth is a very special time of 

the year. It is a time for re-uniting and sharing with our 
families, our friends and our neighbours. 

 
We open our hearts to those less fortunate than we. That's what 
he said: 
 
 We open our hearts to those less fortunate than 

ourselves, and by doing so we receive the warmth of 
love which is the true spirit of this season. 

 
Now that's what he says at Christmas time, Mr. Speaker. Then 
he promotes the support to Ralph Klein and the savage cuts he's 
making to low income people. Mr. Speaker, I don't know how 
he lives with himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we have the leader, we have the Leader of the 
Opposition, in his Christmas message, and I'll just quote a 
couple of sentences here. But I have heard . . . I have read about 
his attacks all over this province in local newspapers, about his 
attacks on all kinds of people that are unemployed and on social 
assistance, and what he would do — and young people — what 
he would do if he was premier. But then, this is what he says at 
Christmas time, and he's been promoting — the Leader of the 
Opposition has been promoting, as has the Liberal leader — 
Ralph Klein and his model. And this is what he says. 
 

Well he starts out by saying, "I really like Christmas." Well 
that's good. He says the most important thing about Christmas 
is that we can treat others with kindness, love, and respect. And 
he says, now that is something . . . then he says: 
 
 That's something we should aspire to all year round . . . 

And in doing so, we're all able to see just a little more 
clearly the things that are truly important in life; our 
family; our friends; . . . being kind to others; and trying 
to make the world, at least our little corner of it, a better 
place. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what Ralph Klein is doing, his attacks on 
low income and unemployed people, is not making the world a 
better place. Well the member from Shaunavon says, tell me 
what you're going to do. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest he read 
the throne speech, he read the budget speech, read this speech, 
but that more importantly he go back and talk to some of his 
constituents because, Mr. Speaker, that member will be so lucky 
to win his own nomination that we will never see him back here 
again after the next election. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that this government, with 
our communities, is . . . we're working very hard to providing 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and I would plead with the minister 
from Wilkie to work hard, to take his critic responsibilities 
seriously, work very hard to give me constructive ideas, to work 
hard to create positive images towards unemployed and low 
income people rather than feeding in to the punitive, negative 
stereotypes that he's been doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he attacks unemployed and low income people 
every time he gets up here. But, Mr. Speaker, whenever he or 
the Liberals or the members opposite come to me with a 
question or come to me with somebody from their constituency 
who's on social assistance, every single time they want more 
money for that person. Without fail, whenever they bring a 
situation to me they want more money for the client. Yet they 
continue to vote against every initiative that helps families and 
then they categorize everybody else as being shiftless and lazy. 
But somehow the people they bring to us are legitimate, Mr. 
Speaker. That I find unethical. 
 
So I challenge the critic to bring positive suggestions, not ideas 
that are rooted in attacks on low income people, which is what 
he did again on Thursday, and I take great exception to that. Mr. 
Speaker, his leader is talking about a 1-800 fraud line like they 
had in Manitoba. Well in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, they spent 
$700,000, dial-a-cheat signs all over the highways, and they 
found out that 3 per cent of the people on assistance were 
cheating. But, Mr. Speaker, they spent $700,000 and recovered 
230. Mr. Speaker, when that member . . . when that party was in 
power, they spent $650,000 on accountability equipment and on 
accountability measures and they recovered 200,000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am quite prepared to send over to that member, 
two full pages of the accountability controls, the measures that 
we've taken to be accountable in the social assistance program.  



February 20, 1995 

 
306 

But I repeat, we're doing that to be accountable, not to be 
punitive and negative and intrusive. We're doing it to be 
accountable and the auditor is satisfied, and if the auditor is 
satisfied, Mr. Speaker, I'm satisfied. 
 
I'll just mention very briefly, I am the critic for seniors too. I'll 
mention very briefly. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm the 
minister for seniors, that's right, correction. I'm the minister 
now for seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that one of the great joys I've had over 
the last 17 months has been to meet with senior citizens across 
the province. Mr. Speaker, we've had extensive discussions. I've 
been in virtually every community meeting with seniors. The 
seniors organizations met with our full cabinet recently. Mr. 
Speaker, senior citizens know that we had a big mess to sort 
out. They're concerned about their children and grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're appreciative that low income seniors got a 
bit of a seniors' income plan increase. Seniors are very 
appreciative of the special drug support coverage that they got, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors are represented on the health boards 
proportional to their population. They're very involved in a 
meaningful way in the life of their communities and ensuring 
that other seniors have the support to remain independent and 
involved. They have been very involved working with us to try 
and develop abuse protocols for senior citizens. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Health met last week at 
the new senior citizen . . . new seniors mechanism, Sask Seniors 
Mechanism offices in the opening of their new office, when he 
announced the new money, the new $20 million, Mr. Speaker, 
he got an applause after every one of the initiatives. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, seniors know that we are working hard to 
provide them with the kind of independent supports that they 
need, and that we have increased home care by 100 per cent in 
the last four years, Mr. Speaker. So they're appreciative of that, 
but I know that the Minister of Health will be going over the 
initiatives as it relates to seniors. 
 
But seniors support the notion of not putting money into bricks 
and mortar but putting money into services that support them to 
be more independent and they're supportive of us handing over 
support to local health boards and their involvement there. And 
of course they're very supportive to the health care renewal and 
the preventive health promotion aspects. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just quote briefly, very 
briefly, on again what external people say about the health care 
announcements of last week. And I quote from the Star-
Phoenix, I believe last Friday, Mr. Allen Backman, a Saskatoon 
professor of health care administration, and he was referring to 
the minister's announcement on the $20 million of new money. 
He says, and I quote: 
 
  

 (This) is "really good news" that will mean "huge 
improvements" in quality of life for many seniors (in 
Saskatchewan). 

 
 (He says) The focus of health care has to shift more to 

the community and this budget is a "very constructive 
start" (in doing that). 

 
 It will mean more respite care, increased day programs 

and round-the-clock home care. Fewer people will end 
up in nursing homes who could manage on their own 
with appropriate help, (says Mr. Backman, or Dr. 
Backman). 

 
(2000) 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, that's an independent view. I think Dr. 
Backman is well respected in the health care field as being 
knowledgeable, progressive, and very much attune to what's 
happening throughout the world. He is very, very positive about 
the initiatives in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I commend my colleagues for this 
budget. It's positive; it's sustainable. Mr. Speaker, it sets out a 
plan and we've delivered on the plan so far, and I know that 
from my discussions with my constituents on Friday, they have 
every confidence that we'll deliver on the debt reduction plan. 
They also have every confidence that we will continue to attack 
the job creation strategy and initiatives and be successful, as we 
have been, Mr. Speaker, in balancing the books. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again say that I am proud to have the opportunity 
to be able to speak to this budget debate. I am very proud to . . . 
I'll be able to represent the constituents of Saskatoon Eastview-
Haultain, and not only for the past seven, but hopefully for 
many years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that we do have the confidence of those people and I 
believe that one of the things that they appreciate about the 
government, Mr. Speaker, is that we have balanced debt 
reduction with job creation, with sustainable health care, with 
agricultural diversification, with balancing the social objectives 
in the way that is truly . . . typifies the Saskatchewan spirit, and, 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the Alberta approach, which is simply 
devastating for low income families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the constituents in my 
constituency, they know that the Tories are filtering over to the 
Liberals. They know these are going to be the same old people. 
They will never again go back to the dark days of the 1980s. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just about decided 
not to get up. The minister was telling everybody what I was 
going to say and what I was going to do and he seemed to be 
occupied with the member from Wilkie. I was kind of 
wondering if he was just maybe stalling around to whoever he  



February 20, 1995 

 
307 

thought was listening to him and gone to bed because I was 
getting pretty drowsy myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps on talking about Alberta. I 
would say me thinks you protest too much. You talked about 
Manitoba only making a difference of 3 percent. Well in 
Saskatchewan, my friend, if you would make a difference of 3 
per cent in the abuse of the system, that'd be $15 million. Your 
budget, your spending has gone up by 42 million as far as I can 
figure out taking a quick look at the book. And if everything is 
so good and so rosy as you try to paint it, how come it's only the 
welfare budget that seems to be going up leaps and bounds? If 
everything was so good why aren't people working? 
 
And I take exception to you, sir, when you said that I used the 
word shiftless and lazy. I never did, never once, and I take 
exception to that. You talked a lot about the slash and burn of 
Alberta; well over here it's rape and rob in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I don't have . . . I don't intend to take a lot of your time 
tonight, Mr. Speaker, talking about the budget. There's isn't too 
much to talk about. 
 
The minister talks about not having enough money to look after 
those folks that need a little extra help. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
know very well you've got a tonne of money sitting in CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) that you 
won't use. You could take that out and give that to those 
disabled people that need a little extra help which you refuse to 
give them, then I could maybe be a little bit more sympathetic 
to your problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget was balanced on the back of the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer; that's who balanced this budget. Not 
the boys on the other side. Anybody can balance a budget if you 
reach deeper and deeper into people's pockets. You took a 
billion-two extra taxes out of the people of Saskatchewan, and 
then you try to tell us that you did it; that you're the great, good 
guys. Yes, right. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the budget where the only family that 
gains is the government's very own family of Crown 
corporations. That's the family that benefits by this budget. Not 
the family that the minister likes to get up and talk about over 
there. He hasn't helped any families. He's maybe paid a whole 
bunch of money out but he hasn't helped them any. Have you 
found jobs for them? No, just hand out, hand out more money. 
That's what you figure you're helping people. Well I can tell you 
they don't want your hand-out. They want a hand up. They want 
a job; that's what they want. You've lost a thousand jobs net, 
and then you try to tell us that you're helping people. You've got 
your foot on their neck and you're ramming them down deeper. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you something here. According to 
this budget the family of Crown corporations, CIC, did not pay 
any dividends at all, not a bit of dividends to the revenue fund. 
Now had they paid the $60 billion into the government that they 
budgeted last year, the 1994-95 surplus would have been 229 
million instead of the 119 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Well the NDP (New Democratic Party) family, the family of 
Crown corporations, is $60 billion richer, while the average 
working family in this province continues to suffer under the 
government-imposed taxation load. And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, it's very ironic that the party claiming to represent the 
working people is cashing in on his pay cheque. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the average working man is seeing his disposable 
income slowly disappear under this NDP regime. Thousands — 
thousands were forced onto welfare under this NDP 
government. We started out with 57,000, now you got 83,000 
and a population of less than a million. Yet this is the NDP 
government that promised to end poverty, not build on it and 
spend 500-and-some-odd million dollars on it. You're going to 
end it; no food banks. All that was going to be done. Well I 
haven't heard tell of any food bank close lately. 
 
And a mere six years ago, Mr. Speaker, at the 1989 NDP annual 
convention, the now Premier, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, vowed to end poverty in Saskatchewan — end it. 
Well we've went from 57,000 to 83,000 welfare cases. How is 
that ending poverty? In fact he pledged to eliminate poverty by 
the end of his first term in government. And that was in the 
Star-Phoenix of November 20, 1989. 
 
Well when the minister get up there and tries to dazzle us with a 
bunch of figures, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is look at the 
facts and you'll find out what kind of a job they've done. 
 
Now just prior to 1991, the general election, he went a step 
further, stating he would make no promises that he couldn't 
keep. That was in a news conference on September 20, 1991. 
Well guess what? Since forming the government, the number of 
people on welfare has risen to record numbers — record, record 
numbers — record numbers. Never have seen them that high 
before. And you stand on your feet over there and try to tell me 
that you're doing a good job. Now you tell that to the people out 
there that's on welfare. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in August 83,069 people — 83,000 in a 
population of less than a million . . . and over in Alberta they 
got two and a half million. And they only got 57,000 on 
welfare. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's because they give them jobs. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Yeah, right. Well it's declined a little bit. Well 
you know, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn't so ridiculous, it would be 
pitiful. 
 
According to the most recent statistic that's available to us, you 
still got 80,000 people on welfare in this province. And that's in 
your own quarterly report. You still got 80,000 people out 
there. 
 
And when the NDP took power, as I said Mr. Speaker, there 
was 57 — 57 in 99. And this is ending poverty, you go from 57 
to 80? Well that's just an increase of 23,000. That's since the 
member from Riversdale became the Premier of this province.  



February 20, 1995 

 
308 

Well I would like to know how his constituent think about that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said there are 23,576 more people on 
welfare than there was in 1991. Now, do these numbers reflect 
on any action on behalf of a Premier that promised to end 
poverty? Well I say no they don't. 
 
Instead we have as many people on welfare as there is — and I 
want you to listen to this — as many as the combined 
population of Estevan, Lloydminster, Melfort, Melville, North 
Battleford, Swift Current, Weyburn and Yorkton. That's eight of 
the twelve cities in Saskatchewan would be on welfare, if they 
all lived in those cities. And the minister gets up there and tries 
to tell us that they're doing a great and wonderful job. Well, I 
guess. 
 
Well of course the NDP takes no responsibility for that. He 
don't take no responsibility. It's not their fault. It's not their 
fault. They never done anything wrong. 
 
It couldn't be the result of the high taxes, sky-rocketing utility 
rates, and the oppressive labour laws. Oh no. No no. 
 
The Social Services minister blames it on the federal 
government. He's been blaming it on them for the last two 
years. Now he's got a new one. He said the federal government 
. . . the high number was because the federal government 
decision not to provide assistance to off reservation Indians. 
Now most recently he's blaming it on the federal government 
UIC program. That's what done it. 
 
Well, as usual, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have chosen to blame 
someone else for their miserable statistics, rather than to come 
up with solutions. All we've asked the minister, at any time, was 
to reduce the cost of welfare, get jobs for these people. We 
didn't tell them to turn them out in the street; we said get jobs 
for them. 
 
Why are people being forced onto welfare? Well let's consider 
the NDP's actions just prior to this budget. Just a little bit of an 
overview. The annual tax and utility rate increases — well we 
all know how far they went. They went so far you had to give 
some back. Then you eliminated the child dental plan and the 
prescription drug plan — great family people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Except for MLAs. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Yes, that's right. You cancelled the senior 
citizens heritage program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They 
did, the great, wonderful family people over there. This great, 
big-hearted minister over there. 
 
You eliminated the Saskatchewan Works program. And you've 
demonstrated a lack of economic development and minimal job 
creation. You have done a dismal job in job creation. You've 
got 1,000 less jobs and you've got 23,000 more people on 
welfare. And you're trying to tell me . . . You want to tell me 
you're doing a good job, and you want some help? I don't want  

to help you do that kind of . . . I don't want to help you do that. 
If I was to go . . . Do you want me to go and help you get 
40,000 more on? Is that what you want me to do? 
 
(2015) 
 
And you talked about the removal of the abuse detection. Well 
you're misleading the people. There was a $6 million abuse 
identified, and they brought that down to $2 million. There was 
a $4 million right there. So you tell . . . When you tell the 
people it was only $200,000, that's not the truth. Telling half of 
the story. 
 
Well another thing you did: when you disbanded the 
investigating unit, you changed the policy cutting off benefits to 
those recipients who drop out of work or job search. You did 
that. Yes, you did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP's disastrous policy decisions and lack of 
controls on who receives welfare in our province has 
compounded the financial strain on our social service net. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people forced to live on the meagre 
amount provided by welfare, but there are those who choose to 
live on welfare. Well, Mr. Speaker, welfare should not be a way 
of life. Welfare should be a second chance. It should be a hand 
up, and not a hand-out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — This government needs to re-evaluate its 
method of distributing welfare and the rates that they provide to 
recipients. Maybe, Mr. Minister, if you want some help, maybe 
you should look at a two-tiered system. Maybe you should help 
those that really need it instead of sticking to your policies. You 
told me the other day, the policy. You can't help this poor lady 
that can't work because your policy. Well where's your heart? Is 
it all written on your heart? Where's your heart? 
 
I raised the attention to you. What did you do? You told me you 
had gone as far as you could within the policy. Well thank you 
very much. Well, Mr. Speaker, this lady has cerebral palsy. She 
can't work. She is unable to work. And he tells me she has to 
live on the same policies, same amount of money as anybody 
else. Well thank you very much. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, overall, the disabled in Saskatchewan are 
eligible for a mere $40 extra in disability assistance — $40. 
Well I do not agree. I do not agree with the NDP administration 
when they state the poor are poor, that one person cannot be 
poorer than another in the eyes of the social assistance system. 
 
Now don't go down with me, sir. There are people who are poor 
and need help. And there are people who are poor and can't 
help themselves, and they need more help. Mr. Speaker, if that 
were the case, the Department of Social Services wouldn't be 
designated individuals as employable and unemployable. If that 
was the case that there was just one level of poor, then why 
would you have two designations? The sad reality, Mr.  



February 20, 1995 

 
309 

Speaker, is some people are physically unable to work, people 
like Mrs. Dougherty, Mr. Speaker. That has to be recognized. 
 
In other provinces, Mr. Speaker — let's take Ontario for an 
example, Manitoba and Alberta — the disabled are given 
special consideration. Mr. Speaker, I believe that our province 
may want to consider providing additional benefits to the 
disabled. I would then join with the minister, if he would come 
to me with a proposal like that. And as this goes on, I intend to 
pursue that issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my opinion that the government should focus more 
attention on getting the people who should not be on welfare, 
out of the system. And I refer to the able-bodied employables 
and those collecting welfare fraudulently. Other provinces have 
had great success, in spite of what the Minister says, in 
discouraging welfare abuse. And I, Mr. Speaker, am not, never 
was, and never will suggest that people . . . every person on 
welfare does not deserve it. There are probably not a lot, but if 
we had those off, we could then look after the other people 
better. And we do know that there are people who are abusing 
the system. 
 
Last year, Manitoba implemented a 1-800 line and I'll tell the 
Minister what happened there. The ongoing cost of this line are 
about $4,000 per year plus staff time. A minimal cost, Mr. 
Speaker, when you take into account that the Manitoba 
government anticipates that they will recover 1.5 million in 
abusive claims. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the five months that this 
line has been operating, the corrective action has been taken in 
188 cases. Now that's not a big number, but it's 188 cases. That 
has produced a potential annual savings of $837,000 on 188 
people. 
 
Now this money then could go to help those that I was speaking 
to the minister about, who was totally, totally unable to work. 
And I will address those at a later date because I don't intend to 
take up a lot of time tonight, Mr. Speaker, because I would 
prefer to get on to the business of the House. And I look 
forward to taking a few of these matters up with the Minister at 
a later date. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I am very pleased to rise in this Assembly today to speak in 
support of the budget for the province of Saskatchewan which 
was tabled by our Finance Minister on Thursday last. This 
budget represents a turnaround, Mr. Speaker, that is no less than 
remarkable for and by the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
come from the depths of despair in 1991, to the threshold of a 
new dawning of hope and opportunity in 1995, in only three 
and a half short years. 
 
I recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, knocking on doors in my riding of 
Saskatoon River Heights prior to the election in 1991 and 
having people say, what can anybody do? Things are such a 
hopeless mess. People sense that the affairs of the province 
were out of control and had lost hope. 
 

I remember well the for sale signs on front yards which 
threatened to outnunmber election signs, especially blue ones, 
and the moving vans blocking the driveways as I went from 
door to door. This was even before we were able to keep our 
promise to open the books of the province and reveal the awful 
truths for certain. But the rumours were out there that the 
provincial debt totalled $15 billion. I recall trying to reassure 
my future constituents that no matter how negative things 
seemed, good management could make repairs and restore the 
traditional confidence of Saskatchewan people in themselves to 
control their own destiny. 
 
I put it in the context at that time of a home owner who owes 
three times his or her annual salary on a mortgage. This is not 
unusual, and people understand that this kind of debt is spread 
over a long period of time that will allow enough residual 
income to provide for a decent standard of living. With careful 
planning, families can provide for their needs and finish with a 
house all paid for. This approach seemed to provide some 
reassurance in using it as a parallel to the provincial financial 
situation. 
 
Then I was elected and appointed to the Treasury Board and the 
Crown Investments Corporation. As the magnitude in systemic 
nature of the legacy of debt began to unfold before my eyes, I 
began to have misgivings about my confidence prior to the 
election that good management alone to turn things around. We 
did have to take measures to reduce programming in some 
areas, reduce funding to third parties, and increase some taxes 
and fees — distasteful things for us to do. But this was done 
after thorough, objective analysis. And though people were 
asked to make sacrifices, the hallmark of our actions was 
balance, fairness, and sustainability. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, three and a half years is a relatively brief 
time in the history of a province. And with this turnaround 
come-back budget it can be truly said that the period from 
1991-95 was short-term pain for long-term gain. I stand in my 
place in this House today totally vindicated in that everything I 
told voters in 1991 about economic recovery through prudent 
management while maintaining our compassion for each other 
and our quality of life has proven to be absolutely true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — This accomlishment belongs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to all Saskatchewan people. Not only are we the first 
government in Canada to balance our budget; we did it the 
Saskatchewan way, the best way — first and best, Mr. Speaker, 
first and best. We are now, as the Finance minister said last 
Thursday, in a position to dream new dreams. With one year of 
a budget with a positive balance almost behind us and a clearly 
laid out plan for four more years ahead, individuals and 
businesses can take comfort in the truth that the province is 
back on track. They can now turn their attention with 
confidence to making plans to build and prosper in an 
atmosphere of predictability, honesty, dignity, civility, and 
decency, which form the Saskatchewan tradition. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
310 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, as the song says, happy days are here 
again. Yes, much more needs to be done, but with some 
successes behind us and a clear goal ahead of us, at least we can 
whistle while we work, as another song says. 
 
This fair and responsible budget sets out targets in four main 
areas — debt management, tax reductions, health renewal, jobs 
and training. 
 
Firstly on debt management. Although much has been 
accomplished, there needs to be a continuation of the common 
sense approach to renegotiation and careful management of the 
'80s megaprojects. Debt in the Crowns has been reduced but 
needs to be reduced further. Future surpluses will be applied to 
debt. Indeed $540 million will be applied in this current fiscal 
year with projections for a reduction in the total debt of 1.2 
billion by 1999. 
 
This begins a positive cycle of reducing the size of the debt 
which reduces the amount required for annual interest payments 
which in turn allows for progressive and sustainable tax 
reductions. Truly we are on track to building a brighter future. 
 
Tangible proof of that truth is to be found, Mr. Speaker, in the 
significant tax reductions contained in this budget, tax 
reductions being the second of the four initiatives I wish to 
address. 
 
There are three major tax incentives to businesses. The cut in 
the aviation fuel tax, which according to press reports has been 
well received; a reduction in the rate of corporate tax payed by 
manufacturers and processors; and an investment tax credit to 
encourage manufacturers and processors. These measures 
should result in more value added activity inside our province, 
providing more jobs for our people and more opportunity for 
enhanced research and development to sharpen the leading edge 
we already have in areas such as farm equipment manufacture, 
for example. 
 
But the tax reduction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is closest to my 
heart is the conversion of the deficit reduction tax to the debt 
reduction tax, now that the deficit is gone, on an annual 
operating basis, and the application of that reduction in a 
progressive way to benefit all individual taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan. And by progressive we mean that it will provide 
the most relief to those who most need it. This issue is probably 
one of the reasons I sought election in 1991 and the reason I am 
in this House today. It is as a result of my experiences as a 
business person and an employer. 
 
Early in 1990, I was preparing T-4 slips for my more than 20 
employees for the previous year. These were farm employees 
and workers in a retail operation with two mall outlets, mostly 
young, some students and part-time, and mostly paid just above 
the minimum wage. As I was typing in the totals of 
withholdings for income tax, Canada Pension Plan, and 
unemployment insurance on the T-4 slips, I realized that there 
was something seriously wrong with the picture. I went and dug  

up a set of employer deduction tables from about 10 years 
earlier. The comparison shocked me and shook me. 
 
It struck me that through the '80s, while right-wing governments 
diverted our attention and stressed us out with interest rate and 
monetary policy fiasco, a constant barrage of CUSTAs 
(Canada-U.S. Trade Agreement), NAFTAs (North American 
Free Trade Agreement), and nattering about globalization and 
entrepreneurship, they had quietly and insidiously used the 
income tax system to create a new class of working poor in this 
country. 
 
During that decade while taxpayers' money was being 
generously dished out to the Westrays, the Pocklingtons, and 
the like, the income tax system threshold had been slowly 
lowered to go deeply into the pockets of honest, hard-working, 
low income people to the point where, for example, a single 
person with no dependants, working full-time, 40 hours a week 
for a minimum wage, would pay almost $1,200 a year in 
income tax. 
 
As I reflected upon this as a social democrat, it occurred to me 
that there were proportions both tragic and comic in this. The 
comic part was that our political movement in Canada has been 
accused by the corporate and right-wing elements of society of 
being social engineers, for embracing philosophies which 
include compassion, safety nets to address the human condition. 
 
(2030 
 
These progressive changes in the tax . . . These regressive 
changes in the tax system were most certainly social 
engineering, but this time it was done by right-wing interests 
and was producing an extremely negative effect. The tragedy of 
this kind of an agenda makes victims of good, honest people, 
many of them young. It doesn't only take money from their 
pockets, Mr. Speaker, it robs their spirit and violates their soul. 
Have you ever been served by a clerk at a gas station or at the 
service level somewhere, for example, who was less than 
pleasant. No wonder. It's one thing not to be able to get a job at 
all, and quite another to get one or two, work as hard as you 
can, then take home so little after taxes that you can't even meet 
your own basic personal needs sufficiently, let alone drive a car, 
take a vacation, save for an education or a rainy day. 
 
This is what creates cynicism and hopelessness and causes 
young people to drop out of the system, onto UIC, then welfare. 
We need to meet the eagerness and initiative of our young 
people with opportunity and a promise to keep the tax man out 
of their pockets when they are building their skills in lower 
paying entry-level jobs. We want them to do those jobs which 
will always be there, but we want young workers to move on, 
not drop out. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, means that over 6,000 lower income 
earners will pay no Saskatchewan income tax, and there will be 
reduced taxes for all earners. 
 



February 20, 1995 

 
311 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — These changes will be effective July 1, 
1995, which coincides with the publication of revised employer 
tables by Revenue Canada, and will continue throughout our 
plan to 1999. 
 
These tax measures are reinforced by other steps towards a 
progressive reduction in the cost of living for Saskatchewan 
people. I'll cite a few. One, our promise to hold the line on 
utility rates. Indeed gas rates, as announced, are down six and a 
half per cent retroactive to January 1, with adjustments being 
made on householders' bills in March. There will be a three-
year freeze, as announced, on SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) rates. SaskTel rate reductions have already been in 
place, amounting to $17 million on long distance since 1993, 
and 7 million on domestic rates since 1994. This is all good 
news, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The fourth area that was targeted was health care, and health 
care renewal; health care being defined as more than medical 
intervention for the sick. It has to include good housing, good 
jobs, education, and a good environment to prevent stress-
related illnesses and disease. We will be moving to the second 
phase of our health reform, emphasizing the movement from 
institutional care to community-based care and to prevention. 
 
We have announced $20 million increase in our home care 
budget. This will provide for round-the-clock care for seniors 
and disabled people in their homes where they would prefer to 
be and where they can get more efficient and personalized care. 
This will provide 450 jobs for nurses, counsellors and other 
people at the service level. And in addition to all of this, Mr. 
Speaker, fees will drop for home care 17 per cent as of April 
1st. 
 
The last area and a very important area, is jobs and training. We 
have previously announced the JobStart initiative and that will 
combine training and work experience, and will help young 
people to get off of welfare. In the post-secondary sector of that 
initiative we will focus on jobs in the small-business sector for 
graduates from our post-secondary institutions. 
 
Another important initiative that is really not emphasized 
enough, I think, is the improvements that we have made in 
enhancing the distance education, and the SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network Corporation) which provides 
training, opportunities, and enhancement of existing curriculum 
and subject material particularly to rural and northern areas in 
the province. 
 
As well it's not well enough known, I think, the role that SCN 
and the film industry and the expertise that has been developed 
in this province, plays in the economic side. There are many 
people involved in jobs in this area and it's a growing field. Our 
reputation in Saskatchewan as a training ground for not only the 
creative people — the writers, the actors — but the technicians 
is receiving worldwide attention. And in fact, we've received 
many awards on the national and international scene for 
productions that have taken place in this province and been  

produced and directed by people from Saskatchewan. In fact, in 
the last year we received some Genie awards, and indeed an 
Oscar. An academy award for computer animation was won by 
a native of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a very important area and it fits together well with the 
expertise in communications, and the access to the Internet that 
SaskTel, with its huge pool of expertise, is able to provide. And 
this will be an area that will be targeted to not only have 
development take place within the province, but to sell that 
expertise abroad to other countries who need it. 
 
This government strategy of targeting assistance to growth 
sectors of our diversifying economy is working. One such 
example which is particularly close to my heart is the 
biotechnology sector centered at Innovation Place on the 
University of Saskatchewan campus. Since the 1970s, I spent a 
total of 24 woman years, overlapping of course. This budget 
proves that our administration can do addition. 
 
I served on the College of Agriculture Advisory Committee, the 
University Senate, the VIDO (Veterinary Infectious Disease 
Organization) and Biostar boards and the Saskatchewan 
Research Council, for a total of about six years on each 
particular entity. And in those capacities, starting even back in 
the late 70s and early 80s, one could readily identify a potential 
unfilled for the biotech industry to be supported and developed. 
 
Our strategy of targetting this area of endeavour has at last 
attracted national and international attention to this place. The 
influx of companies setting up shop in Innovation Place has 
created an exciting synergy providing many high-quality jobs 
and opening up new opportunities for the industries they serve 
including agriculture, energy, mining, forestry, and others in our 
resource-rich province. It is very gratifying to see these most 
recent developments, and I'm confident that there will be within 
our strategy many more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Indeed, I think that it is safe to say that our strategies are all 
coming together as are representative, and having the honour to 
represent the people of Saskatoon River Heights in this 
legislature. I can truly report that over the weekend, as I was 
shopping in the mall, going to church, meeting people on the 
street, that a large number of people, dozens, approached me 
without solicitation, to congratulate us on the job that the 
government is doing and particularly to mention that they really 
thought that it was a good budget. So, on their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm pleased to make these remarks this evening in 
support of the budget and I certainly will be voting in favor of 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I look forward 
to entering into this debate, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
comments on the budget itself. I want to welcome new staff 
who are working here in the Legislative Assembly, including 
the pages. I want to offer some objective criticism to the  



February 20, 1995 

 
312 

exaggerated views of the Leader of the Third Party and the 
Leader of the Official Opposition. However not wanting to get 
into it at this late hour and breaking up the flow of what I have 
to deliver, and being near the time of adjournment, I move this 
debate do now adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:41 p.m. 
 
 


