






















































May 1, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 1, 1995 

 

 
1863 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I would 
like to start the week off by reading a petition from the people 
across Saskatchewan and Alberta. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These signatures come from Regina, Weyburn, Medicine Hat, 
Calgary, Taber, Radville, Moose Jaw, Maple Creek, and just a 
whole lot of other towns. Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to table these 
today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Moose Jaw, Mossbank area of 
the province, Mr. Speaker. Central Butte, Riverhurst, Hudson 
Bay, Melville, Esterhazy, Estevan, Carievale, Bienfait — all 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present today. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

adequate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 63 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Justice: (1) what was the 

cost of sending Jane Lancaster to the effective executive 
program at Waskesiu in 1993; (2) what are the names of 
all Justice employees who participated in the effective 
executive program at Waskesiu in 1994; (3) what are all 
costs associated with these employees attending this 
seminar; (4) what are the names of all Justice employees 
who have enrolled in this seminar for the current year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
want to introduce to you and through you to the other members 
of the Legislative Assembly, a couple that are in from 
Strasbourg — Paul and Elsie Dickman. They're sitting in the 
west gallery. 
 
Paul and Elsie have farmed out in the Strasbourg area and I 
believe they're on the homestead that Paul's father homesteaded 
in the early 1900s. Of course Elsie is known around that area 
for her green thumb and her handcraft and all that, and Paul 
with his horses and so forth. 
 
So I really want to ask the members of the Legislative Assembly 
to join with me today to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you 
and to members of this Assembly, a group of 50 grade 5 
students. And they are from the Valley Manor School in 
Martensville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And accompanying these well-behaved students are four 
chaperons — must be more than that the way they're silently 
sitting there — but four chaperons along with teachers, Jim 
Golding, Glenna Pellerin, and Sheri Protz, Mr. Speaker. And it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to introduce them to 
my colleagues here. And I look forward to enjoying a drink 
with you folks a little while later, visiting a bit, and having our 
picture taken. 
 
So I would ask all members of the legislature to help me 
welcome these 50 students, teachers, and chaperons from 
Valley Manor School in Martensville. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join with my 
colleague and extend a special welcome to Jim Golding who 
taught in our area for a couple of years — unfortunately it was 
too short a period of time because I know the students at home  



May 1, 1995 

 
1864 

certainly enjoyed Jim as a teacher. And I'm sure the students in 
Martensville are enjoying his presence as well. So thanks very 
much, welcome to the legislature, Jim. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Athabaska Airways Expands Service 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the member from 
Regina Albert North told us about Northwest Airlines providing 
international air service to Saskatchewan. Today I am pleased to 
offer some additional good news for the travelling public and 
for the tourist industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Prince Albert-based Athabaska Airways is going to introduce a 
daily flight between Regina and Williston, North Dakota, on 
May 16. This means that the travelling public will be able to go 
to Williston, from there to make connections to Minot, 
Bismarck, or Dickinson — all in North Dakota — or to Denver, 
Colorado. 
 
The potential for attracting American tourists and business 
representatives from the U.S. (United States) is exciting. An 
increase of American visitors to Saskatchewan will mean more 
effective, more economic activity in tourism which could lead 
to more jobs in this industry. The introduction of this service 
could also mean more jobs with Athabaska Airways. 
 
I would like to congratulate general manager, Jim Glass, and the 
management and staff of Athabaska Airways for offering their 
new service and for this contribution to the economy of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
50th Anniversary of Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance is today celebrating its 50th anniversary 
of service to the people of Saskatchewan. Fifty years ago today, 
the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, SGIO, sold its 
first insurance policy. 
 
Since then, as the theme of the anniversary suggests, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has been part of your 
community. It has been and continues to be an employer; a 
partner with local independent brokers; a supporter of 
community events; and most importantly, an insurer of people's 
homes, vehicles, and possessions. 
 
SGI boasts a history of affordable, dependable service. 
Saskatchewan was the first province to adopt a car-rating 
system that doesn't discriminate on the basis of age, gender, or 
marital status. SGI had the first government-owned salvage 
operation, the first package-policy concept, and the first 
drive-in claims centre in North America. 
 

SGI's first half-century has been marked by innovation, 
excellence, and service, and we look forward with pride to the 
next 50 years. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drama Festival 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 All the world's a stage, 
 And all the men and women merely players: 
 
Mr. Speaker, this line will come to life this weekend in Yorkton 
when the Saskatchewan Drama Association holds its annual 
festival. Over 600 students from across Saskatchewan will 
gather at the Yorkton Regional High School and C.J. Houston 
junior high for three-day performances, workshops, meetings, 
and social events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 11 regions of the Saskatchewan Drama 
Association have sent their best overall productions. The cities 
and towns represented include Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, Kelliher, Porcupine Plains, Delisle, Spiritwood, and 
La Ronge. 
 
The performances will start Thursday afternoon and conclude 
Saturday afternoon. All performances will take place at the 
Anne Portnuff Theatre at the Yorkton Regional High School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Drama Association's provincial 
festival is the finest showcase in our province, and Yorkton is 
proud to be its host this year. I want to invite everyone to the 
festival. And to the directors, performers, and crews, I wish to 
say, break a leg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of First Responders 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to congratulate a team of first responders from the 
Saskatoon Health District. First responders are volunteers who 
receive comprehensive first aid training. They can arrive on the 
scene of a medical emergency within minutes to provide care 
when an ambulance is en route. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this team in Saskatoon Health District has just 
completed a special weekend of training in a new emergency 
program that deals specifically with farm accidents. As most 
Saskatchewan residents are aware, farming is a dangerous 
occupation. Farm accidents kill about 26 people every year in 
Saskatchewan and injure many others. These first responders 
have participated in first aid training devoted solely to rescue 
and treatment involving farm equipment and accidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first responders enhance our excellent emergency 
response system. The success of first responders in this 
province is an inspirational story. It demonstrates that the spirit  



May 1, 1995 

 
1865 

of community is alive and well in Saskatchewan. First 
responders build on the Saskatchewan tradition of caring for 
neighbours and sharing in the community. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

KidSport Fund 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week at F.W. 
Johnson Collegiate, I had the pleasure to attend a press 
conference to launch KidSport Fund in Regina and for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Earlier today, a breakfast was held 
in Regina to signal how the community could become involved 
in supporting the KidSport Fund. 
 
Sask Sport is undertaking this new program to provide financial 
assistance to children who are unable to participate in sport 
because of the cost. I join my colleagues in the Assembly in 
supporting this worthwhile program because we believe that all 
children, regardless of their ability to pay, should be able to 
participate in sport and realize the many benefits that sport and 
recreation provide. 
 
Many children will now be able to enhance their lives by 
participating in various sports activities through the use of 
lottery dollars and the Saskatchewan Lotteries community grant 
program. Children between the ages of 6 and 18 will be eligible 
for funding. Direct grants will range from 50 to $200 a year for 
registration fees and the purchases of necessary equipment. 
 
Application forms can be submitted by any school principal, 
recreation administrator, or social worker, who is aware of a 
child's need and financial support in this area. 
 
I support and applaud the goal of the KidSport Fund to give all 
children the chance to enjoy healthy and positive activities, and 
I encourage all members of our community to support the 
KidSport Fund today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

May Day 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is a special day for working people all over the 
world. Today is May 1, the international working persons' 
holiday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people are under the impress that May Day 
arose as a foreign holiday, a holiday introduced from the mind 
of Karl Marx or Leon Trotsky, or other noted people on the left. 
Far from it, Mr. Speaker. May Day was a holiday introduced 
first in North America as a result of workers struggling against 
the Pullman railway car company. And it was established in 
order to set the tone internationally for the struggle of workers 
for the eight-hour day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May Day I want to salute the struggles of 
workers all around the world. I'd ask members of the  

Legislative Assembly to join with me in continuing the quest 
for the aim of workers' struggle, which is equal rights and social 
justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

District Health Board Deficits 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, not only 
have your health reforms devastated services in much of the 
province, as we see from your announcement this morning, they 
really aren't saving any money either. And not only do we see 
the Department of Health spending more money now than it 
ever has, we also find that a number of . . . in fact the health 
districts across this province have accumulated a debt of over 
$15 million. 
 
And one has to ask why has this happened. If your new system 
is so efficient, why have health districts accumulated such large 
deficits? Is it because they were forced to accumulate the deficit 
so the Minister of Finance could bring in a balanced budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my friend and colleague in 
the opposition seems to be catching the virus that has caught the 
member from Shaunavon in either not being able to read 
financial statistics or misinterpreting them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will know, if he looks carefully at the 
news release which I issued publicly this morning, that the 
deficit figures indicated there are figures for the calendar fiscal 
year 1993-1994, Mr. Speaker. In that fiscal year, the total deficit 
picture for all of the health boards across Saskatchewan was 
approximately $15 million. 
 
The accurate deficit figures for this fiscal year just ended, 
'94-95, will be released at the end of June. At that time, Mr. 
Speaker, we expect the total deficit picture across the province 
will be around $7 million. And further, Mr. Speaker, we expect 
by 1996-97 that across the province we will be in a balanced 
position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find that 
very convenient that the minister would release documents 
indicating today what the deficit was in 1993-94, what they 
anticipate it to be, and yet we won't have a release of what that 
'94-95 fiscal situation is until after the end of June. 
 
Is there any particular reason for that, Mr. Minister? Is that 
because you've determined and your Premier has determined, 
that you do not want those figures coming out prior to the next 
provincial election, which may indicate that your deficit 
projections are not falling in line? Is that the reason, Mr.  



May 1, 1995 

 
1866 

Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you the reason — 
it's because this Premier and this government believes in 
obeying the law and obeys obeying the law in openness. 
 
And the member will recall, that when we passed the district 
board legislation in this House, a part of that legislation . . . it's 
by law that the health district boards are to have their audited 
statements to the Department of Health by the end of June, 
following the end of the fiscal year. Those audited statements, 
by law, will be delivered to the Department of Health by the 
end of June, at which time then, Mr. Speaker, they will become 
public knowledge. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is to the testament of this government and 
the people of this province that for the first time this kind of 
financial accountability exists in Health and exists across 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. 
Minister, I find that interesting. The legislation certainly doesn't 
ask the minister not to call for the release of that information 
prior to; it says by law, they could wait and have it out by the 
end of June. 
 
Why aren't you asking for it sooner, Mr. Minister? Why don't 
you ask those district health boards? They've probably had their 
audits already done. Why don't you ask for it and release it 
sooner? 
 
Show us this good faith you're talking about, that your Premier's 
talking about. Show us that good faith and have those budgets 
released prior to the announcement of the next provincial 
election. Why won't you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the member well knows, 
the fiscal year ended only a few weeks ago — only a few weeks 
ago. These are complicated books and they will be thoroughly 
audited by the private sector auditors, and reviewed by the 
public sector auditor in some cases, Mr. Speaker. It is simply 
physically impossible that all these audits would be done by this 
week. 
 
Now it is a fine situation when members of that party come into 
the House and talk about releasing financial information. I can 
recall sitting on that side of the House and waiting not months 
but years for basic financial information about the operations of 
government in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've taken the position of extreme financial accountability 
because we believe that's how government should be operated. 
And in the sector of health, we feel the same way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, even the 
commissioner of your Gass Commission, Mr. Gass, indicated 
on an open line back in 1991, the books were as wide open as 
anybody wanted and they could have been reviewed at any 
time. So don't give us that line. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, our health boards, why are health boards 
facing deficits? Why were they allowed to even run into deficit 
positions in the first place? And where do they gain the 
revenue? Where do they find the revenue? There's only two 
sources: either taxes or reduce services. 
 
So while you're standing in here talking about a balanced 
budget, on the other hand people across this province, and 
specifically the rural areas, are facing increased expenditures 
through taxation and less in the area of services. 
 
Mr. Minister, can health boards run deficits, and why were they 
allowed to run these deficits? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I have explained to that 
member and other members of the House on other occasions, 
there were some initial transition requirements that have 
produced these small deficits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to remind the members that the deficits that we're talking 
about here, in the fiscal year 1993-94, represented no more than 
2 per cent of the total district budgets. In this year, they will 
represent less than 1 per cent of the total district budgets. And 
next year, I reaffirm that we will be in a province-wide balanced 
or surplus position in the health districts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that compares to a government, when these people 
were in office, who were running deficits of over a billion 
dollars or 25 per cent deficits on their annual budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we work with each and every health district board 
because, with the boards, we share the concern that health care 
in the long term should be financially sustainable. If we are 
going to preserve what we wish to preserve from our political 
party and from our government — and that is universally 
publicly-funded, and sustainable medicare — we know it needs 
to be based on a firm fiscal foundation as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Minister of Finance. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1991 the NDP (New Democratic Party) got elected 
by promising to eliminate the PST (provincial sales tax). And 
since then the PST has risen from 7 per cent to 9 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, with no relief in sight. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: individual communities and 
businesses have contacted the government on this issue many  



May 1, 1995 

 
1867 

times but obviously to no avail. So now, Madam Minister, 
they're banding together to try and get some action out of your 
government. A coalition of business and town councils from 
Swift Current to Meadow Lake are getting together on 
Wednesday in North Battleford to discuss ways to lower the 
PST. 
 
The question I have to the Minister of Finance is, are you going 
to attend? Will you have the courage to attend on Wednesday? 
And for once, if you do attend, will you listen to the damage 
that your 9 per cent PST is causing the people on the west side 
of this province? Will you go, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. First of all, I would say to the member opposite, I 
have met with these groups. For example, recently I was in 
Swift Current and officials had met with these groups, and they 
have a standing offer which I have written to the mayor of 
Macklin, to meet with the fiscal policy committee which I'm a 
member of. 
 
As far as Wednesday, my problem is I haven't been invited and 
I usually like to go to places that I'm invited to. And as you can 
imagine, Wednesday is quite booked. 
 
But you know, the members opposite really shouldn't keep 
doing what they're doing. This government did not promise to 
eliminate the PST in 1991. What we said is, you folks planned 
to tax things like children's clothing and books. We said we 
weren't going to do that. I think the member opposite may be 
getting his elections confused. It may very well be that the 
members opposite in 1982 made promises like that, but we 
didn't. We promised to clean up the books and we did — we 
delivered. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, we'd like to see your plan for reducing the PST 
because clearly it was said in 1991, you know, October 20 at 
midnight the PST is gone. All sorts of people across this 
province heard it, Madam Minister, they heard it from the 
member from Riversdale, over and over again. 
 
Now we'd like to see your plan, Madam Minister, in legislation. 
I mean after what happened in the last election campaign, your 
word isn't good enough any more, Madam Minister. You said 
you were going to reduce the PST. Will you put a commitment 
to the Legislative Assembly, instead of just promising and then 
betraying those promises like your leader did in the last 
election? Will you put legislation before this House to reduce 
the PST, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I think we're all working hard in this province to 
restore public trust in government and it doesn't work when the 
member opposite keeps saying things that simply are not 
accurate. This government did not promise to eliminate the 
PST. They said, we do not support taxes on children's clothing 
and on books . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would have to call the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster to order. She just simply can't 
interfere when other people are speaking in this House. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, we have 
come out with our four-year financial plan for this province, a 
plan which sees tax reductions, not tax increases. And people 
can feel confident that we will deliver on that plan because we 
have balanced the books of the province which is the first 
prerequisite. 
 
And they can also feel confident that we will deliver on that 
plan because we have begun delivering on that plan. In our 
recent budget we provided a tax cut for families — $150 per 
taxpayer, $300 per dual-income family — and targeted tax cuts 
to get and keep the economy moving. 
 
So we have a plan, we have a vision of this province, and we 
will ask the people what they think of it, and we think they're 
going to like our plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
knows full well that the promise was made. And really the only 
reason, the only reason, Mr. Speaker, that it hasn't occurred — 
the minister admitted it last December — was she doesn't want 
to lose her transfer payments from the federal Liberals. She 
wants Saskatchewan to remain a have-not province and live off 
what the federal Liberals give us, instead of listening to the 
people in this province, Madam Minister, the people on the 
west side particularly, in business, in communities, who are 
saying that their communities would be booming if you simply 
kept your election promise. 
 
And I quote Don McIntyre of Macklin who's heading up the 
new coalition. He says, I quote: I don't think I'd be out of line in 
suggesting our community would be at least double the size if 
we were sitting on a level playing-field with our town across the 
border. 
 
Madam Minister, business owners don't care about transfer 
payments and your welfare mentality from the federal Liberals. 
What they want is growth, economic growth, and that starts 
with a reduction in the PST, Madam Minister, to let those 
people get the government off their back. When can we expect 
you, Madam Minister, to get the courage, number one, to go to 
that meeting on Wednesday, and number two, do what is right 
and build Saskatchewan instead of tearing it down and be a 
welfare case for the federal Liberals. When are you going to do 
that, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, when I have met with these groups — for example a 
few days ago in Swift Current — I warned them that the 
members opposite were on their way. And I said, you know 
when an election is called someday in this province, you're  



May 1, 1995 

 
1868 

going to have people traipsing through your communities 
promising dramatic, massive tax cuts. They'll say, oh we're 
going to do this for you and we're going to reduce that tax and 
this tax and whatever. And I said, beware Greeks bearing gifts, 
because you remember what happened in the '80s; those tax 
cuts come back to bite you and you end up paying for them. 
 
And I say to them, this side of the House has taken responsible 
action on the tax side. We have reduced income taxes for 
people and we chose the income tax because the benefit is 
greater to families. And we have targeted tax cuts to business to 
ensure that our economy keeps moving. So we have sound 
finances, an economy turning around, and that's what the people 
of the province have told me that they want from this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Board Deficits 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today's news 
about health care deficit is very disturbing. First, after closing 
down 52 hospitals and laying off front line workers to save 
money, the provincial budget shows that health costs actually 
went up by $12 million; now we find out that in addition to 
this, as you said today, a cumulative deficit of more than $15 
million for the 1993-94 year, with more than half of the districts 
running in the red, Mr. Speaker. Health costs are up, services 
down, and administration is getting bigger. 
 
My question to the Health minister: given that any projected 
deficit has to be approved by the minister, did each of these 
'93-94 deficits receive your government's stamp of approval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry that the member 
wasn't listening earlier because I think we've dealt with this 
question, but I'm more than happy to deal with it again. The 
member will realize that the health districts actually came into 
formation during that calendar year; that in the transition period 
there were some deficit amounts carried over from former 
functioning. There were some deficit amounts arose that . . . 
because of some severance pay to administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has been laid before the members today and 
before the public are the exact figures from the calendar fiscal 
year 1993-94 when the deficit total was about $15 billion. 
We're estimating . . . $15 million. In this fiscal year we estimate 
it will be approximately 7 and by the next, Mr. Speaker, we 
anticipate a balance across the province. And I hope that is very 
clear to the member and that she will understand it once and for 
all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, we note that in today's release 
on district health deficits there is a further $7 million in 
projected deficits, as the minister has admitted. When the 
minister first defended the deficits, and as he does today, he 
said that it was because of start-up costs. Well start-up costs are  

past us now, and the health costs continue to spiral, services 
continue to dwindle, and the minister tells us we are looking at 
another $7 million deficit in '94-95. 
 
My question to the minister, Mr. Speaker: how did you decide 
which boards would be allowed to run deficits and which had to 
balance their books? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we work with each and 
every of the health districts to understand the needs of their 
communities and the needs of their districts. We work to 
develop with them the management plan and their budgetary 
works. 
 
Now for the first time, Mr. Speaker, in this province's history, 
these district boards are also going to their communities and 
sharing their plans; seeking out needs assessments and sharing 
their financial plans. That's how it works today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The decisions are not made as they used to be made when those 
folks were around government, either Liberals or Tories, on 
totally political kinds of approaches. No, what happens now, 
Mr. Speaker, is we work with our communities, we work with 
our districts, to find the best expenditure of the health dollar. 
 
Now we know, Mr. Speaker, I think we all know — perhaps the 
Liberals don't — that these have not been easy times for the 
fiscal condition of the province of Saskatchewan. We've had to 
work very hard, very hard with the inheritance from the Tory 
government, to provide the quality of health care services that 
we're able to provide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we've done that. And we've done it, I may say, Mr. Speaker, 
in a publicly funded and publicly administered system. We have 
not opted to any two-tier kind of medicine in this province, nor 
do we ever intend to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, these deficits are beginning to 
cause some real problems. The president of the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses stated last week at their annual meeting, and I 
quote: we cannot practise safe nursing in this atmosphere of 
deficit hysteria. 
 
The minister has just confirmed that this deficit situation will 
continue for at least another year. And like in the Regina district 
where there is no overtime being paid and where people are not 
being called on when people are sick, these are some of the 
problems that are arising. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. Given that the costs 
have continued to go up and services go down and that deficits 
continue to occur despite the minister apparently not approving 
them or foreseeing them, how can we believe that the deficits 
will be under control in the near future? 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1869 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I note with interest in 
today's Leader-Post that the Liberal leader, the Leader of the 
Liberal Party says, and I quote: she doesn't have the answers. 
Now that's the position of the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will know that these have not been 
easy times in the province of Saskatchewan. This government 
inherited a debt of a province of $15 billion — highest per 
capita debt anywhere in Canada. We have managed, Mr. 
Speaker, like no other government in Canada, to bring this 
province to a balanced budget circumstance in three years — in 
three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Miraculous. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is, as one of my colleagues just says, 
miraculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've done this while at the same time renewing 
and resustaining our health care system so that we can be 
confident in the delivery of health care well into the 21st 
century, in the model of health care that was Saskatchewan 
made. We're just not interested in the American-made kind of 
proposals we're hearing from other parties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the proof of the pudding is in 
patient care. What concerns me most about this situation is that 
the minister is continuing to accept deficits for the health 
boards. Today's news release projects a further 5 million in 
deficits for '95-96, which I presume that you have approved. 
 
This is more overspending in a period when we're supposed to 
be cutting costs. But the only thing you are cutting is the 
number of hospitals, the numbers of nurses and other health 
care workers for Saskatchewan people. 
 
To the minister: what kind of plan is it that deliberately creates 
health care deficits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . the member from Shaunavon continues to chirp from his 
seat. Well, Mr. Speaker, a few days ago the member from 
Milestone pointed out a little learning that she'd had in her life. 
She said to the House, you know, every mistake is an 
opportunity to learn. Well if that's the case, I think the member 
from Shaunavon's been on a steep learning curve these last few 
weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken a province that was financially and 
fiscally bankrupt  threatening the very, very foundation of our 
social programs in this province  we've taken this province 
and turned that into a province that has now a level of fiscal 
sustainability. And that extends, Mr. Speaker . . . that, Mr. 
Speaker, extends to the provision of health care services. 
 

Now this Liberal Party, on one day in this legislature, its leader 
stands up and says we're spending way too much money; we've 
got to cut government, cut government. She attacks public 
servants. She attacks those who provide public services. One 
day they're saying that. The next day they're saying we should 
be spending a whole lot more. Mr. Speaker, it's a very 
convoluted position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI President's Contract 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Tuesday, April 11, I submitted a written question to the 
government regarding the contract and salary considerations for 
the new president of SGI, Mr. John Wright. In direct contrast to 
this government's open and accountable motto, the House 
Leader refused to answer the question. 
 
My question is to the minister responsible for SGI. Mr. 
Minister, can you tell this Assembly if this position was 
advertised? How many candidates were considered, and will 
you provide a copy of the employment contract signed by Mr. 
John Wright? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it is well known — 
and the member opposite knows — that contracts of senior 
public servants are public knowledge and are made available to 
members opposite, and this will be as well. The member asked 
the question. It will be provided to the member opposite in 
written form. If it's converted for an order for return and there's 
nothing unreasonable about the salary, there's nothing 
unreasonable about the process. 
 
We are proud of the fact that we have one of the top public 
servants, who has been with the government here since the 
1970s, to be the president of SGI, to carry on the proud 
traditions of SGI in Saskatchewan which has brought about 
tremendous service to the people of this province and great 
returns as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Government House Leader took that question and turned it 
into a motion for return (debatable). Means we never get the 
answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the biggest dog-and-pony shows your 
government undertook in the first session was about how you 
were going to be . . . open up the Crown employment contracts. 
In fact you passed legislation which was supposed to make 
these contracts public. 
 
The current Minister of Health just said . . . he talked about 
following the law. The former Health minister said on 
December 19, 1991, and I quote: 



May 1, 1995 

 
1870 

 The contract of every permanent head and every person 
who reports directly to a permanent head must be filed 
with the clerk of the Executive Council for public 
inspection. No more secrecy, no more hidden contracts. 

 
That's what your government said, but that's not what you're 
doing. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you not supply us with John Wright's 
contract when we asked for it, and why don't you supply it right 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the contract of the 
new president of SGI will be filed in the normal process; it will 
not take very long. 
 
I don't think the member opposite can speak of any president of 
any Crown corporation whose contract has not been filed. That 
is something that is quite different from the way it used to be 
under the Conservative administration and the way it is under 
Liberal administrations around all the rest of Canada where 
there are Liberal administrations. 
 
We are proud of the fact that we hire people who are the best 
qualified people we can get. And if we can get them internally 
from the province of Saskatchewan, within the public service or 
Crown corporations, that's even better, because it gives an 
opportunity for promotion by people who work there. 
 
But that contract is going to be filed under the normal 
circumstances; it will not be long. And the member will know 
what the terms are, as well as the public of Saskatchewan, as 
they have a right to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treatment for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to an 
issue that was raised in the House on April 26 and again on 
Friday, I would like to report to the House regarding the 
coverage of the drug interferon for Ms. Victoria Lissel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the House that Ms. Lissel 
continues to have adequate drug supply for her prescribed 
treatment. 
 
I think I should explain the circumstances regarding this case. 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Lissel is approved for coverage under the 
exceptional drug status. At the time of approval, those approved 
receive a letter from the drug plan indicating effective dates of 
coverage. Ms. Lissel has been renewed on several occasions. 
However, Mr. Speaker, when the issue was raised in the House 
by members opposite, Ms. Lissel's doctor, physician, had not 
yet contacted the drug plan to request an extension of the 
coverage. 
 

Mr. Speaker, staff in the drug plan in fact contacted Ms. Lissel's 
physician. The physician has now made the request for 
extended coverage. And, Mr. Speaker, coverage has been 
extended for an additional six-month period, pending the 
recommendations of the expert advisory committee on hepatitis, 
on the use of interferon in the treatment of hepatitis C. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to say that the individual 
has now been contacted and informed that her coverage has 
been extended. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI President's Contract 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier's friend, Don Ching, questioned the appointment of 
John Wright, so we have the opportunity also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about the normal process. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I find it amazing and perhaps even amusing that 
members of this legislature have to apply to get the truth out of 
the NDP. They will selectively leak any information they wish 
at any time, but when it comes to their own NDP patronage 
appointments, people have to pay $5, fill out forms, and wait 
two weeks. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, here's my $5; you can put it towards the 
Premier's pension. Will you please supply that contract now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I think Mondays are 
bad days, because the opposition seems to come short of 
questions. The member opposite knows that he does not even 
have to go through the freedom of information process to get 
access to contracts of management positions in the government 
services. 
 
They are filed with the Clerk of the Executive Council. He 
needs to go down and he needs to be able to ask to see it. It's 
just like a student writing an exam — you fail if you don't do 
your homework. And obviously the member opposite, as well 
as both of the oppositions, fail because they don't do their 
homework, Mr. Speaker, before question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskFor Products Limited Partnership 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure today to 
rise and make an announcement of great importance to 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, a new corporation 
has been created in Saskatchewan. It represents a joint venture 
between the people of Saskatchewan and MacMillan Bloedel of 
British Columbia. 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1871 

This new corporation, SaskFor Products Limited Partnership, 
will operate three existing wood processing plants — 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation plywood mill in 
Hudson Bay, the sawmill in Carrot River, and MacMillan 
Bloedel's oriented strand board plant in Hudson Bay. 
 
More importantly, Mr. Speaker, the new SaskFor Partnership 
will be engaging in new endeavours and, Mr. Speaker, it will 
apply for a forest management agreement so that the forest 
resources in north-east Saskatchewan can be managed in an 
integrated, planned, and sustainable manner. 
 
Subject to environmental approval, the SaskFor Partnership also 
plans to conduct a new state-of-the-art oriented strand board 
plant in Hudson Bay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plant will require a capital investment of $150 
million. It will directly create 150 new jobs in the plant itself 
and create another 300 seasonal jobs harvesting wood. The 
plant will produce 480 million square feet of oriented strand 
board, a plywood substitute, and that will be on an annual basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is great news for 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. The way that the partnership is put 
together means that it also will be great news for the rest of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the assets of both Sask Forest Products and 
MacMillan Bloedel were given an independent valuation 
appraisal. This appraisal determined that the assets of both 
companies were approximately equal in value. As a result, the 
new company will be equally owned by CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), on behalf of the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, and by MacMillan Bloedel. 
 
The new oriented strand board plant will be constructed with 
the ongoing cash flow of the existing plants and third-party 
borrowing. This means that the citizens of Saskatchewan will 
not have to expend any money in order to have this new, major 
plant in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, down the road, the citizens of Saskatchewan will 
receive the full financial benefit of 50 per cent ownership of 
this new, expanded company. And, Mr. Speaker, these are the 
benefits of this new partnership: jobs, an integrated, sustainable 
forest industry with the proper environmental practices, and 
financial returns for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
certainly welcome any time a minister of the Crown stands up 
and announces there'll be more jobs in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: — And as I do my arithmetic, that means — I 
know that the government's ecstatic, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
they should listen to what people have to say — that means that 
they're now only 850 short of where they were in 1991, instead 
of being a thousand. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people in the media are now calling this an 
NDP megaproject. It's interesting that all the criticism dealing 
with FMLAs (Forest Management Licence Agreement) in the 
province previously, what you termed as megaprojects, as bad, 
you're now into one of your own. 
 
And it's also interesting, Mr. Minister, that CIC, which in its 
last annual report showed a loss, according to your arithmetic, 
is now involved in another megaproject in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And since January 1 of this year, the running 
tally, short of this particular project, is $267,191,339, and you 
have now added another 150 million on top of that, Mr. 
Minister. I would say that your family of Crown corporations 
and the taxes that they've been taking out of the hides of 
Saskatchewan citizens by raising every conceivable rate that 
there is attached to them are now starting to pay, at least you 
hope, political benefits for the NDP Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, that 150 jobs in the forest industry could have 
been created a long time ago if you hadn't been so busy taxing 
Saskatchewan people to the point where they couldn't invest in 
their own province. They couldn't invest in their own province, 
Mr. Minister, because you and your government and your 
family of Crown corporations were so busy picking the pockets 
of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, this 150 jobs is welcome in the north-east. What 
we'd like to see though is that you start bringing the family of 
Crown corporations before this Legislative Assembly so that we 
can understand these deals. If you're going to get into a 
megaproject, it should be before the Assembly, not pulled out 
of the hat simply before an election in order to make you and 
your government look good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, since we had the introductions of 
guests, our Assembly has been graced with the arrival of 21 
young people from our sister province to the east, from 
Manitoba, who are seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These grade 7, 8, and 9 students from Riverdale School in 
Kenville, Manitoba are here today accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Penner, and their chaperons, James and Janet 
Goossen and Ken and Darlene Penner. They've been here for  



May 1, 1995 

 
1872 

most of question period, and shortly, they'll be leaving the 
gallery to have a tour of our legislative buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll ask all members of the Assembly to show a 
warm welcome to our visitors from Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 
Telecommunications Enhancement Fund 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Today, the Premier and the Member of 
Parliament from Regina Wascana announced that the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program has 
approved funding to establish the telecommunications 
enhancement fund and develop the electronic infrastructure for 
a province-wide, multimedia learning network. 
 
This is further indication, Mr. Speaker, of the innovative 
projects which the province has put forward as part of the 
infrastructure program. In tandem with transitional construction 
projects, we are advancing electronic infrastructure projects 
which will prepare our young people and our adults to 
participate in a knowledge-based society. 
 
The telecommunications enhancement fund will provide 
matching grants so that over 100 Saskatchewan schools and 
regional college sites can install the wiring and cabling needed 
to connect to a multimedia learning network. The network will 
eventually link all schools and regional colleges to Internet, 
SchoolNet, the provincial electronic library system, the 
province's two universities, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), and the Saskatchewan 
government Correspondence School. 
 
Infrastructure program funding also will be used to help 
educators develop content  for example, cooperative learning 
projects linking students in many sites, and on-line learning 
resources. 
 
Our province will invest $1.3 million of the 3.135 million total 
project value. In true Saskatchewan partnership, another $1.2 
million is matched . . . or in matched dollars will be contributed 
by our educational institutions, regional colleges, and schools. 
Participating communities will be identified in June and 
detailed proposals will be approved in October, 1995, and 
installation will take place during the '95-96 academic year. 
 
Before long, Saskatchewan will have an extensive, technically 
diversified infrastructure, linking communities, people, schools, 
libraries, post-secondary institutions, and so on. A multimedia 
learning network will bridge barriers of geography and ensure 
all residents — urban, rural, and northern people — access to 
on-line information and education resources. 
 
Today's project, Mr. Speaker, will result in the creation of up to 
52 jobs within Saskatchewan's communications industry — 
highly skilled jobs for electricians, technicians, and computer  

network managers and other professionals. 
 
But that's only the beginning, Mr. Speaker. We're also fostering 
an environment which will develop and attract highly skilled 
people. Our young people will become information literate. It 
will give them the ability to use new technology to access 
databases, join networks, and to locate, retrieve, and interpret 
the information they need when they want it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's education system will be able to 
provide education and training opportunities to all learners in a 
flexible and affordable way, regardless of where they live in the 
province. With this project, adult learners will be able to have 
access to post-secondary education and other education or 
training right in their own homes, their own communities, or 
their place of work. Because of this project, Saskatchewan 
people will have available to them information that is the most 
current in the world, positioning our people in the international 
global-market economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan, and particularly 
our Premier, is pleased to contribute to this exciting project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is indeed very important that all people in Saskatchewan, that 
every school, has the same amount of access to the information 
and to knowledge. But unfortunately, because our province is 
so widespread and we have such a sparse population in certain 
areas, it's very difficult to do that. 
 
When the minister talks about the monies that are being 
supplied for Internet connections across this province, that is an 
access that will provide people with the opportunity to 
additional information, but not necessarily, Mr. Speaker, the 
educational information that they truly need. 
 
When people have to ride the school buses for an hour and a 
half either way, Mr. Speaker, it makes it very difficult for them 
to learn when they're at school. So perhaps some of this money 
should be used, Mr. Speaker, to provide either better 
transportation or better school access, rather than simply on the 
Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you look at the Internet connections themselves, Mr. 
Speaker, what do you need? You need some hardware. You 
need a computer, you need a modem, and you need access to a 
telephone line. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, most schools have access to the telephone 
line. They may not have that telephone jack in the school, in the 
classroom, but it's in the school and it's not a significant amount 
of money to run that into the classroom. 
 
They need a computer. Most schools, Mr. Speaker, have 
computers. So what else do you need? You need a modem. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's one of the things that most schools do 
not have, are modems. But a modem for a computer will run  



May 1, 1995 

 
1873 

you anywheres from 50 to $300, depending on how fancy you 
want to get. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the minister's talking of spending a few 
million dollars, you can buy an awful lot of modems for that. 
What do you really need, Mr. Speaker? What is really needed is 
an affordable access to the long-distance communication 
network. And that's what this government is failing to provide. 
 
It's cheap if you live in Regina, to make a connection to the 
Internet, Mr. Speaker. But if you live out at Herbert, it's not 
anywheres cheap, because you now have to pay the 
long-distance charges. And that is what's going to kill most of 
the small rural schools in dealing with the Internet, Mr. 
Speaker. It's not the cost of hardware; it's the cost of using the 
system once you're connected. 
 
And Madam Minister has not addressed that fact, Mr. Speaker. 
Support for the hardware is fine; the idea of connection to the 
Internet, Mr. Speaker, is fine. But it's the cost, the ongoing 
operating cost, that's going to kill the system, Mr. Speaker. And 
that's what Madam Minister has to address with her colleague, 
the minister for telephones, if she really wants to make Internet 
and the access to information accessible to all Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure project is exciting. And 
unfortunately, as my colleague from Cannington has pointed 
out, the current costs for rural Saskatchewan to access the new 
infrastructure is five times the cost to urban students. 
 
This is an issue that has to be addressed so that the playing-field 
will be levelled. The importance of the project to the 
development of knowledge-based education and employment 
should not be underestimated. This is a start, Mr. Speaker, and a 
good example of all levels of government working together for 
our future. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
question 67, I move we convert it to motion for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question 67, motion for return debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act respecting the University of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to explain 
the background and purpose of The University of Saskatchewan  

Act, 1995. 
 
Under the Act, the university of . . . an autonomous corporation 
that provides post-secondary instruction and research in the 
humanities, science, social sciences, and other areas of human 
intellectual, cultural, social, and physical development. 
 
The board and senate and council of the university are 
responsible for determining the manner in which the university 
fulfils this role in relation to the Act and to the recognized 
principles of academic freedom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the provisions in the current Act date as 
far back as 1907 and are no longer relevant or realistic. The new 
Act is based on detailed proposals coming from the University 
of Saskatchewan. The university community has been involved 
in preparing these amendments for more than five years. The 
board of governors, the senate, and the faculty council, have 
approved the proposals put forward. 
 
The intent of the Act is to promote effective academic decision 
making through a representative council which meets more 
often. The other aspect of the Act is to provide a system of 
governance to take the university into the 21st century. As I said 
earlier, Mr. Speaker, the present Acts dates from 1907, and 
some of its provisions are out of date for 1995. The third aspect 
of the Act clarifies the complementary roles of board and the 
faculty council, with the board having financial and 
administrative authority and the faculty council having 
academic authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments have been drafted with 
consideration to the unique traditions of institutional autonomy 
and academic freedom. They recognize current practices at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Act is intended to modify the governance 
structure in order to do the following. One, create a 
representative academic council. The present university council 
is a very large body with over 1,000 members. The new 
representative council will consist of elected faculty and student 
representatives of the college and elected members-at-large 
with the president and vice-presidents included ex officio. 
 
This new representative faculty council will have an expanded 
role. Its relation to the board of governors, which is responsible 
for administrative decisions, is clarified. The faculty council 
will be responsible for the academic decisions of the university. 
The council will authorize the board to establish programs, 
departments, and colleges. It will handle academic discipline 
and student appeals and establish scholarships and prizes. 
 
(1430) 
 
In short, the new representative council is responsible for 
establishing and maintaining the high standards and academic 
freedom that are fundamental to any university. These changes 
will bring academic decision making in line with university 
governance structures in other provinces. At most other  



May 1, 1995 

 
1874 

Canadian universities, responsibility for academic affairs is 
vested in the faculty through a body like the proposed new 
representative council. 
 
The second objective is to establish a new entity: the general 
academic assembly. The membership of the general academic 
assembly will consist of the entire faculty, along with some 
student representation. The general academic assembly will 
ensure that all decisions are well considered in a collegial 
fashion. 
 
The third objective is to change the role of the senate. The 
senate becomes primarily an advisory body which has a clear 
focus on the external community, both from the standpoint of 
bringing the views of the general public to bear on university 
decisions, and from the role of explaining the university to the 
community. In fact the new structure of senate and council 
powers will reflect current practice at the university. 
 
While senate currently has overall responsibility for academic 
matters, in most cases, senate exercises this responsibility by 
ratifying recommendations from the council. 
 
The new Act will focus senate activity on issues of concern to 
the community at large, while representative council will focus 
on internal academic issues, thus leading to a more 
understandable and realistic distribution of powers. 
 
In addition to the changes to governance structure, the new Act 
will expedite academic decision making by clarifying the 
powers of the board and council and by creating a smaller 
council which will meet more often. 
 
The actual, streamlined academic decision making to enable the 
university to be more responsive . . . and to update provisions. 
Redundant and outdated provisions are removed or amended as 
necessary. 
 
I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this Act being brought in 
is based on detailed proposals coming from the university 
community which has been approved by the board of 
governors, the senate, and the faculty council. This Act 
represents a proposed set of legislation that was developed over 
time at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The department's consultations with the university community 
have generally revealed support for the change to a 
representative council. Such a council is seen as being more 
responsive and effective than the current model. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'll be 
just making a few brief comments and then asking to adjourn 
debate in regards to this Bill. 
 
I certainly applaud the minister for dealing with some issues 
that have long been outstanding, I think, as far as the  

governance and the direction that the University of 
Saskatchewan is taking. As a former alumni of that wonderful 
place, I always like to hear people in the circles of power taking 
an interest in what is happening there. 
 
I guess when you talk about restructuring in these ways, 
obviously there are going to be people that have done things a 
particular way for a long time that are going to have to change 
their thinking. And we all have to do that at certain points in 
our life, Mr. Speaker; that as times change you have to be 
prepared to move with them. 
 
And obviously one of the things that people want to understand, 
as far as university education in the province, is how does that 
institution fit into the 1990s and how does it fit into the 
changing needs of the academics that are taught there, of the 
graduates that graduate, and what place they will have in the 
workforce that presents itself today? 
 
And we hear stories of colleges graduating hundreds and 
hundreds of students with very small placement taking place. 
Obviously if that's the case, then you have to look at the very 
structures that determine that those students should be in that 
college in the first place and why should they then be put into 
the workforce with no concept or hope of a job perhaps for 
years to come? And what the minister's proposing before the 
House today, I think, has some possibilities to change some of 
those ideas and change some of the concepts associated with 
university education. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it's appropriate that we take the time to 
talk to people who are obviously spending a great deal of time 
thinking and developing some of the proposals put forward by 
the minister, that we feel very comfortable proceeding with this 
legislation. And by doing that it means that we have to do our 
communication on behalf of those who may wish to bring 
points forward. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to adjourn 
debate on the Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 58 — An Act 
to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed  



May 1, 1995 

 
1875 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 56 — An 
Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Pringle that Bill No. 12 — An Act 
respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the 
Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in 
respect to Intercountry Adoption be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the official 
opposition believes that certainly this is an important piece of 
legislation that could potentially benefit hundreds of children 
and prospective parents across the province. And as we have 
seen over the past number of years by the television and read in 
articles in the newspaper, we hear about the deplorable 
conditions of orphanages in countries such as Romania and 
Bosnia. It is, however, heart-wrenching to see children suffer 
when parents in Saskatchewan wait up to five years for an 
opportunity to adopt a child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there has been a multitude of 
successful adoptions by Saskatchewan couples of Romanian 
children, and I am also aware of the fact that this government 
and the past government have been integral in facilitating these 
adoptions. And certainly I want to acknowledge the efforts of 
not only the present minister, but the member from Rosthern 
when he was Social Services minister, for the time and effort he 
gave and the credit he deserves for the initiatives that were 
brought forward in his term as minister. 
 
I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has signed an 
intercountry agreement for regulation of international 
adoptions, and that standards and eligibility criteria will soon be 
established. We cannot allow countries or individuals within 
various countries to exploit children by selling them or to 
defraud prospective adoptive parents out of money in the hopes 
of finally bringing a child home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition does not intend on holding 
this legislation up; however we do look forward to raising some 
questions in committee with the minister. And therefore at this 
time we're prepared to allow it to move to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Act 

 
The Chair: — I will ask that the Minister of Energy introduce  

the officials who are with him for the committee here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
To my right I have Bruce Wilson, the executive director of 
petroleum and natural gas division; to my left, Don Stirling, the 
director of mineral revenue branch; immediately behind me is 
Phil Reeves, director of the mines branch; and to his right is 
Gerald Tegart, Crown solicitor for the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, and officials, welcome today. Mr. Minister, we have 
contacted some of the oil industry to get their impressions of 
this Bill, to find out what their concerns, if they have any, are 
related to this particular piece of legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in general they're satisfied with this. 
However we would still like to have some information about it, 
to have you go through the process to determine exactly what is 
all involved in this. Simply reading the Bill doesn't give you all 
the information that a person necessarily requires. 
 
What kind of consultation did you go through? What kind of 
process did you go through before you brought this particular 
piece of legislation before the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much for that 
question. Mr. Chairman, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 
Tax Act basically has three amendments, and they will: 
introduce new powers to assist in the collection of unpaid taxes; 
the second would be to provide for the use of an average price 
in the determination of taxes on freehold gas production; and 
the third is just minor housekeeping changes. 
 
I want to say to the hon. member that with respect to 
consultation, the process — I am told by the officials — began 
in mid-December and was very extensive through to the 
middle-to-the-end of January. As you will know, the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers play a big role in the 
production and the development of our oil and gas industry. 
They were part of the consultation. The Small Explorers and 
Producers Association of Canada as well were consulted, as 
they are beginning to play a bigger and bigger role in our 
province. As well the mining association of Saskatchewan was 
consulted on the amendments to the Act. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could give us a complete list of who you consulted with 
and when you did those consultations. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We've got it listed here, but we 
haven't got it on a formal sheet that would give you the dates 
and the times. But certainly the department is willing to put 
together at least a chronology of the interaction with industry 
players, and we can send that to you. 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1876 

If you would rather, I can read them into the record today . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — What's the time frame? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I'm sorry? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want a time frame. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We can give you the time frame in 
terms of when it began and when it ended. If you're interested 
in that, I'll just put that together and we'll read it in. If you have 
another question? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd also 
like to know, in your consultations with the industry, what their 
suggestions were dealing with this particular piece of 
legislation, and did they have any . . . did they bring forward 
any concerns or any negative opinions towards this particular 
piece of legislation. If so, what were those concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I guess one of the 
concerns that the association had was . . . firstly, let me say that 
they were in general agreement with the changes. Their concern 
was, when we began the discussions with them, was with the 
lack of time to be able to review the legal text of the 
amendments. 
 
I'm assuming that some of that has taken place since we have 
discussed this last with them. It's certainly not our intention to, 
first of all, amend legislation that affects this industry without 
consultation and without their understanding of what we're 
trying to achieve. I think it's become very clear to the oil and 
gas industry and to the mining industry that we want to work in 
partnership with them. 
 
What we're attempting to do with the amendments to this Act is 
to ensure that we have the ability to collect unpaid taxes. And I 
think that's a prudent approach to take, and you would probably 
agree with me on that. 
 
And with respect to an average price, I think you will agree as 
well that the industry is quite comfortable with that. Quite 
clearly they would want their legal people to do an analysis of 
the amendments, and certainly we will and have allowed ample 
time for that to take place. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, one of the things 
though that is disturbing in this particular piece of legislation 
deals with the collection of taxes from third parties. Now, Mr. 
Minister, who would qualify as a third party in this particular 
type of arrangement? Would it be someone to whom the oil was 
delivered? Or someone who owed a receivable to the offending 
party? Who, in this particular piece of legislation, will qualify 
as a third party to whom the government can go to collect 
unpaid taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I guess it's fairly 
encompassing in that it would include anyone indebted to the 
taxpayer; it would then be any purchaser of oil and gas. And  

that's who it would impact on. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So it wouldn't 
necessarily apply to some other third party to whom the 
offending party had performed a service and they owed a 
receivable to them; it deals strictly with the sale of the 
hydrocarbons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, it . . . I want to say to the 
member opposite that it could. Third-party interests, oil 
purchasers, joint venturers, partners, buyer of assets, all of those 
could be included. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, at times an oil 
company may have a particular expertise in some area. Their 
employees may be turned around and contracted to someone 
else to provide a service, on a consultation basis. Now that third 
party that would be involved in that contract, can they be liable 
for the unpaid taxes of the first company? Because they would 
owe a receivable for the consultation service to the oil 
company; would they then be liable for those unpaid taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I guess I should, first of all, Mr. 
Chairman, read into the record the interaction with industries. 
On December 14, letters were sent to CAPP (Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers), SEPAC (Small Explorers 
and Producers Association of Canada), and the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Mining Association Inc.). Subsequent to the 
letters being sent, meetings were held on January 16 with 
CAPP, on January 12 with SEPAC, and with the SMA on both 
January 16 and January 25. 
 
With respect to the third parties that you speak of, I guess in 
terms of the Department of Energy and Mines, the records that 
we would have, easily identifiable and who would be pertinent 
in terms of this amendment, would be the purchasers of oil and 
gas. 
 
So that would really be the primary target in terms of this 
amendment, and that's how we would . . . the group that we 
would be able to easily identify, so that's where this amendment 
would assist. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, these changes would deal 
with unpaid royalty taxes. As a third party you would only 
collect those unpaid royalties from the money owed to that oil 
company by whomever purchased it. Now would that be the 
pipeline company or would that be the refinery down the road 
or would that be some other entity? It would have nothing to do 
with monies owed to them for, say the sale of lands, or for 
contractual services rendered then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that would be the 
individual or entity that would be responsible for making a 
direct payment to them. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So it still could be someone who hired 
some of their employees for consultation, that owes them a 
receivable; the tax money could come from that third party for  



May 1, 1995 

 
1877 

the contractual arrangement that they had to provide services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, I would want to say that first of all, the chances of us 
knowing the events and the possibility of a liability outside of 
the direct purchasers of oil and gas would be very slim. What 
the department attempts to do is to work through all other 
avenues to make collections and this would be a matter of last 
resort. This would be, I would suggest, in very few 
circumstances, used. And probably for the most part the 
collections would be successful, the payments would be made 
without having to invoke this. 
 
But there are some instances where this kind of a procedure 
would be required. And for that reason I believe that CAPP and 
SEPAC and the SMA would agree and are in agreement with 
this amendment to the Act. It's an avenue of last resort, targeted 
basically at the person, purchaser of oil and gas, who would be 
responsible to make direct payment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. If you . . . 
when you contact the third party to put a claim against their 
receivables to the offending party, how are they to determine 
that this is a valid application? Is it a sworn affidavit that 
company X is in default on paying their taxes, therefore we are 
garnisheeing your payments to them? Or what kind of a form or 
application is it going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, a 
certificate would be filed with the courts, and that would be I 
guess relevant to section 10, subsection 21 of the Act. 
 
The regulations as yet have not been designed, or have not been 
drafted. The regulations will prescribe the forms that'll be 
required, and we would do that in consultation with industry. 
As you will know, regulations will flow from a piece of 
legislation, the one that we're referring to here. Those will be 
drafted. We will make sure that industry is comfortable with 
them before the regulations would be put into place by order in 
council. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I believe that the process needs to provide some 
protection for that third party. When you come knocking on 
their door and say, here's the Bill, give us the money, they just 
can't simply turn over the cheque to you. They need some 
assurance that what is actually happening has some legal 
foundation to it and that they are protected if they do in fact 
turn over that money. 
 
If the company that they owed the money to comes to them and 
says, hey, where's our money, and they say, well the Minister of 
Energy and Mines came and got your money, and what's the 
response then from the company to whom the money was 
owed? They say no, our taxes are all paid up. So they need 
some legal protections, Mr. Minister, that if they do indeed turn 
those funds over to you, that there will be no legal recourse by 
the offending party on them for having done so. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if the member will 
look at the Bill under . . . It's on page 2 under section 10.2(5), 
and I quote: 
 
 Payment to the minister by a third party of an amount 

pursuant to this section discharges the liability of the 
third party to the person who is the subject of the 
certificate to the extent of that amount. 

 
So that would quite clearly indicate that it would discharge the 
liability if that were to take place so that the circumstance that 
you put before the House would not be valid. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, according to the Act 
it may not be valid, but that would not prevent the offended 
party from turning around and suing them, the person who 
turned the funds over to you. They may or may not be 
successful, I don't know. But that would not prevent that from 
happening. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that the company who turns the funds 
over needs you to serve them with a legal document that says 
you have done something to make sure that this procedure is 
entirely legal, and that everyone knows that it's happening — 
that the department knows that it's happening and that the 
person who owes the money to the department knows that 
you're going to go after the third parties that may owe them 
some receivables. 
 
So I think it's very important that that procedure be set up and 
that the proper paperwork be in place to provide some level of 
comfort to the person who owes the receivable. And so that 
when they turn their funds over to the department or to the 
Minister of Finance, that they are protected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I give the member 
my commitment and the commitment of the department that the 
regulations will prescribe a document that will be recognized by 
legal officials. In this case, as in many other cases, the 
documents are vetted by, at times, internal legal advice. 
Sometimes it's done with respect to using consultants or legal 
opinions from outside, and sometimes a combination. 
 
But I can give the member the assurance that in the drafting of 
this form, as we do with the drafting of all forms, we would 
want to maintain the integrity of the process. We would want a 
legal document that would stand the test of the courts, and that 
would stand public scrutiny. And I can guarantee him that the 
regulations, or the document that will be a result of the 
regulations, will in fact stand legal scrutiny. We will, with all 
due diligence, ensure that we put a process in place that's fair 
and that's workable. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. When this 
action takes place and you have gone to the third party for the 
taxes owed, what kind of time frames are they looking at in 
being able to pay that within the oil industry in particular? And  



May 1, 1995 

 
1878 

I don't know the mining industry that well, but payments can be 
made anywhere from immediately to 120 days and perhaps even 
longer in some cases. 
 
So how soon would the third party have to come up with the 
money once they have been served notice by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the way this 
functions, as I understand it, is that these payments are made on 
a 30-day basis. And I guess I would suggest we would use a 
measure of common sense, as with all collections, that there 
would be a reasonable time with which to respond. So I would 
think it may be reasonable within a 15-day period. 
 
I wouldn't expect that that would be unreasonable. You know I 
mean part of what this process would be would be to bring 
these people up to date, have them making their payments 
timely. Knowing that it's on a 30-day basis, I don't think it 
would be unreasonable to look at a two-week time frame. 
 
But you may have other thoughts or other ideas, and if you 
have, I'd be more than willing to entertain your thoughts. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, a two-week time 
frame to make that payment  in some organizations it takes 
that long for the letter to go from the top of the building to the 
bottom of the building. So I think 14 days is a little short, Mr. 
Minister, in making this to another organization. 
 
Most organizations will have their payment schedules made up 
to the company that they're buying the oil from in this particular 
case, and that structure is in place and it's fairly regular. But 
when somebody interrupts that, then all sorts of things happen. 
 
When this document comes in, it's going to have to go to the 
legal department first. And from having seen how lawyers will 
operate in this House, that could take a fair piece of time, Mr. 
Minister, just to get through that particular roadblock. 
 
So I think to expect a two-week turnaround time on these funds 
may be asking a little much, Mr. Minister. Thirty days, I think, 
is probably a minimum — a minimum — to make those 
payments, to go through the process. 
 
So perhaps if we look at another area we can get some sort of 
an idea how long it takes for something like this to go through 
the process. When someone does a garnishee against another 
person's wages, Mr. Minister, how long would that process take 
from the time the application was put forward to the time that, 
oh, Social Services would receive the funds for the garnishee of 
a person's wages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me say to the member, Mr. 
Chairman, that my officials tell me that it would be a minimum 
of six months after the fact to the point where the department 
would be involved in sending this form and enacting this form. 
 
And I mean I don't want to haggle with you whether it's 15 days 
or 30 days. I think it's important that we'll use a common sense  

approach. Certainly if it would be an unreasonable situation in 
15 days, we could look at 30 days. I don't think that's a difficult 
problem. But I think important to know that there already would 
have been a time lag of some six months, so it wouldn't be news 
to anyone. Our people tell us that it would be a six-month time 
frame after the fact. So, you know, I don't see that as being any 
kind of a major problem. 
 
I mean understand here what we're trying to do is create some 
harmony and some fairness. We're trying to facilitate fairness 
using this piece of legislation, to have fairness for the purchaser 
and the vendor. 
 
And so I would only want to say that we will use a common 
sense approach when we're developing the forms. With respect 
to the criteria, we'll be working with industry. And certainly 
between the passage of these amendments and the drafting of 
the regulations that will prescribe the form, I ask and certainly 
would welcome your input in terms of suggestions that you 
might have. 
 
But I only want to say, it's certainly not our intention to create 
hardship here. What we're trying to do is facilitate a reasonable 
and a fair resolve to issues that sometimes remain outstanding 
longer than many would like to see. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, we're all in favour of 
everyone paying the taxes that they owe. But, Mr. Minister, I'm 
also concerned about the snowball effect that this might have. 
 
So company A has produced the oil and hasn't paid you the 
taxes. You go after company B to collect the taxes. You can't 
collect it from them for whatever reason it might be. Do you 
then go after company C who has receivables to company B? 
How far down the line can all of this go? You've said it's mainly 
for the production of oil and gas and the royalties thereof, and 
whoever buys that oil and gas would then be the third party. But 
you've also said that others who have contracted a service from 
the oil company could potentially — could potentially — be the 
third party to whom you're going to get the funds. 
 
So how far down the line can you go? Can you go A, B, C, and 
D companies, each owing the other a receivable, to finally try 
and recover your monies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Member, 
it's whoever has the direct relationship. It's not a matter of 
company A, B, C, D, and down the line. That isn't possible. 
 
One comment, I think, that you make is fair — and I certainly 
agree with you — is that there should be a requirement for 
individuals, companies, to pay taxes as they go. 
 
I don't believe that you would disagree with me when I say that 
people who pay their taxes on a regular basis expect compliance 
with other groups or individuals who don't comply, because it 
ends up being a subsidy — those who do pay their  



May 1, 1995 

 
1879 

taxes to those who don't. 
 
So I want to say that what we're trying to do here is ensure the 
people do pay their taxes. This is a . . . we believe will be used 
in very rare instances, but in terms of who this will affect, it 
will be a direct purchaser, and it won't be snowballing as you 
suggest may be the case. That's not possible. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Since you 
say it's a rare case, perhaps we should determine how much 
money is in arrears at the present time on the oil production and 
on gas production, and how many companies are we talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — As I have indicated there, you 
know, it's quite rare that this will happen. And my officials tell 
me that there were around two over the past year, where a 
third-party demand could have been utilized to ensure 
collection, and the amount was in the neighbourhood of 73,000 
of unpaid royalties and taxes. So 2, maybe 3 . . . 73,000 in 
taxes. It's not something that the department will be using on a 
daily basis. As I've indicated, the past year, two, and an 
aggregate amount of $73 in unpaid royalties and taxes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That 
73,000 of unpaid royalties, have you now collected that? Or is 
that still in arrears? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It's still in arrears. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Excuse me, Mr. Minister, I missed that, 
could you please . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It's still in arrears. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
minister says it's still in arrears. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, it takes a significant amount of money to 
just bring this piece of legislation forward and to go through the 
process, to take up the time of the House, to consult with the 
industry. It's going to take money to go out and collect that at 
the end of the day. For $73,000 do you think this is really 
necessary? 
 
Perhaps the question I need to ask you now is how much over 
the last three years have you lost in unpaid royalties? You had 
$73,000 from two operations last year that were, and currently 
are, in arrears. So how much have you failed to collect over the 
last three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the department has 
not written any off. I am told that there is an amount of about 
$100,000 that would be accrued in the last three years. 
 
But I think it's not a matter of how much, I think it's a matter of 
fairness. It may not be a large amount. You know, I mean 
certainly it would be much more critical if it was an amount in 
the neighbourhood of seven and a half millions dollars as  

opposed to $73,000. But the fact of matter is good legislation 
should require fairness and it should require the ability to 
collect taxes. It should allow the ability to collect unpaid 
royalties as well. 
 
But I want you to be aware, and I'm sure you are, that it's not 
just a matter of assisting in the collection of unpaid taxes that 
these amendments and the changes to this Bill will introduce, 
it's — as is indicated in my opening remarks and comments in 
response to your question — to provide for the use of an 
average price and the determination of taxes on freehold natural 
gas production as well. 
 
So I would not want, sir, you to take lightly . . . I think you'll 
understand, and having been a member of this Legislative 
Assembly for the last three and half years, almost four years 
now, amendments and changes and cleaning up legislation and 
changing legislation is part of the process that we are involved 
in here on an ongoing basis. And I frankly don't think keeping 
legislation up to date, keeping it current, and keeping it relevant 
with respect to problems that arise, is a waste of money. 
Because I think both the industry and the people of 
Saskatchewan and the general public expect that we monitor 
our legislation, keep it up to date, keep it timely, and keep it 
functional. 
 
So although you may see 73,000 as a minuscule amount, and in 
the whole scheme of things with respect to the provincial 
budget it is a relatively small amount, but I think it's important 
to look after the pennies as well as the dollars. So I would hope 
that you wouldn't trivialize amendments that would allow for 
what I believe to be fairness, equity, because I think that's part 
of what this amendment is attempting to do. 
 
And so, you know, I would certainly hope that you would 
support our initiatives to try and attempt to clean up these 
outstanding amounts, whether it be $75,000 or whether it be 
750 or seven and a half million. The old adage, you look after 
the pennies and the dollars look after themselves. And I 
certainly think that that holds true, whether it's in government or 
whether it's in private industry or whether it's running your 
family household. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, this piece of 
legislation seems to be looking after the pennies when you 
consider that the health boards overspent their budgets by 15 
million. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, have either of these two companies or 
anyone else within the last three years that has been in arrears, 
have they received any drilling contracts? Have they received 
any land sales; have they been allowed any land sales? Have 
they had any business with the Department of Energy to acquire 
more assets or to do more activities within the oil industry, or 
the mining industry — I'm not sure where these are at. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, has this $73,000 from these two companies 
been growing, has it been shrinking, has it been stable, and are 
they still in business? 



May 1, 1995 

 
1880 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't speak 
for whether or not the companies are in business. But I can tell 
you that it's the policy of the Department of Energy and Mines 
not to do business with delinquent companies. And there has 
been no interaction with respect to the department and these 
companies that are delinquent. We don't do business with 
delinquent companies. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that your 
officials will know whether or not these two companies 
continue to be in business. Because either they have leases with 
you that are paying royalties, or they have a licence that 
continues to be in place for a particular well or a mine. They 
have some formal arrangement with your department that will 
let you determine whether or not they remain in business. 
 
If they are still in business and are producing, then are they 
paying their current taxes? Are they catching up on the taxes 
that they owed from before and aren't paying their current ones? 
So that's why it's important to know whether this 73,000 is 
growing, is it shrinking, or what's happening with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, these two 
companies that I referred to are no longer in business. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well okay, if 
this particular piece of legislation was in place with these two 
companies, since they're no longer in business, at some point in 
time they no longer shipped the commodity that they were 
producing. 
 
And you're saying it could take up to six months down the road 
to go through this process, to make an application to the third 
party to get the funds. Now in that six-month period, it's very 
conceivable that the third party has already paid them all of the 
funds that they would have been owed. 
 
So I fail to understand the real need for this. I understand why it 
may be beneficial to try and collect all the taxes; I just wonder 
about the practicality of this particular piece of legislation in 
being able to access any taxes, unpaid taxes, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, no one will 
suggest that in all cases there is an absolute 100 per cent ability 
to collect on royalties and taxes because that's just not so. There 
are some situations where that is just not a possibility. What 
we're trying to do here is to, in some scenarios, in some 
situations where they're still producing and not paying taxes, be 
able to go in and collect the taxes. 
 
And I certainly think that although the questions I think are 
important, I think it's important to understand that we're trying 
to minimize outstanding royalties and taxation, and I think that 
makes some element of common sense. We'll all agree — and 
you've been in business, as have I for most of my working life 
— understand where there are situations where outstanding 
accounts or royalties and taxation are just not collectable. 

But this would provide for some circumstances where there is 
the ability to collect. And through the regulations, we would be 
able to, on behalf of the taxpayers, collect some revenue. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the case where an 
organization goes out of business, goes bankrupt, and there are 
receivables due to that company, in the case of the royalty taxes, 
where would the government sit as a secured creditor on royalty 
taxes in a bankruptcy situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told by my 
officials that under the new bankruptcy Act we are an 
unsecured creditor with respect to royalties. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Is this 
then perhaps the reason why this particular piece of legislation 
is coming forward now as opposed to, say, a year ago? 
 
I mean it just seems somewhat unusual that for $73,000 from 
two companies that are no longer in business, you're bringing 
forward this piece of legislation. All of the reasons behind this 
don't seem to be apparent yet, Mr. Minister. So in the case of 
the bankruptcy where you're now becoming an unsecured 
creditor, under the previous bankruptcy Act was the Department 
of Energy, and the Department of Finance, to whom the 
royalties would be paid, would they have been secured 
creditors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, if this 
can act as a deterrent and if it will act as a deterrent, quite 
clearly it'll have some impact and I guess a positive impact. I 
think that it's prudent that we do all that we can to ensure that 
corporations and individuals play by the rules. That is quite 
clearly what we're trying to do. There may be some instances 
where this is inadequate. With respect to it acting as a deterrent, 
we are certainly hopeful that that be the case. And I think that's 
a reasonable approach to take. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now what 
kind of a position is this particular Act going to place that third 
party in if the party who is delinquent in the taxes has indeed 
declared bankruptcy, they've got a receiver in place? 
 
The receivables from the third party are owed to the receiver for 
the bankruptcy. Now you're going to stick your nose into that 
process. What kind of implications does that have on the third 
party? Because they can't go around paying out particular 
organizations that may have money coming to them. Those 
monies have to go to the receiver or else they're in legal trouble, 
Mr. Minister. So what kind of implications is this particular Act 
going to have on those parties who may owe funds to a receiver 
in a bankruptcy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there may be 
situations where this has to be litigated, but I guess that's a part 
of doing business and I think these are situations that arise 
every day. We are acting as a department in the best interests 
with respect to our mandate to try and facilitate payment of 
royalties, payment of taxation, and we will do what we think is  



May 1, 1995 

 
1881 

a responsible approach. And I think the department's 
recommendation with respect to this amended legislation makes 
some sense in that regard. 
 
Does this mean that there won't be circumstances where 
litigation may be necessary or may be a choice that will be 
made? The answer is of course that will happen. Those are 
everyday situations. The courts are full of disputes. If we can 
have this act as a deterrent, where we're in fewer of those 
situations, so much the better. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that logic is 
very flawed. You're putting the third party in a very untenable 
situation when they're caught between two government entities. 
They're caught between the law of bankruptcy and they're 
caught between your law now, and they're the ones that have to 
pay the bills to fight both sides of it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think it's very, very unfair, unfair, that you 
should place them in that position in the case of a bankruptcy, 
where their funds are to be paid to the receiver and then you 
step in and demand those funds outside of that process. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that your legislation should either 
exempt them in the case of a bankruptcy, so that their funds are 
paid to the receiver, as the law calls for, or that you place 
yourself within that receivership process as a creditor of some 
form, either secured or unsecured as the case may be, but that 
you participate in the bankruptcy scenario, rather than trying to 
come in and blind side the third party to demand payment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all let 
me say that third party demands and garnishments and common 
revenue-generating legislation in Canada are in many provinces 
around our country. In British Columbia these provisions are 
there; in Alberta these provisions are there; in Manitoba these 
provisions are there; and in Ontario these provisions are there. 
 
Now it may be that in some instance this Act and this 
amendment may be in competition with the bankruptcy Act. If 
that's the case, I'm assuming that litigation would take place. 
Once the litigation had taken place, we'd be in a position to 
know, and we would be in a position to deal with that. 
 
I only remind the member that this is not ground-breaking 
legislation. This is in place in four provinces that I've listed. 
And if my memory serves me correctly, two of those are PC, 
Conservative provinces, provinces governed by your own 
political affiliation. And it may be that it's inappropriate in 
Alberta and Manitoba, although I don't think so, and I'm led to 
believe it's been on the books there for some time. But I can 
give the member the commitment that if we find ourselves in a 
position where it would be not workable, certainly we would 
look at that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you mentioned four 
provinces that have similar legislation. Is the legislation exactly 
the same, or is it different in any manner? Perhaps the 
circumstances of a bankruptcy are dealt with in some of the  

other provinces in their legislation. Is this legislation exactly 
identical to the four other provinces that you've mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, we 
were debating the principle. And I guess the principle of this 
legislation, although it may not be worded identically, it 
certainly is similar in intent. And so I would assume that the 
similarities between the legislation in the other provinces that 
I've mentioned will be fairly close. But I think if we're talking 
principle, that what we're trying to achieve here would be very 
similar to what the other provinces are trying to achieve. 
 
If you have a legal opinion that would suggest that this is 
worded differently and not workable, then we'd certainly be 
willing to hear what you have to say on that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the theory behind 
this may indeed be somewhat identical between the provinces, 
but the applications may vary greatly. 
 
You talk about the principle of it, Mr. Minister. Well in 
principle, Mr. Minister, if you trap a citizen between two 
conflicting pieces of legislation and then expect that citizen to 
pay for the resolution of those two conflicts between two 
different government departments, I believe that one or both of 
those legal laws are wrong; that the law should not be written in 
such a fashion as to trap a citizen. 
 
It should be written to provide recourse and fairness for 
everyone, but not to trap a citizen in a catch-22 position where 
it's illegal for him not to pay the receiver and it's illegal for him 
not to pay you the exact same money that he owes the receiver. 
It's not up to the citizen, Mr. Minister, in this particular case, to 
do the litigation. 
 
If there is litigation to be dealt with here, that litigation should 
be between your department and whoever looks after the 
bankruptcy Act. That's who should pay for the litigation — not 
the citizen. The citizen should be exempted from that, let you 
fight it out to determine who gets the money, and he pays it to 
whomever it might be. 
 
But the litigation should not be carried out by the third party in 
this particular case because of the way you have written the law 
or because of the way the bankruptcy laws have been written  
that should be determined when you bring the legislation in, 
Mr. Minister, to make sure that those conflicts do not exist. And 
it's my opinion, Mr. Minister, you have failed to do that in this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am told by my 
officials that there is such an animal. And I'm certainly not a 
lawyer so I'm going to have to take their word for it. But there is 
such a scenario where a third party could ask for an interpleader 
application, which would then I guess ask the courts to rule 
between the department and the receiver, which would in that 
respect exempt the third party. So that option is there. 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1882 

I want to say with respect to this Act, and as it compares to 
other Acts in other provinces, my officials tell me that they have 
put in place additional safeguards to protect third parties that 
weren't in some of the other pieces of legislation that they had 
reviewed prior to drafting this piece of legislation. 
 
Now having said that, that certainly doesn't mean that there may 
not be instances where a third party would not be satisfied, 
would not be comfortable. And certainly over the course of 
time I believe that these things would in fact work their way 
through. But I think the fact that there is an opportunity for 
interpleader application, that kind of interjection into this 
process, I think should give you some degree of comfort that 
individuals may in fact be protected through that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps 
when they added some more protections for the third party in 
this particular piece of legislation, they should have taken into 
account also — and perhaps you can still do that — to provide 
some sort of an avenue, in the case of a bankrupt situation, to 
provide some protections for those third parties that you may be 
going to for the collection of the taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could comment on that, to 
give some consideration to provide some protection for the 
third party in the cases of a bankruptcy. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me 
say that this is a discretionary action. It's drafted such that the 
minister may intercede. It's not a matter that, it needs to in 
absolutely in every instance, will be applied. 
 
I can say to you that we will take a very close look at this. It's 
not certainly our intention to harm third parties; that's not the 
intent of these amendments. It's our intention to, with these 
amendments, safeguard the taxpayers, and ensure there's a level 
playing-field, and not have people who pay taxes and royalties 
subsidize those who refuse to for whatever reason. 
 
But I give you my commitment that we'll look very closely at 
that; we will do whatever we can. And if you at any point have 
some suggestions we certainly would welcome you passing 
them along, either to my office or to the department. 
 
And any questions with respect to details, if you would want to 
review other legislation, and if you find that there are positive 
elements in other legislation in other jurisdictions that we may 
be able to incorporate, certainly down the road we'd be willing 
to look at that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, even before I was 
elected, I ran into some circumstances such as the 
environmental impact studies which were written as guidelines, 
and yet when it came time for interpretations and actions, they 
were written in stone. 
 
We've also seen in this House, Mr. Minister, where at times  

bureaucrats can get a little carried away with their actions, and 
because it says a certain thing in a certain piece of legislation, 
they are . . . it's also cast in stone that they shall take this action. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when an action is available to be taken, there 
are many times when those actions are taken whether or not 
there may be some mitigating circumstances that would indicate 
that perhaps an action at that particular point in time is not 
necessary or is unwarranted. 
 
So just because, Mr. Minister, you say you may not take that 
action, or you have the discretion, your department has the 
discretion to take that action, once it seems to get out there and 
working, and nothing would likely happen that would be 
untoward in the first six months or the first year, but three years 
down the road all of a sudden everybody's forgotten the debate 
in the House and what promises you made to it. And the books 
say that after a certain period of time you apply this action to a 
third party if the first party is delinquent in paying their taxes. 
 
And the fact that you believe or that you state, as the Minister 
of Energy at the present time, that it's your discretion, that three 
years down the road someone else is the minister  that 
discretionary concern may no longer exist or may no longer be 
exercised. And it simply becomes routine that at a certain point 
in time you apply to the third party for recovery of the 
delinquent taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think it would be much more comfort level 
in there, particularly in the case of a bankruptcy, if there was 
some protections for the third party. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess first of all let me say 
that this isn't the only vehicle that could be used to have people 
or to encourage people to pay their taxes. I just want to take you 
back to the legislation on page 2, section 10.1(1). It ends by 
saying, and I'll just read the last two lines: 
 
 . . . amount has remained unpaid for at least 30 days 

since the acknowledgement, the minister may: 
 
And there are other references in the legislation that you will be 
aware of. And in all instances it says: and the minister may. So 
quite clearly it is discretionary legislation. 
 
But I also want to say that certainly the one way to avoid this is 
for the paying of royalties, the timely paying of royalties and 
taxation. That would be, I guess, the way to avoid any kind of 
departmental or ministerial action. And I think that that's what 
we're trying to achieve here, and hopefully this amendment 
would create a deterrent for those who, for whatever reason, 
would choose not to pay the royalties, not to pay their taxes. 
 
I just think it would make only sense that members of this 
legislature, when we're drafting legislation, would want to 
ensure, and when we're amending legislation would want to 
ensure, that shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan, their 
interests are protected. 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1883 

That to me is much more important or every bit as important as 
any other element of legislation. We have a responsibility to the 
taxpayers who sent us here to draft and to work with our 
officials in drafting and introducing and passing legislation in 
this House. I think this makes some good sense because it will 
certainly assist in the collection of unpaid taxes, and I don't 
know who can argue against that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm certainly not 
arguing against the collection of fair taxes. It always becomes a 
problem though, Mr. Minister, at some point in time when a 
business is failing, as to where do the funds go. 
 
They have obviously not got enough money to pay everyone 
when they're going into a bankruptcy situation. Very few 
people, very few people, Mr. Minister, go into business with the 
idea of refusing to pay a portion or all of their taxes while 
carrying on the business and paying all of their other creditors 
that they may be dealing with. 
 
At certain points in time businesses fail for whatever reason, 
and at those times when that happens everyone suffers, 
including the taxpayer. But it's the third party, Mr. Minister, that 
need not suffer, that need not be trapped between two or three 
or four separate pieces of legislation and put into conflict with 
all or some of them because of the actions of one or the other of 
them. 
 
And that's where I have a problem, Mr. Minister, on this. It's 
important, Mr. Minister, that everyone do indeed pay their fair 
share of the taxes. Without that, our society will fail. But it's 
what happens to the person who does not owe the taxes but may 
indeed owe a receivable to someone who does, and they have to 
be treated fairly also, Mr. Minister. And that's my concern. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials. 
 
A lot of the questions which my colleague was asking on Bill 
13 obviously are applicable to this one. Could you give us a 
summation then of some of the points that he raised in regard to 
the context of Bill 14 and where you feel there are similarities 
and where there are differences, particularly vis-a-vis the third-
party interests and why the separate piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are four 
amendments identified in the Bill, two that I will read into the 
record, that we would view as being the same. 

The first one is the introduction of new powers to assist in the 
collection of unpaid royalties. The other that would provide 
similarities would be to provide for the use of an average price 
in the determination of natural gas royalties to simplify 
administration. 
 
The housekeeping areas, they may not be similar and certainly 
wouldn't be similar to the other ones. There are small 
housekeeping amendments in this. But the one other element 
would be to provide adequate authority for existing regulations. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, given the fact that natural gas, 
particularly in the last year, has been in a real free fall, how 
would you . . . can you give us some ideas of what the price 
averaging that you're talking about in this legislation would 
look like over, say, the last 12 months in dealing with a 
delinquent third party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
member from Thunder Creek, really we're dealing with two 
different concepts. And I guess one is the dramatic fluctuation 
with respect to natural gas that the markets have experienced in 
the last few months. And I guess what I would want to do 
certainly is separate that. I think that's a debate that will take 
place another time. 
 
But I think what we're trying to do here is deal with a reduction 
in terms of paperwork that corporations, that oil and gas 
companies, have in terms of their dealings with the Department 
of Energy and Mines. 
 
What we're doing is, rather than dealing with each well and the 
pricing on each well — the price for production — what we 
would do is average and take and base the royalties, taxation, 
based on a provincial average or an average of all of the 
holdings within a corporation. 
 
We're really trying to work — and this has been I think one of 
the concerns that industry raises with me on an ongoing basis . . 
. is where we can reduce the amount of paperwork and the 
amount of paper flow, thus reducing the cost of operations for 
them and the cost of operations for government  that we 
should attempt to do that. 
 
So with respect to price averaging, what we could do, and this 
would allow us to either take a corporation's operations, do an 
average of all of their producing areas, their producing wells; or 
failing that, we could as well use a provincial average with the 
overall industry, and then use that average and make our 
calculations based on that average. 
 
So really what we're attempting to do is save both operational 
costs within the department and the paper flow with respect to 
industry as well. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I asked the question 
because there's . . . For instance, a company may have shallow 
gas wells, they may have deeper gas wells in the province; they 
may have their interests spread around. Royalties and taxation  



May 1, 1995 

 
1884 

vis-a-vis volumes, cost of drilling, all sorts of things are . . . I 
mean there's lots of things in the natural gas pricing curve. 
 
And I was curious because you're talking about seven days’ 
notice and then 30 and then the six months that you explained 
to my colleague before some of this stuff came into play. But 
given the fact that you're in a rapidly declining market, whether 
you're using a field or one company or lots of things, you can 
have enough variation in there and sort of . . . that price will 
have a determination upon the size of the potential delinquency. 
I can think of all sorts of different angles. 
 
And I just wondered, if you were into a situation with a 
company that had a fairly diverse gas holding who had fallen 
into delinquency, and you were going to institute the process 
here, I was just curious how you would do your averaging and 
what it would look like, given that the price of gas was X, 12 
months ago. It's now X today, and you've got a lot of stuff in 
between. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told by the 
officials is that how they would calculate shortfall . . . shortfall 
would be the actual costs when the shortfall took place. 
 
Certainly those numbers are all a matter of record. They're all 
open for public view. The industry knows what the prices were 
six months ago, as do the department. And with respect to a 
shortfall that, say, took place — and I think you used the month 
of January, if I'm right, as an example — we would revert to the 
prices at that time and base the shortfall on the prices that were 
in effect at that time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, so if gas was $3 a thousand, eight 
months ago, then that's the . . . at that point you would use the 
field or the company, and you would take the average then, and 
you would come up with your calculation in order to determine 
the shortfall. Is that what you're telling me? 
 
You're telling us that the companies want that, or does your 
department want that? Which . . . where is this? Is this . . . I 
want to know about your consultation process. Is this industry 
driven, or is this department driven? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would want to 
begin by saying that consultations with respect to averaging 
have taken place with the industry over the past two years. I 
don't think you will argue with me that industry, when they can 
see an area where we can reduce paperwork and paper flow and 
consumption of their time and their employees' time, that they 
would certainly be willing to work with us to that regard. 
 
I would want to say that our neighbouring province, Alberta, 
has introduced this averaging system awhile ago. The industry 
feels it's working well. Our department feels it's working well 
and is something that we can model here in the province. 
 
And I can tell you that this government will continue to, and as  

the minister in charge of Energy and Mines certainly I will 
attempt to, reduce paperwork and red tape for industry 
whenever I can. I don't think that in your tenure as Energy and 
Mines you would take any different position frankly, than I do. 
You're a business man. I've been in business I guess all of my 
working life and I know some of the frustration that business 
faces when they're dealing with government red tape. 
 
I would want to say that we're not a department and we're not an 
operation that is not willing to pick up on a good idea. And 
certainly the averaging, the system that's put in place much 
along the lines of this one, in Alberta is working. And when 
industry asks us to reduce red tape, to work with them in terms 
of reducing their costs of operation, and when we can reduce 
the internal costs of operations within the department, we're 
certainly more than willing to adopt those ideas; and I think 
frankly this is a good one. It makes some sense to me and I 
think business is going to be very supportive of it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — How many companies or individuals are we 
talking about here and what amount of money are we talking 
about if this were in place that you would be able to begin the 
collection of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told by my 
officials that of the $72,000 that I referred to earlier as being in 
arrears, part of that is gas, part of it is oil; so it's a portion of 
that 72,000 that we talked about. 
 
I want to say that we are dealing with 100 companies in this 
province, with respect to natural gas. They've generated for the 
people of Saskatchewan, in the neighbourhood of 60 to $70 
million in revenue. And so quite clearly they're an important 
element in our provincial economy. We rely on them to assist us 
in terms of program delivery and our ability to pay down on our 
provincial debt and our ability to ensure that we don't deficit 
budget. So they really are an important part of our economy. 
 
I think it's also fair to say that if you look at arrears of $72,000 
in terms of 60 to $70 million, it's not a great amount, but these 
amendments certainly will allow us to deal with even those 
smaller amounts. Although not in the millions, they're certainly 
still in the thousands, and I think that the approach that we're 
taking really does make some sense. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's a good 
point, Minister, and that my colleague raised it. I know your 
department is not flush with money. It seems to me they've take 
a budget cut for about the last 10 years as far as running your 
operations, and they've done that very successfully. 
 
You know we're doing more with less all the time, as far as the 
Department of Energy and Mines goes, and that speaks well for 
the people you have there. But the reason I ask this question, 
I've taken the opportunity to ask around a bit. I'm fairly 
knowledgeable about the people that drill for oil and gas in this 
province and produce it. 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1885 

This particular item either wasn't well-known about or it wasn't 
hitting on anybody's Richter scale because the department has 
been very diligent in its collections and working with people. If 
somebody gets in trouble, they don't let them get so far in the 
hole that they have to have a big hole to get themselves out of. 
We don't let people get delinquent. 
 
We've got two pieces of legislation before the House for a 
grand total of $72,000 or $73,000. And I understand the 
averaging business, because Alberta has instituted that. There is 
some need to cut down on paperwork because I can remember 
signing removal permits damn near on a well basis. I mean the 
way people were doing things, there were hundreds of those 
things. And I used to sign every one of them. And there was a 
need to cut down on the paper flow — no question. That isn't 
done today, I'm told. 
 
But I'm really wondering why we've had all of the legal and 
technical expertise of your department brought to bear for 
$73,000 in two separate areas. It sort of bothers me. I mean if 
it's because you wanted to do the averaging business, I can 
understand that, or you wanted to achieve some other things. 
 
But there must be something more to this than what I'm seeing, 
Mr. Minister — a potential problem looming or some 
consolidations happening or something happening that's got 
somebody in your department stirred up enough to generate a 
whole bunch of legislation. Those are hard-working folks over 
there and they don't do something unless there's something 
coming down the pipe. And I'd like to know what's coming 
down the pipe for you to generate all this legislation over 
$73,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all let 
me say I think here the issue is — and probably the most 
important — is not to suggest that collection of royalties isn't 
important, because I do believe it is, but I think the thrust and 
the key in what we're trying to achieve here is a reduction of red 
tape, government red tape, which is why we're looking at the 
averaging. 
 
I know that when you were the minister of this operation, on 
lots of occasions it was something that you strived to, was to 
minimize the red tape for industry. And I commend you for 
that. And I've heard, frankly, very good things about the 
Department of Energy and Mines, not only under this 
administration but in the previous administration. I think it's 
really one of the arms of this government that we need to be 
proud of because they do good work for us. 
 
So basically, I think the thrust here is not the collection, but I 
think what we're trying to do is anticipate what might come 
down in the future as well. As you will know, we've been able 
to attract smaller and smaller oil and gas companies, companies 
that have grown from very small beginnings to taking some 
prominence in the oil and gas industry. And a lot of them have 
got their start here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we're dealing with more companies. It's not a matter of the  

majors coming in and that they are primarily the only players. 
We're dealing with more and more companies. 
 
And I think you will admit, even though we really do believe 
and want to pursue assisting smaller companies to grow and 
build, when you've got smaller companies that are, I guess, less 
flush with capital and have less flexibility in some areas, find 
times where there may be arrears. And I think, not to suggest 
that it's only arrears . . . the arrears might come from only the 
smaller corporations; that's not what I'm saying. But what I do 
believe the department is trying to do is anticipate more clients 
that they're going to be dealing with, smaller companies, 
probably more risk. 
 
But the thrust certainly here isn't the collection of the $72,000. 
It's part of what we're doing when we do the amendments to try 
and create a reduction in the red tape — that's the thrust. And if 
we can facilitate an easier environment and I guess a more 
positive environment for industry, we're going to do that. 
 
And I think that's frankly with respect to Crown land and with 
respect to freehold. We're doing it in both instances here and 
that's the reason why we're introducing the amendments to both 
Acts. So basically I guess the arguments are the same in this 
Bill and in the previous Bill that we discussed. But I think this 
will go a long way to having industry, I guess, find it a little 
easier to deal with us. 
 
There may be — and I just want to make a point in passing — 
that there may be some individual corporations that you've 
discussed this and who may not be aware of what we're doing in 
these Bills. And I guess that is one of the concerns that I have, 
is attempting to deal and to have every corporation, large and 
small, aware of amendments. 
 
We try and do that and we attempt, on a regular basis, to do that 
through CAPP and through SEPAC, through their governing 
bodies, through their sort of parent bodies, their associations, 
and hopefully that information gets disseminated to all of the 
players. 
 
I think the discussions have been going on for a considerable 
period of time and I would have hoped that all of the players are 
aware of what we're attempting to do here. And if you're aware 
of any individuals that want, I guess, or would require 
clarification, certainly either my office or the department would 
be more than willing to share information with them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I think your last words to the Assembly are more in 
line with, I think, what thinking is probably going on. I mean it 
isn't any secret out there that investment capital in junior oil 
firms right now is getting very difficult to come by. And I 
would think if we believe and watch the stock market and other 
things, that a lot of these people are having a difficult time. And 
anything you can do to reduce their costs is laudable. 
 
And I also think it's incumbent upon you to sort of give us the 
straight goods about what's happening out there, and the fact is  



May 1, 1995 

 
1886 

that a lot of people may find it very difficult to remain in 
business if the current trends continue. And being prepared for 
that possibility is also laudable. 
 
But I believe, when we bring in legislation like that, if we've got 
a problem, we should talk straight about it, not beat around the 
bush over $73,000. And the reality is that it's a fluctuating 
market-place. And I understand, if you need to prepare yourself 
for some potential downsides, then you need to do it. And I 
agree with you. We agree with you. 
 
When we start going after third parties who may in many cases 
be a little bit innocent of what's going on out there . . . And 
there's been situations discussed in the media recently that give 
some people concern, and we don't have to get into names. But 
I mean the third parties attached to those types of operations I 
don't want to see unnecessarily hurt, I guess is the way you 
would put it, because oftentimes those third parties are the ones 
that stay here permanently. They don't come and go the way that 
oil and gas companies come and go and be amalgamated and 
get smaller and get bigger and disappear quite frankly off of the 
stock exchange. 
 
So if that is a reality — and you're concerned about it; your 
officials are concerned about it — fair ball. Just tell us that you 
are, and that probably is a good enough reason to do what 
you're doing as long as those third-party interests aren't the folks 
in small town Saskatchewan who are going to get unnecessarily 
hurt. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, my 
comments to the member would be similar to the ones I made in 
the previous piece of legislation. 
 
There are options for third parties, and certainly it's not our 
intention to unnecessarily hurt third-party interests. But we do 
have a responsibility — whether it's 70,000 or whether it's 7 
million or whether it's 750,000 — to collect unpaid taxes and 
royalties, and we certainly have no intention of shirking from 
that responsibility. 
 
You know I've been told before I came to this place, and I've 
been asked by many of my constituents and people who I've 
done business with in Prince Albert and who I've worked with 
on Central Avenue for many, many years, is what they're 
looking for is a government that will operate like a business. 
And I don't know that any government will totally be able to 
achieve operating as a business. There are some differences, 
and there are some circumstances around government that I 
think will preclude that from happening. But I think what 
they're asking for is a businesslike government. And what 
they're saying to me is, if you've got outstanding accounts, you 
should do what you need to do to collect them — the same as I 
do in my store or you do in your business. Certainly I think it 
would be imprudent to ignore an outstanding bill, whether it be 
for $20 or whether it be for 200. And I think that most business 
people in Saskatchewan will agree with me that that should be  

the case. And if it isn't, it should be. 
 
So I guess all I say is it's not our intention to harm small 
business in Saskatchewan, small third-party interests; that's not 
where it's at. I've outlined processes by which they can achieve 
fairness and some satisfaction. If there are some amendments at 
some point down the road that need to take place, and if it 
requires either legislative amendment or if it's policy 
amendment within the department, those are things that we look 
at at an ongoing basis. 
 
So I guess I would only say that we're trying to take a very 
pragmatic approach to governing. This legislation, I think, 
reflects that, in that we're able to minimize the cost for business 
by minimizing their red tape. And I think that's something that 
I'm going to continue to strive for. It's something that I think 
that all governments should attempt to do. And this particular 
piece of legislation, as I've indicated earlier, I believe will allow 
us to do that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I'd like to thank the minister and his officials for 
coming in today and for providing us with the answers to our 
very necessary and interesting questions. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
thank the members of the opposition for their questions. I'd also 
like to thank my officials who have just left. I want to thank 
them for their time and their work during the course of the year 
to help us. 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance 
and Student Aid Fund Act , 1985 

 
The Chair: — I will ask the Minister of Education, Training 
and Employment to introduce her officials to the members of 
the committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To my right is Lily Stonehouse, the 
assistant deputy minister of Education, Training and 
Employment. Immediately behind me is Brady Salloum, 
director, student financial assistance branch. And to Mr. 
Salloum's right is John Janzen, assistant director of student 
financial assistance branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Welcome, Madam Minister, and officials. Madam Minister, 
today we're dealing with the Saskatchewan student loans 
package and some of the items necessary to make the changes 
and collections of funds for that student loan. 
 



May 1, 1995 

 
1887 

It's my understanding, Madam Minister, that the student aid 
program is currently administered by the department and that all 
costs associated with the administration of that fund, including 
the collections of those funds from students that have to repay 
their student loans, is charged to the Department of Education. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, the changes that 
you're recommending here would change the collection 
procedures and who pays the costs of it. 
 
It would shift it from the department over to the student loan 
fund itself, so that at the end of the day, Madam Minister, it 
would appear that there would be less money available for 
student loans, if the figure is fixed, because you're pulling 
monies out of that student fund to pay the collection agencies as 
they go out and collect it because you're talking here of turning 
the collection over to a third-party collection agency who would 
then charge a fee, who would recover . . . a portion of whatever 
monies they recover would be kept for themselves as a fee for 
that service that they provide you rather than charging it, as 
done today, against the administration of the department. 
 
So would it in fact, Madam Minister, mean that there would be 
less student loan funds available at the end of day because of 
the fees paid to the collection agencies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that this is 
not about making less money available to the students. Students 
presently receive student aid based on need. So we have a fund 
available to the student population. And if they meet the needs 
criteria, then they in fact receive a student loan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, 
because it's important that the public knows that that is not the 
case because there is a fear out there that, as the collection 
agencies take their fees out of the student loan fund, that there 
would be less available. And so it's important that that not 
change, that the student loans currently, and continue to, be 
available to the students based on their needs. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe you've stated that the current system 
works reasonably well and properly, except in two 
circumstances, and that is in regards to bankruptcies, in 
particular, that there is some difficulty with. Madam Minister, 
just how will this change the circumstances dealing with 
bankruptcies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — At present it's very difficult to predict, 
within the $3 million budget that we have for administration, 
the costs associated with bankruptcy, default, and those kinds of 
issues. Now that the administrative costs are going to be funded 
by the student assistance and student aid fund, we won't have as 
much difficulty because we'll have a larger pool of money in the 
fund. 
 
To just sort of to reiterate this, because you're looking puzzled,  

at present it is difficult to budget administrative costs because 
there are all of these uncertainties. We don't know how many 
students will go into default when you're budgeting for '95-96; 
you have to guestimate. We don't know how many students will 
go into bankruptcy; you have to guestimate. 
 
So we're dealing with a sort of an infinite set of circumstances 
and not a finite set of circumstances. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm indeed 
somewhat puzzled by the fact that you have difficulty in 
predicting the bankruptcy rate amongst students, but if you 
enlarge the pool in which you're going to be dealing with, that 
changes. 
 
Madam Minister, if you can't predict the bankruptcy rate on the 
current student loan program, it doesn't matter where the 
administration costs come out of. You're still not going to be 
able to predict it unless there's something else changing, 
Madam Minister. 
 
I would suspect that you should be able to come up with a 
reasonable prediction. You won't be able to come up with the 
exact dollar number or the exact number of students who may 
wish to declare bankruptcy, but you should be able to come up 
with an ongoing percentage that has happened, what's the past 
history and what's projected for the future based on that past 
history, and you should be able to come up with some sort of a 
prediction even though you may say it's difficult. I don't think 
changing this Act will make it any more or any less difficult to 
predict the costs associated with that or the numbers that would 
be involved. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When it comes to the administration of 
student loans, we budgeted approximately $3 million. The fund 
has a cost of about $35 million. It is true, regardless of where 
you're getting your administrative costs for collections, as an 
example, whether you're getting them from the small $3 million 
fund or the $35 million fund, you make predictions. But you're 
not always accurate; you may be under or you may be over. 
With the larger fund, you have a larger pool of money. 
 
I think the other thing, the principle here, is that we're linking 
costs to revenues, and the revenues which are associated with 
the costs. So you have a better opportunity in terms of the fund, 
because people are paying back money, you're loaning money, 
to link those costs to the revenues than you would in the $3 
million administrative costs associated with the student aid 
program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you may call it 
linking funds; I call it shifting funds. 
 
At the end of the day, the Department of Education has a 
certain budget and the student loan funds have a certain amount 
of money in them currently. If you take the collection costs out 
of the Department of Education, then those funds remain in the 
student loan fund without change. But you've said yourself that 
that student loan fund is not based on what's actually in there,  



May 1, 1995 

 
1888 

but rather on the need and the number of students that apply for 
a student loan. So that number varies. 
 
But at the end of the day, you've got a fixed amount of money 
in the entire department, including the student loan fund. So all 
you're doing is shifting whether you pay it out of administration 
of the fund, out of the Department of Education, or you take it 
out of the student loan fund. But it comes out of Education one 
way or another, and you're simply shifting it. So at the end of 
the day, Madam Minister, it doesn't make a lot of difference, 
because the funds are being paid for by the province. 
 
So I'm not sure why this shift is being made. Percentage-wise, 
perhaps, if you're in error on your estimations, if you have a 
collection fee of $300,000 in one year and that's what your 
estimation is, and you collect 400,000 . . . or the costs are 
400,000, you're now out by 33 per cent on your estimation. But 
if you put that into the department, into the student loan fund, 
on a $35 million basis, that percentage is going to be a lot 
smaller than on the 3 million administration cost. 
 
So it's a matter of lies, damn lies, and statistics. So, Madam 
Minister, you're just shifting the money around really without 
changing a lot. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right now collections is funded by the 
administrative costs of the Department of Education. They 
collect money for the fund. And what we're doing with this 
legislative amendment is we're linking the costs of collections 
to the fund. We happen to know that the more funds you spend 
to collect, the more revenues you receive to increase the cost. 
So the fund is related to students' payback of their student 
loans. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, at some point in 
time in the collection industry you reach a point of diminishing 
return, where you're spending more time trying to collect those 
funds than you actually get back. 
 
Madam Minister, just how many dollars are we talking about 
here? How many student loans, on average, are sent to the 
collection agencies each year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that about 1,400 files were 
sent to collection agencies. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How many 
dollars would we be talking about with those 1,400? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — 6.2 million. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, how would this 
compare with the last three to four years, each year's numbers. 
Is it decreasing, increasing, or what's happening with the 
number of student loans sent to collection agencies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In 1992-93 there were about . . . 963  

accounts were referred to collections agencies; in '93-94, 1,700 
referred; and '94-95, projected 1,400. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What kind 
of dollars would we be looking at for the collection agencies as 
their fees, as part of their efforts to collect? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It is about 18 per cent of what they 
collect. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister, we're looking at 
$6.2 million for the projection '94-95 year, that would be in 
arrears. Now how much of that would you collect? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We collected 345,000 . . . or we spent 
$345,000 in collection fees for '94-95; whatever percentage that 
is of $6.2 million. We don't have what you're asking for. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well then 
surely some place in there though you must . . . not all 
collections . . . Okay, well maybe I should change this. Are all 
collection attempts . . . the company only gets paid for those 
they're successful for, or do they receive any compensation for 
those that they attempted but are unsuccessful in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They only collect money for those 
loans that they're successful on. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How 
diligent are the collection agencies in attempting to recover 
these funds? If they're only going to receive a compensation for 
those in which they're successful, are they simply making one 
contact and hoping that the student will then be frightened 
enough to make a payment? Or do they continue to approach 
the student to recover the funds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Given the correspondence that I receive 
in my minister's office, it would appear as though they're 
diligent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When 
we're talking about student loans with . . . students with loans, 
what kind of an average loan portfolio would a student be 
carrying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that the average student 
loan is somewhere between 11 and $12,000. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. When 
we have a projection of 1,400 students which will be in arrears, 
what percentage or what number of total student loans are we 
looking at? Is this 5 per cent, 10 per cent, 20 per cent? What 
kind of a percentage, and how many student loans are there 
actually out there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have about a hundred million 
dollars that we have lent to students in total. Now that would be 
students who are still in school, students who are out of school 
but maybe have not begun to repay their student loan, students  



May 1, 1995 

 
1889 

who are presently in default. So that's the entire package of 
monies that we have outstanding. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The 
hundred million dollars, how many student loans would that 
represent? I'm wondering, the 1,400 that are delinquent — what 
percentage of that is of the total student loan . . . number of 
loans, not the dollars? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That represents about 50 or 60,000 
students. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Of those 
50 to 60,000 students, how many would be in the position of 
repaying their loans? How many of those loans are collecting 
interest and how many are due for repayments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm told that more than 70 per cent are 
good or in repayment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — That's not exactly what I want, Madam 
Minister. What I'm looking for is how many students, then, with 
students loans are currently in the education system and how 
many individual with student loans are outside of the education 
system, therefore in a position to be repaying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We could give a guess, but the officials 
are not comfortable with giving a guess. So I can't answer your 
question. We . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give me a ballpark. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I'm advised — and this is a guess, 
just so we're very clear, and it may not be accurate — over 
20,000. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. So 
approximately, with a big latitude on either side, of about 
one-third are currently in school and therefore would not owe 
anything on their student loans in the sense of needing to repay, 
and two-thirds would be in the position where they should be 
repaying. You stated that approximately 70 per cent are current, 
20 per cent are out of school and making payments, and 
two-thirds are currently in school of the 50 to 60,000? 
 
Well I'm surprised at those numbers. I didn't realize that we 
would have 40,000 students attending post-secondary education 
in this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps the 
minister could stand up and give me those numbers without me 
trying to interpret her comments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have over 110,000 spaces, students 
in the province of Saskatchewan that in some way, shape or 
form take an educational program. Now it doesn't mean that 
they're full time; they may be part-time students or they might 
be students that are taking a class or two. 
 
So we are a province that obviously takes its education very 
seriously, given that we have those numbers of people — and  

some of those people may be double-counted — engaged in 
some form of educational activity in the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. That 
is a very good number for the province and it does indeed show 
our concern and our desire to be educated, although I would 
have to wonder if that included counts, say, for an individual 
who attended a community college to take DOS (disk operating 
systems) 1 or something. 
 
You know if it includes those numbers, those people in general 
would not be applying for a student loan. I think most of the 
people applying for student loans are attending post-secondary 
school, such as SIAST or the universities or one of the technical 
schools. And in those numbers I don't know just where we 
would be standing at, but I would think that the 30 to 40,000 in 
that particular circumstance would probably be close. 
 
Now maybe the minister can give me some information on that 
and just give me an indication, because I realize that those 
particular numbers may not be just right on her fingertips, but 
an indication of what we would be looking at in university, 
SIAST, and the technical schools. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand it's in the neighbourhood 
of about 16,000 per year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you 
look at the numbers collected through the collection agencies, 
where they're picking up $345,000 in fees over the past year, 
how many of those students loans  which would have been 
l,700 in the '93-94 year, that were delinquent  how many of 
those would they have received collections on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have those numbers here. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I 
guess I can cipher it out if somebody had a calculator but . . . 
using the numbers that you have provided for us already. 
 
Madam Minister, how long before . . . once a loan goes into 
default, how soon would you turn it over to the collection 
agency? I believe under the Canada Student Loans Act the 
student has six months after the time they exit from school to 
start repaying their loans. It's requested immediately but they 
can get up to six months interest free initially once they exit 
school. So how soon would you approach a collection agency to 
contact the students for repayment? And would you do any 
contacts prior to that as a department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that we send a 30-day 
notice, then a 60-day notice, then a 90-day notice, then a final 
notice. Then there's telephone calls and we finally say it's going 
to a collection agency. So we parallel the Canada student aid 
program where there's six months grace. 
 
I think the thing that students need to be aware of, needing to 
repay their student loan, that they can ask for interest relief 
while they . . . if they don't have a job or they're not . . . they  



May 1, 1995 

 
1890 

don't have a very good job. I mean there are arrangements that 
they can make with student aid, which they should do, in order 
that their loan not go to the collection agency. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So, Madam Minister, you're looking at 
approximately three-quarters of a year, to perhaps even a year, 
before it would be turned over to the collection agency. You 
have the six-month grace period, then three months of notices 
with a final notice at some point after that, and a telephone call. 
So potentially a student would be in arrears for a year. 
 
Now when they have the opportunity to ask for interest relief, 
what kind of requirements are included in that opportunity? 
Let's say they do have a job at minimum wage. What kind of a 
position would that put them into for applying for interest 
relief? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Interest relief depends on the size of 
your family, the job that you have, and the amount of money 
you're earning. If you're a minimum wage person, I'm told that 
you probably would be eligible for interest relief. What you 
need to do is keep applying for it every three months in order 
for interest relief to be available to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In your 
attempts to recover the student loans that are falling into 
delinquency, what kind of a percentage of success would you 
have in that, and how many of the delinquent files of the 1,400 
projected or the 1,700 for '93-94 would you collect before you 
would turn them over to the collection agencies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When they've gone to a collection 
agency, that means that we've failed, that we haven't been able 
to collect the money from the student who is in default. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well how 
many student loans would have been delinquent and you've 
managed to gain some repayment on before they went to the 
collection agency? So there must be some number greater or 
other than the 1,400 projected for this year coming that you 
have managed to recover something from. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My officials advise me that we don't 
keep track of our successes. The only cases, obviously, that go 
to the collection agency are the failures. So we don't have data 
or statistics in order that I can answer your question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well perhaps, Madam Minister, you 
could answer this: how many loans fall into arrears? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that 18 per cent of students 
who are supposed to repay their student loan would fall into 
arrears now at some time in their student loan repayment life — 
and we have people repaying loans for many, many years — but 
that does not mean that they default and it goes to a collection 
agency. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If you 
have approximately 50 to 60,000 loans and only 1,200 are 
going to the collection agency, but yet 18 per cent are falling 
into default at some time in their history, there's a significant 
number that your department is following up on and is 
successful in recovering. 
 
Madam Minister, the 1,400 projected or the 1,700 last year that 
will go to the collection agency, how many of them are as a 
result of bankruptcy declarations by the student? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We had 264 bankruptcy claims in 
'94-95. So '94 and '95 would take us to the end of March of 
1995. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I don't 
know if you'll have the information, but can you give us some 
idea as to how many of those bankruptcies are directly related 
to the fact that the person involved has a student loan and that is 
what is putting them into a bankruptcy situation, or is there 
some other related financial circumstance and the student loans 
are simply a part of their accumulated indebtedness? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't know that. The thing that we 
would like to point out, however, is that in 1992 the federal 
government changed the legislation — I guess this would have 
been when Mr. Mulroney was prime minister — changed the 
legislation so that students who owed money could go into 
bankruptcy. The old system was that you could go into 
bankruptcy but you still had to repay your student loan. So it 
was changed under the former federal administration. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think when you go into bankruptcy that all of your indebtedness 
should indeed be a part of it. I mean that's why bankruptcy laws 
are put in place — to allow relief of debt. And so that should 
indeed be part of it. 
 
Now my concern is that a number of students may be using that 
legal change to somehow avoid paying their student loans. And 
I'm wondering how many are directly related to the student 
loans and how many are related to other economic factors that 
there may have been 10 years down the road since they applied 
for those student loans, received them, have been out working, 
and have now lost their job or their business has failed, or 
whatever it may be. How many are directly related to the 
student loans and how many would be related to some other 
financial circumstance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand from the officials that we 
can contest some situations where students are filing 
bankruptcy, and we have contested and we have won. 
 
Now I just want to . . . on philosophical grounds, I just want to 
make this statement, and I'm expressing a personal opinion 
here. But it seems to me that when you get a student loan and 
you go to a university or a technical school and you receive a 
credential, a certificate, you receive something that . . . a skill or 
an education or a training that can take you on to certain  



May 1, 1995 

 
1891 

endeavours that . . . and you've been able to receive that skill or 
training or education because the public has agreed to lend you 
money, because it's important from a public policy point of 
view that we have well-educated and well-trained individuals, 
that there is some obligation on you to repay that debt. 
 
It's not like a car where someone can go and take it back from 
you, or a house where someone can go and take it back from 
you; no one can take my education back from me. But I do 
think that had it not been for a bit of student aid, certainly in my 
lifetime as a student, I would not have had the experiences that 
I've had over the last 15 or 16 years. 
 
So I guess I disagree with you on the fundamental question of 
whether or not a student should be able to go into bankruptcy 
on student loans. I think that that's one debt maybe people need 
to repay to society, given it's the taxpayer that's funding it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, it's my belief 
philosophically that every debt should be paid, whether or not 
it's a debt to society in the sense of education, or whether or not 
it's a debt to the company who sold you the car. It's my belief 
that every debt should be repaid. 
 
But the bankruptcy laws currently will allow you an exemption 
for that vehicle if you need it for transportation to employment. 
They will allow you an exemption for your home because you 
can't be deprived of your shelter. 
 
So, Madam Minister, while it may seem that we have some 
philosophical difference here, I think it's a matter of degree on, 
in your case, believing that because there is free enterprise 
involved in the purchase and lending of money for an 
automobile, and society in the case of an education, that one is 
forgivable and the other isn't. I would suggest to you that 
neither is forgivable. 
 
But that society has made a determination that we will protect 
you for shelter and we will provide you with the tools necessary 
to carry out your trade, and we will provide you with the 
transportation necessary to get you to your point of 
employment, and you're protected from that under the 
Bankruptcy Act. Madam Minister, you're even protected for I 
believe 40 bushels of potatoes under The Credit Union Act that 
deals with bankruptcies. 
 
So, Madam Minister, we provide a certain amount of 
protections for everyone in society when it comes to a 
bankruptcy, and the student loans should not be exempted from 
that. It should be indeed part of the debt process. 
 
Now we also have to try and recover as much of that as 
possible. So that doesn't say just because you are going through 
a bankruptcy that you should be totally exempted, because you 
have some opportunities, you have some skills. They're not a 
hard, physical, real asset in the sense of property, but you have 
an asset which down the road can provide you with a return. 
 
And in that sense I would suspect, and you can clarify this, that  

on those grounds sometimes the bankruptcies are denied and 
the Department of Education and the student aid fund does have 
recourse to recover their funds down the road. 
 
So, Madam Minister, how many of those cases that have 
applied for bankruptcy have you taken not necessarily to court, 
but provided an intersession on the behalf of the student aid 
fund at the bankruptcy situation and been successful on; and 
how much funds have you recovered from them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We contest about 10 per cent of the 
bankruptcies, bankruptcy applications, and the officials aren't 
able to tell us how much money we get from that contesting of 
the people who are going into bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — What kind of various grounds would 
you be interceding . . . what reasons would you have for 
interceding in those bankruptcies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that we look at the student 
borrower's educational history, at their employability, at their 
potential earning powers, and the legal costs of the opposition, 
and the size of their debt. So those would be some of the 
grounds that we would make a decision on in terms of 
contesting a bankruptcy claim. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So when 
you talk about earning power, would you be more apt to 
intercede on, say, a lawyer or a doctor if they were to be 
declaring bankruptcy, say, than an art student? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it's fair to say that we'd be more 
inclined to intercede . . . say for instance a dentist was 
considering going bankrupt or a doctor, you know, someone 
who has the capacity down the road to earn an appropriate 
living. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, on those 10 per cent of 
the bankruptcies that you intercede in, how soon after they have 
left their educational institution and gone out into the workforce 
were those applications for bankruptcy being provided? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have that information here. 
You're asking very technical questions, and we thought we were 
just dealing with a Bill on administrative expenses. So we don't 
have the file here to give you the appropriate information. But 
we certainly would be able to address your questions in Public 
Accounts. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, the reason I ask 
that is because it's my fear that bankruptcies could start 
occurring  and maybe already have started occurring  
shortly after a student would leave their institution of learning, 
as a means to absolve themselves of a large debt when they've 
exited the institution, before they proceed into the workplace. 
 
If they could get rid of a $12,000 average . . . so on some of  



May 1, 1995 

 
1892 

those you're going to have a significantly higher amount of 
money involved. If you're sitting there with a 20 or 30,000, 
$40,000 student loan debt when you've exited the institution 
and are now a doctor or a dentist or a lawyer or an engineer or 
whatever it might be . . . If you could absolve yourself of that 
debt in some manner, it would make your future work and 
prospects significantly better. I'm wondering if that is starting to 
happen on a more prevalent basis or if the statistics are 
remaining rather stable on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that the 
federal government, the present federal government, is looking 
at the previous federal government's legislation regarding 
bankruptcy and student loans, and they're looking to perhaps 
extend the time from the time you leave school to the time you 
can file for bankruptcy, for this very reason. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — The fact that they're looking at that then, 
Madam Minister, would indicate that it's becoming somewhat 
of a problem or the expectation is there that it could become a 
problem. 
 
Madam Minister, in your second reading speech you stated that 
the Department of Education does not have the resources to 
deal with these situations, meaning the collections of delinquent 
student loans. What kind of resources are currently in place 
within the department to deal with delinquent student loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We spent approximately . . . we budget 
about $200,000 last year for this activity. And so that's the 
resource that will now be transferred over to the student aid 
fund. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you 
have anyone in the department who's dedicated to this particular 
duty? If so, how many? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Six or seven employees that are 
dedicated to this duty. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, how much 
would you have spent on legal counsel challenging the 
bankruptcy provisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You're asking me a question, and we're 
going into estimates, hopefully, tonight. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, we're not? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I'm going to keep you here. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, because you're asking me a 
technical question that would be best in estimates or Public 
Accounts. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
You're giving me a whole list of questions for some other  

period in this week, perhaps, or some later week that we can 
deal with this situation. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe that we have indeed covered this 
topic rather extensively, and that we can proceed with this 
although I believe that perhaps in the cases of the collections 
you need to be very diligent in trying to collect the monies prior 
to going to the collection agencies with them. And if that can be 
done, it'll in all likelihood be much more comfortable for 
everyone involved, both for the department and for the students 
that would be involved. It places a great deal of stress on them 
when the collection agency is sitting on their doorsteps every 
morning looking for their pay cheque. 
 
So I think if it can be handled through the department without 
the collection agency, that would be the best avenue. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Teachers' 
Federation Act 

 
The Chair: — The minister has different officials for this Act. 
I'll ask the minister to introduce them to the members of the 
committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. To my right is 
Michael Littlewood, director of legislative services, and behind 
Mr. Littlewood is Kathie Tenold, assistant registrar of teacher 
services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam 
Minister. This particular Bill deals with a number of items, 
mainly housekeeping within the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation), but it also deals with some other aspects that do 
need some consideration. And I know that most of the members 
opposite are very interested in these questions, so I will make 
sure they all have the opportunity to hear them. 
 
Madam Minister, educators today are being called upon to 
administer medications, to deal with student violence, to deal 
with young offenders in their classrooms, and as well to try and 
deal with, in some cases, students that are malnourished or 
abused. 
 
When an educator is uncomfortable with those situations such 
as providing medication, Madam Minister, what alternatives do 
they have? What circumstances can they deal with on those 
circumstances, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This Bill is about the internal 
operations for the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation. It's 
called The Teachers' Federation Act and we'll be coming back  



May 1, 1995 

 
1893 

after supper and we can get into those kinds of detailed 
questions, because I will have the appropriate officials with me 
that can help me answer those questions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, this Bill deals 
with an item called professional misconduct, one in which a 
teacher is perhaps addicted to alcohol or drugs, as defined as 
professional misconduct, is being changed from designation of 
professional misconduct to a medical problem. Madam 
Minister, what effect does this particular change have in the 
repercussions and in the dealings with that particular teacher? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think that there's no question that 
drug and alcohol addiction is a serious problem. But one of the 
things that we have come to understand is that drug and alcohol 
addiction is a health issue. And in professional legislation 
generally, these kinds of issues, like drug and alcohol addiction, 
are seen as health-related issues that need to be dealt with in the 
same way that you would deal with a medical affliction or a 
physical ailment. So it's that rather than a question of conduct. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. In the 
case where a teacher has a potential drug or alcohol addiction 
problem, what avenues does the student or the parent or the 
administrator have in bringing this forward for a solution? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well if a teacher's drug or alcohol 
addiction renders them totally incapable of being effective in 
the classroom or being effective as a professional, there are a 
number of steps available to the employer and the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation to deal with that kind of an 
issue. 
 
And I think if I were a parent that had cause for concern in 
terms of a teacher in a classroom, I would first raise this issue 
with the principal and then he could go through the appropriate 
steps as the director of education and the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation. The Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation 
does investigate issues of professional competency. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. In 
cases of drug and alcohol addiction, it's not always the 
circumstance where an individual would be totally 
incapacitated. There would be ups and downs and 
circumstances where they would be ineffective today in 
teaching, and yet be able to provide for the student in the next 
day. 
 
Madam Minister, this winter we went around the province on a 
safe driving committee that said if you are caught with blood 
alcohol content above a certain level in your blood, it will be 
necessary for you to take mandatory drug assessment. 
 
Well in the case of a teacher, Madam Minister, where 
complaints do come forward — I mean I wouldn't want to see a 
situation where a student for retaliatory purposes said that this 
teacher has a problem and therefore we need to do something 
— but if there is a circumstance where a teacher may be seen to 
be having problems by the students, by the parents, by the  

administrators, that some form of assessment could be provided 
for them. 
 
And I don't know that I would want that to be mandatory but 
that it be made available in some sort of a circumstance that 
each of those three parties would have some input into it. That 
the students can say, I believe my teacher has a problem in this 
area, and so that they can go to the administrator or they could 
go to the school board to . . . or perhaps even to the teacher 
representatives, for some avenue there to provide some 
assessment. 
 
I'm wondering, what kind of avenues in that direction would be 
available for the students and the parents? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation, as part of their professional organization, has an 
employee assistance program. And they have several 
counsellors that assist teachers in dealing with a host of 
personal issues such as drug and alcohol addiction. 
 
So there are avenues for teachers that are feeling distress or 
stress and are having some of these difficulties. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Would it be possible though, Madam 
Minister, for the students or the parents of the students of that 
teacher to access that system to make a recommendation that 
perhaps this teacher should participate in the assessment 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what could happen is the 
principal might be notified or the director of education might be 
notified. They would then work with the people involved in 
teacher welfare at the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation; and 
the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, as a professional body, 
could intervene with the teacher to see if there were some . . . 
whether there was some assistance that the teachers' federation 
could give that individual teacher through the employee support 
program which is the counselling program at the STF. 
 
I do know that there are several teachers that take advantage of 
those counselling services to deal with a variety of issues. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister. In the changes 
to this legislation, is there an avenue open then for the teacher 
representative or the STF counsellors to approach that teacher 
and say, we recommend or we strongly recommend that you 
come for assessment. Is there some avenue in there for that kind 
of thing within the disciplinary structures that are being built 
into this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's not in the Act itself. There is an 
administrative process that STF counsellors or others could 
employ if they felt that a colleague was in difficulty. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister, how under the 
disciplinary structures and changing it from professional 
misconduct to a medical problem, will that affect the teacher 
who may be involved? 



May 1, 1995 

 
1894 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think one of the things that 
we've come to discover about drug and alcohol addictions is 
that in the past it was considered to be . . . if you had a drug or 
alcohol addiction, that that was grounds for professional 
misconduct. We now understand more about drug and alcohol 
addictions, and we understand that in fact people who suffer 
drug and alcohol addictions, that that suffering is treated as a 
medical problem. 
 
If you know anything about AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) or 
NA (Narcotics Anonymous), it's clear that it's an illness. 
Addiction is an illness. And so we've moved beyond the old 
days where there was no intervention, there was no assistance, 
none of that kind of thing. We've come to understand that drug 
and alcohol addiction is a medical condition . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Sorry to interrupt, but it now being 5 
o'clock, the Committee of the Whole stands recessed until 7 
o'clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


