






















































April 24, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 24, 1995 

 

 
1709 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Proposed Amendments to Bill C-68 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that the amendment proposed by my colleague from 
Thunder Creek addresses the needs and the desires of the public 
of Saskatchewan, the firearms owners of Saskatchewan, for the 
legislature to do something concrete to provide some protection 
for them from the Liberal initiatives. They believe that the 
legislature of Saskatchewan has the ability and the opportunity 
to do, through legislation, some forms and measures by which 
protection can be afforded to the firearms owners. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that that form, those measures, are typified in Bills 31 
and 48. And I believe that we, the members of this legislature, 
should support those two particular motions, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide that protection for the property owners of 
Saskatchewan; that these measures will indeed do what is 
necessary to slow up and prevent Allan Rock's initiatives from 
working to the detriment of firearms owners in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and I 
would encourage all of my colleagues in this Assembly to also 
support that amendment and to provide some concrete 
legislation from this Assembly to support the firearms owners 
and to prevent Allan Rock from carrying out his ill-conceived 
plans. Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
happy tonight to have an opportunity to explain to people the 
views that we in our part of the world, south-west 
Saskatchewan, have on this issue. Now I'm going to speak on 
behalf of my constituents and so I must say right away that not 
everyone supports the position 100 per cent of not having gun 
control, but it is probably about 90 per cent out in our area that 
support the position against the federal government and its gun 
control legislation as it is presently proposed. 
 
The other people who I'm going to talk a little bit about . . . 
because they do have some valid points and they need to be 
discussed. They say we do need to have some control of 
weaponry in our society. We have to have some control in order 
to control crime and criminals. And to them I say this, Mr. 
Speaker: we have gun control legislation in our country; we 
have crime control laws in our country. And the problem is not 
going to be solved by putting in more red tape, more laws, and 
more confusion. 
 
The problem won't be solved that way because if you study the 
issue, as we have had to because of the repetitious nature in 
which it has been thrown at us over the past couple of years . . . 
we as parliamentarians at this level have had no choice but to 
study the issue and to listen long and hard to many different 
debates and arguments. And after having done that, we find that 
we have more than enough rules already, and that half of the 
people in this country really don't even know what all the rules  

are that exist at the present time. 
 
So the solution to the problem, Mr. Speaker, is not more — 
more  registration. The problem can't be solved that way. The 
problem simply needs to be dealt with by enforcing the laws we 
presently have. And our law enforcement agents — when you 
study this thing for a couple of years as we now have — have 
been loud and clear and very succinct in telling us that the 
problem is they don't have enough manpower to be able to 
enforce the present legislation. 
 
So making more rules isn't going to make their job any easier. 
It's going to make it harder, and they are aware of that. So 
they're all telling us that, for those people who want to have 
crime control, more laws that will govern gun owners and 
restrict their freedoms and rights in society will not solve the 
basic, fundamental problem that they want to have solved. So 
their arguments and their fears, while they are based on reality, 
can't be solved with this solution. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about an issue such as the one 
that the Minister of Justice brings before us today, we have to 
ask ourselves the question: why did the minister bring forward 
this motion today? 
 
We have discussed this issue before in the legislature and we 
have discussed it at some length. Obviously we hear there's 
going to be a gun rally in Rosetown very shortly, called, I 
suspect, by the Minister of the Environment who probably is 
having a difficult time finding enough numbers to be re-elected. 
And so most probably he put the strong-arm on the folks up in 
Rosetown to see if he couldn't get a gun rally going to see if he 
could improve his fortunes in the upcoming election. 
 
So then you have to ask yourself two questions. First of all, are 
we doing any good with the motion that we've done when you 
have . . . As one fellow told me downtown here a few minutes 
ago, he said, oh I thought all three parties in Saskatchewan were 
already agreeing on this issue. Why would you be wasting a 
whole other day talking about it, he says. So well I said, I guess 
because the Minister of Justice wants to talk about it. And he 
said, well if everybody agrees, what's there to talk about? Why 
not get busy and have some action. He said, doesn't it cost you 
quite a bit of money to run this outfit all day long to talk about 
the same thing you already talked about before? And he's 
exactly right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the fact of the matter is that we're discussing this because the 
Minister of Justice brings it forward, and then we have to 
question what his motives are. 
 
First of all, his motives have to be connected to the week's 
activity which is developing politically in the province on the 
eve of a probable election coming up this summer. Most likely 
the Minister of the Environment has seen some polls that are 
suggesting that he's not going to make it unless he has some 
dramatic turnaround in voter support in rural Saskatchewan 
where he happens to live. And so this might be an attempt to try  



April 24, 1995 

 
1710 

to get him re-elected. Well the truth of the matter is that that's 
all well and good, and we're glad that they're doing this sort of 
thing because I think it will have some impact on Ottawa and 
the Liberals there. At least I hope it does. 
 
So then we have to look at what the other motives would be, 
Mr. Speaker. And of course, the other motives would have to be 
that the Minister of Justice has suggested he wants to go to 
Ottawa to present a case. And I suppose you don't go all the 
way to Ottawa to present a case unless you've done some 
groundwork to build the political momentum to make it a 
worthwhile exercise in the minds of the people who are going 
to have to pick up the tab for all of these people that are going 
to travel to Ottawa on this trip. 
 
Now it is true, I guess, that a couple of the opposition people 
will be invited to go along. And members of the opposition 
certainly cannot ignore that invitation. We have to be there. 
This issue is too important to us. And the members of the third 
party will have to be there too. It's obviously important to them. 
 
But the truth of the matter is that the message that we are 
developing and building here today is not the proper and 
significant message. 
 
Now some of the members from south-east Saskatchewan will 
know very well that this is not what the people in rural 
Saskatchewan — who are mainly concerned about this problem 
with all of the rest of the folks who want to protest this federal 
law — it's not what they're really asking for. What they're 
asking for is for the minister to go down to Ottawa armed with 
the kind of ammunition that they're going to need in order to 
win this debate and this argument. 
 
Now it's necessary, obviously, to build first a momentum to 
justify the trip, armed with some consensus from the taxpayers 
that it's okay to spend . . . What's it going to cost? I'll speculate 
— 100,000, maybe? No, not likely. More likely about 200,000. 
 
Well we'll be lucky if we can get away with that because 
obviously a lot of the people that go along are going to be on 
salaries; they'll be government employees. There'll be hacks and 
patronage appointees. There'll be drag-alongs, come-alongs, and 
advisers, all strung along into a great convoy heading for 
Ottawa. 
 
And I suggest to you that if you added up every nickel and dime 
of all the wages and everything else that goes with it, you're 
going to be looking at a half a million bucks of everybody's 
money thrown into the pot to go to Ottawa on a big trip to tell 
the minister in charge, Mr. Rock, what? Exactly what we've 
been telling him all along for the last year — the same old story, 
only armed now with some wishy-washy concept out of a 
motion in this legislature that goes along the lines that we 
should gently nudge the minister into changing some of the 
rules of the law, rather than going down there and telling him 
flat out we don't need the law, and it's no good to begin with. 
 
So we're going to try some wishy-washy, back-door approach  

to why there should be amendments to the new Bill in Ottawa 
that has already gone through second reading, and with the 
obvious effects of having very little or no impact whatever. 
 
So we have to question the approach of this administration to 
serious, serious problems that affect western Canada. Is it all 
just going to be smoke and mirrors and politics all the time for 
ever with you folks? Are you never going to get down to the 
reality of actually trying to represent the people of 
Saskatchewan in an honest way, an honest way where you say, 
flatly, we cannot tolerate the same kinds of rules in our region 
of the country that you can live with possibly in other regions? 
 
The Quebec people have said it quite clearly. They said it quite 
clearly when they talked about their language Bills. They said, 
we want to speak French in Quebec, and they went ahead and 
they did it. They took a positive, forward initiative — one that I 
happen not to agree with, but they did it. They took a positive, 
forward initiative, and they said you will speak French in our 
province, and you will advertise in French, and you will put 
signs up in your businesses in French. And they did that. 
 
They did that from a provincial point of view because that's 
what they believed in for their people. They took that stand. 
They took it deliberately, directly, and they stood up for it, and 
they fought for it. And it has been years and years before any 
kind of a challenge was made in the Supreme Court, and even 
after that was done and the Supreme Court has ruled that they 
were out of order in what they did, they continue to do what 
they want because they fight for their people, and they do what 
they believe in. 
 
Where's that kind of initiative from Saskatchewan on an issue 
that is just as important to Saskatchewan people? Certainly 
there are 6 million Frenchmen, and there's only 1 million 
Saskatchewan folks, and we come from every nationality. But 
we have a region that is distinctly different than Quebec, with a 
distinct need for the use of firearms in our lives and in our 
livelihoods and our way of approaching life. And so while 
French language is so important to Quebec people, so too the 
right to use firearms is just as important to the people of 
Saskatchewan in their way of life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to wonder at the approach that the 
Minister of Justice has taken. We have to seriously question his 
motives and his approach to the issue. Now I seriously kind of 
wonder if the minister isn't being confused a little bit by some 
of the people that surround him. Perhaps the fact that someone 
near and dear to him in his family ran in an election in 
Saskatoon on a platform against gun ownership might have 
something to do with clouding his vision. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now I suspect that many of the people in Saskatchewan that 
don't live in Saskatoon, and lots of the back-benchers here, may 
not even know that. But the truth of the matter is that when a 
minister of this Crown is pulled and pushed by several different 
forces you can expect him to start jumping around in the middle  



April 24, 1995 

 
1711 

of all those ideas with something of an irregular step that is not 
in tune with the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, the registration of all guns is not a 
reasonable approach; it is not a reasonable solution. It's only a 
harassment of legitimate owners. And the criminals are going to 
continue to break the law. 
 
I've had people tell me the same old story that we've heard from 
a lot of people but we've got to repeat this because if we don't 
start getting back to basics and the fundamentals of what's 
going on out there, we are bound to have this thing so confused 
in the end that nobody will really understand what anybody 
believes in. 
 
But the truth of the matter is that the criminals are going to 
continue to be criminals. We are never going to stop criminals 
100 per cent in our society. As long as there are people, I 
believe we will have some problems. We can reduce those 
problems and the numbers of them certainly. 
 
But we have also in our society developed a kind of a Christian 
attitude towards all of people where we use some mercy and 
compassion. If that weren't so of course we would use some of 
the solutions that they use in Africa or places like that. I'm 
thinking of Arabia, I guess, not Africa. Arabia, where thieves 
have their hands cut off or perhaps Egypt where if you get 
caught drinking alcoholic beverages you are given the lash. 
 
We don't believe in that kind of extreme justice I don't think in 
Canada and certainly not in Saskatchewan for minor 
misdemeanours. Otherwise maybe most of us wouldn't be here 
any more because our grandparents who fled from Europe 
would most likely never have ended up living very long in this 
country. 
 
The truth of the matter is though that this becomes nothing 
more than a harassment, Mr. Speaker, because simply by 
registering a gun you're not going to stop people from using it 
as a weapon. If I were going to go out and do a crime, would I 
be so foolish as to use the gun that I have registered? That's 
what a man said to me the other day and obviously he's right. It 
would take the utmost of fools to go out and commit a crime 
with a gun that you have registered in your own name. It would 
sort of be like signing your name at the crime site and leaving 
your box number and your phone number so that the police 
could find you easily. Well criminals don't work that way. 
 
And the truth of the matter is that we cannot approach this thing 
as though it has an easy solution to solve crime because the gun 
law is not going to solve our criminal problems. In fact if 
anything, it's going to cause a lot of people to become 
criminals. 
 
Every day in our society I find people saying to me we've got so 
many rules, so many regulations, so many laws, that every day 
when I get up people have told me I most likely before supper 
time have broken a law without ever knowing I broke one. And 
that's a fact of life. We just have so many rules and  

we've got such a complicated society now that nobody can keep 
up with it. 
 
I had a taxman tell me the other day that there's so many rules 
and regulations in the tax laws that he, as a trained professional, 
has no idea what all the rules and regulations are in that one Act 
alone that our society works under. We are becoming overruled, 
overregulated, and we've got too many far-fetched laws for 
people to be able to understand or to be able to obey, because 
they simply don't know what they all are. 
 
So here we are about to propose at the federal level another new 
law, another new law with a whole lot of regulations, a whole 
lot of rules. And when we study the whole thing very carefully, 
we find out that it's not going to achieve one simple thing, not 
one single thing in our society that needs to be resolved when 
you study why we should be doing these kinds of approaches 
with the law to try to bring about crime control. 
 
Crime control, Mr. Speaker, cannot be controlled by registering 
guns, because quite simply, a criminal is going to go out and 
steal a gun if he feels the need to use one of those in a crime. 
He'll either steal it or he'll go to the United States and buy one 
and smuggle it in, or he'll buy it through the underworld 
economy of our country that apparently exists all over our 
country, especially in our big cities. 
 
I'm told that you can go — by the news media of last few 
months — any place in downtown Montreal and Toronto and 
places like that, and if you know the right connections, you can 
buy guns that have been imported from the United States 
illegally. They tell us in the news media also that you can buy 
guns now that are made of plastic that you can't even find on 
radar detectors. You can't detect them coming through customs. 
They can be built out of pieces of this and that and whatever. 
 
Well the reality then, Mr. Speaker, is that registering guns is not 
going to solve a crime problem. It's only going to cause the 
problem of honest people saying, no thank you, I'm not going to 
obey this law because it's going to cost me too much money, too 
much hassle, or too much irritation  whatever their reason 
will be, and there will be lots of reasons for it. Or simply just 
because they are tired of being pushed around and told what to 
do, a lot of them are going to put these guns into plastic bags 
and bury them in the ground. 
 
Others are going to hide them under the bed and in the attic and 
every other silly place where kids will find them and certainly 
cause a lot of problems. They'll put the ammunition away, 
forget where it is; next thing you know you're going to have a 
fire and blow the place up. I tell you it's going to cause more 
problems than you can ever shake a stick at because, quite 
simply, that's what people do. 
 
In a mad frustration to avoid becoming the person that gets 
caught disobeying the law, they will shuffle this stuff around all 
over their houses and in their granaries and garages and places 
like that. And after a generation goes by, who knows where all 
these caches and deposits of guns and ammunition are going to  



April 24, 1995 

 
1712 

show up. 
 
I know of one instance where I was told, and I suppose this is 
just a rumour, but they tell me of a guy that supposedly built 
guns into the walls of the house and then plastered them over. 
Well if this is the kind of ridiculous approach we have to take in 
this country, then we'd better re-examine the kind of laws that 
we're bringing in that force honest people into this kind of 
behaviour. 
 
Now I'm not going to try to say that everybody that does this 
sort of thing is a logical thinker, but maybe they have a logical 
thought in their mind that drives them to do what they are 
planning on doing. 
 
I know for very sure that I have heard a repetition of this story 
in my household that has gone back a couple of decades or 
more — I guess about four or five already. Quite simply put, in 
the old days they tell me that you had to register your radios, 
and if you didn't register your radio, you could have it 
confiscated. When you registered it, you had to pay a licence 
fee. Everybody that had a radio in the war years was required to 
pay a tax on that radio, a licence fee. 
 
And so people were busily hiding their radios. Whenever they 
heard that there was an inspector in the community, they'd all 
get on the telephone and they'd ring it all up and they'd give a 
great, big, long ring — of course in those day there was 25 or 
50 people all on the same line — called the general ring; they'd 
ring it for a minute or so — everybody knew that that was an 
emergency — and they'd say, hey, the radio inspector is coming 
through. And immediately all the radios were unplugged, 
disconnected, and hidden in every spot you can imagine, except 
for one as a rule. And they'd pay the taxes and licence fee on 
one and as soon as the inspector was gone, they'd all plug them 
in. 
 
Of course what that tells us is that history has already proven 
that, as Pierre Elliott Trudeau once said, that if the law is a law 
the people will not abide by then the law is an . . . and I won't 
say the word and you all know what it is. 
 
And so the law is the back-end of a donkey, as they say, if it 
forces people to comply with something that they're not going 
to do to start with. And this law is exactly the same way. 
Immediately that you tell people you've got to pay 100 bucks 
for every gun you've got, half the guns in the country are going 
to end up being hidden and put away and all kinds of things are 
going to happen as a result of them being put into obscure 
locations. 
 
So we've got a serious problem, Mr. Speaker, with this kind of a 
law, because it doesn't address any of the needs of the people. It 
doesn't address any of the needs of our province. It may address 
the needs of people in Montreal. I'm not going to say too much 
about that; I've never lived there. I don't know what kind of 
people live there. I don't know what kind of lifestyle they've 
got. Maybe they need gun control down there. And if they do, 
I'm saying to them, fine and dandy, let's have a  

regional law for you to take care of that, just as you took care of 
your language law. You know what you need for your people, 
but out here we don't need that kind of gun control. 
 
And I was really upset when I listened to the member from 
Cumberland House today talk about his approach to this issue 
and how he supported this particular wishy-washy stand. I hope 
he goes out and campaigns on that wishy-washy stand in 
Cumberland House because he won't get re-elected. The people 
up there will simply say to him, Elijah Harper you are not. 
Elijah Harper knew how to stand up for his people and fight 
with them, and he brought a whole province to a dead standstill 
for the beliefs that he believed in for the people that he 
represented. My friend, my friend, I think that the aboriginal 
community must be very disappointed with you today. If Elijah 
Harper were in this Assembly today, he would stand here and 
fight for his people. He would fight for every one of the 
aboriginal peoples' rights . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think there are some 
members who wish to get up and debate but I wish they would 
wait their turn. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now of course I 
was referring to the Elijah Harper of years back, when he 
stopped the Meech Lake accord process in Manitoba. And now 
they tell me, of course, that he has turned Liberal and can be 
bought off, and so I guess that's the same old story that if you 
do things the right way you can get them all swooped over one 
way or the other. 
 
And that part's unfortunate but the truth of the matter is that the 
aboriginal people who are listening to this Assembly and the 
process today must be seriously, seriously wondering about the 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) that represent 
them, that would suggest a wishy-washy approach like this 
motion would be the answer to the needs of our aboriginal 
people who have had entrenched in their rights, almost as much 
if not more than anybody else, the right to use arms to get game 
for their food supply and for their livelihood. They have to have 
the use of firearms in order to protect themselves from the 
animals when they go trapping. They need to get meat supplies 
for their families and they have hung on very jealously to that 
right, as well they should. 
 
But here we hear the member from Cumberland House saying, 
well we should go down to Ottawa and ask for a few 
amendments and that will make everything nice and smooth and 
easy for everybody. Well no thank you, Mr. Speaker, that won't 
do. 
 
What will do is to have some positive legislation — as the 
member from Souris-Cannington has suggested here — some 
positive legislation that gives the minister and his entourage 
some ammunition of a real nature when they get to Ottawa to 
negotiate this deal. 
 
They're approaching this thing, Mr. Speaker, in a metaphorical 
approach that would be similar to giving, to giving a dead cow  



April 24, 1995 

 
1713 

medicine; after she's dead, you give her the medicine. And what 
good would it do? 
 
You're going to go to Ottawa with no ammunition, some 
wishy-washy approach about amendments to a serious law, with 
no teeth in what you have come up with as your political point 
of view and your stand, and you're going to go down there and 
try to negotiate with strength with this kind of a wishy-washy 
approach. I don't think it's going to work. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan, and especially the 
aboriginal people, have expressed very clearly that they want 
you to go fully armed, absolutely dedicated, completely ready to 
go to the wall for them on this issue, because it's important to 
them. 
 
Now there are other important issues, Mr. Speaker, of course. 
There's the issues of economy and there's issues of health care 
and education and all those things, but right today we have the 
Minister of Justice talking to us about gun control and the need 
to go to Ottawa to talk to the people there about Allan Rock's 
gun control approach and his Bill. So that has to be the 
paramount issue at this moment. 
 
And that paramount issue is, how do we best defend the people 
of Saskatchewan when we get there? Do we do it with some 
motion that says, we're coming here to ask you for a few 
amendments? Or would it be better to come down there and 
say, look boys, if we don't play ball, we're going to take this 
matter into our own hands because we've already passed in our 
legislature two or three laws that give us power and control over 
our own destiny? 
 
Now does that sound more like a negotiating position of 
strength, or does asking for some wishy-washy amendments to 
the thing sound like a good position to bargain from? Well I put 
it to you, the people. You decide which position you think 
would be best to negotiate from. 
 
And as far as having any kind of an effect on criminals, I want 
to just go back to that just for a minute, Mr. Speaker, because 
what we really have to do here is go to Ottawa armed with 
arguments that prove very persuasively that this law is not 
needed, not necessary, and won't accomplish what it sets out to 
do. It won't accomplish what it sets out to do because it will not 
stop criminals from committing the crimes that they commit. 
 
It will not help to solve our problems because we already have 
laws that will cover registration. I had to buy a firearms 
acquisition certificate in order to be able to have a gun. Every 
gun that I want to buy, I have to show that to the person. It's got 
my picture on it, and I have to show it to that person and they 
record the numbers off of it. They record my name, my address, 
the numbers of my registration, and the numbers of the gun I 
want to buy. And it's all registered, and it is kept on file. We 
already have registration. 
 
Now we have a new law coming in this country that says I 
should now pay, as well, a lot of money for that, and a whole  

lot of other strings attached. 
 
(1930) 
 
Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, I have to go back to the gentleman 
who said to me a very short time ago, I really don't see what 
everybody's so excited about. What's all the fuss about? 
Suppose you had to pay $5 to register your guns. Would that be 
so bad? Well of course not. Paying $5 to register your gun 
wouldn't be too bad when you consider that I already put out 
fifty bucks for the FAC (firearms acquisition certificate) that I 
had to buy, and go to a photographer and get a picture so that 
they could glue it on. And that cost me another $16, plus a trip 
to Swift Current to get it done. And that's 100 miles out in our 
country. 
 
This is not a $5 touch we're talking about. We've already 
invested $100 in the process we've got right now. And anybody 
that tells you that they're going to have a gun registration 
program after this law in Ottawa is passed that only costs $5, is 
not really in tune with the realities of what's going on here. 
 
The reality of what's going on here is that we're going to pay 
very much more than that. But we're creating some very serious 
problems for our whole province and the industry that most is 
budding and flourishing, and that being tourism. 
 
We already have American hunters who are saying they're 
afraid to come to this country because they're afraid to come to 
this country and have their guns registered. And here's how 
things get out of proportion, I guess. They already are reporting 
down there to one another that maybe they might have their 
guns confiscated when they get here. 
 
Now how are we going to offset that very negative perception 
even though it's wrong. We have got this kind of perception that 
is building and creating around the world, and we have to do 
something to offset that. 
 
And it's a very serious problem because tourism is becoming a 
very big, important factor in our lives in Saskatchewan. I know 
in northern Saskatchewan there's an awful lot of people that 
guide and bring in hunters and charge them for room and board, 
and sell them gas and licences and all the things that go along 
with it and make their living. 
 
Well that's becoming an industry in southern Saskatchewan as 
well. It's budding and it's growing and it's improving. And it's a 
most terrible thing to see a silly law in Ottawa that could wreck 
all of this progress that we have made up to date. 
 
Well this fellow at the same time, Mr. Speaker, that I was 
talking to who said, well $5 wouldn't be so bad, well he said, 
well why would anybody want more than one gun? And I guess 
that told me right there, again, we haven't been doing a very 
good job, those of us that are against this gun law, of explaining 
to the folks exactly what's at stake here and exactly what people 
who have guns want to have them for and why they have them 
and why they're so important in their lives. 



April 24, 1995 

 
1714 

So maybe we have jumped over a whole lot of this area of 
explanation, thinking that everybody knows what we're talking 
about, but really maybe a lot of folks don't. I guess it's like the 
old story, where they always used to say when I was a kid going 
to school, this teacher's so smart he talks over everybody's head 
so nobody can learn anything. 
 
And there's some truth to that, because if a very smart person is 
a teacher sometimes, instead of dealing with the basic 
fundamentals at the very start and building up so that the 
students can learn as they go, then they don't learn because the 
teacher starts up too high in the scale of the process. 
 
And the member from Swift Current will certainly understand 
this because he has captured my imagination a couple of times 
by going back to square one on issues and explaining the 
fundamentals to me, recognizing that as a farmer I wouldn't 
have any understanding of how things got into the process and 
built and develop. And in Crown corporation estimates he has 
been very helpful that way. So he will understand what I'm 
saying about teaching the process to people so that they'll 
understand. 
 
And when a man comes to me and says, why would people 
want to have more than one gun, then I say, we haven't done our 
job. And as boring as it is to have to say these things that we 
think are boring, the reality is that a lot of people don't know. 
They don't know the fun and the pleasure that people get out of 
using handguns in a competition to shoot at targets. And some 
fellows will say, if you haven't done this before, well what a 
waste of time. You're going to stand here and poke holes in a 
piece of paper over there, 50 yards. How can that possibly be 
fun? 
 
Well I guess if you're a golfer I'd have to say, how can it be fun 
to chase a little ball all over somebody else's pasture? But it is 
fun to those people that like to do it. It's their way of recreation. 
I guess to a skydiver, I would say why would anybody be silly 
enough to jump out of an airplane heading straight for the 
ground, with only a piece of silk hanging on your back to stop 
you from meeting your Creator as you bite the dust? But to 
those people that do that sport it's great pleasure and they have 
fun at it. 
 
Well people that shoot little holes in targets at 50 yards find that 
to be great recreation. The fact that they can shoot two holes 
into the same spot without messing up the rest of the paper is a 
great challenge. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that not many 
people can do that. And so it is a recreation, a sport, a fun thing 
for people to do. 
 
And there are many things to do. This fellow that I'm talking 
about said, well why would you need more than one? Well the 
truth of the matter is that there are different kinds of 
competitions, and there are different kinds of competitions that 
require different kinds of tool. And the gun is really just a tool 
of the sport, and you're no better at the sport than what the 
quality of your equipment is. 
 

Some guns just simply won't shoot straight. Nobody can make 
them shoot in the same spot twice because they have a crooked 
barrel or something is haywire with them. And so you have to 
have good equipment and you have to have equipment that suits 
the sport. 
 
Anybody that watches the Olympics must certainly be aware of 
the fact that Canadians are very good marksmen. Canadians do 
quite well in the Olympics in everything where guns and 
shooting are concerned. And I've never heard anybody say, well 
we ought to take the guns away from those guys and not let 
them practise to go to the Olympics. In fact I hear them 
cheering all the time, go Canada go, as soon as they get into 
silver or gold medal contention. 
 
And so at that point I would say if we don't allow people to 
have guns to practise with and to enjoy that sport, how could 
we ever have anything like the Olympics or compete on a world 
scale or even stay in the world theatre as a member of society of 
the world, as a country? We couldn't do that any more if we 
don't keep up with the times and live like the rest of the people 
to some extent. 
 
Now certainly we need crime control, but to say that we're not 
going to allow people to have their handguns in order to 
practise with and not to have two or three different kinds so that 
they can do silhouette shooting or target shooting or some of 
the steel shoots and all those other kinds of things, then 
certainly you can't perfect that precision kind of shooting that's 
required for those people who are athletes in their own right, 
who are practising an art form, an art form to those people who 
do this as a recreation. To them it is quite an accomplished art 
to be able to put little holes in that piece of paper consistently in 
the same spot. That's an art. 
 
I've seen guys come up with a sheet of paper with 10 little holes 
in the centre so proud, so proud of themselves that you wouldn't 
believe how proud they could be of having made that 
accomplishment. 
 
Now to take these rights away from the people by allowing 
Alan Rock to force people to give up those guns, which is what 
this law is all about in Ottawa . . . And that's why this 
amendment is being talked about; that the Justice minister 
wants to go and ask for amendments. 
 
This law is going to take these handguns away from people. It's 
not going to allow them to have them any more. They're not 
going to be able to compete any more. They're not going to be 
able to get ready to go to the Olympics any more. 
 
Only people that'll be able to afford to get into this or people 
that go to the United States and say, I'm on the Canadian 
Olympic team but I'm practising in the United States. Does that 
make any sense to anybody? Does it make any sense that you're 
going to find some prize shooter out of all your young people in 
the province. How would you find out which kid is good at 
shooting little holes in a target if you never ever allow them to 
have a gun to try or to practise with? 



April 24, 1995 

 
1715 

I remember as a kid having a .22 and become rather proficient 
with it. How would I have ever known how to use it or what 
was safe to do with it? Or how would I have ever developed the 
skill and the art of being able to use it properly if I hadn't had a 
chance to do it many, many times? Because this is a sport of 
repetition; the repetition is required in order to become good at 
what you're doing  at anything that you do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, then we want to move into the area of the 
longer guns because this law now wants to register all of them. 
And why do people fear the law? Well I'll tell you why they fear 
the law because just a little while ago, a year or so back — or 
was it two years ago? — suddenly somebody got the brainwave 
we had to register all these handguns and we had to register all 
of these other so-called offensive weapons, I think they were 
called, the automatics and things like that, the full automatics. 
 
It isn't very long after everything is registered and then the 
government comes along with this new law now that says 
they're going to have to turn them all in or have them 
confiscated or go through a whole bunch of rigmarole. 
 
People that had antiques that they had inherited went in and 
very obediently registered their guns, went to the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police), did that. I was shown one that has a 
new number carved in it. The RCMP got somebody to carve a 
new number into it so it could be registered with a number on 
it. Now that person is told that he can keep it as long as he lives 
— and he's old — but he can never give it to anybody else. 
Immediately that he dies, he can't pass it on; it's gone, it's going 
to be destroyed. That's what will happen with this new law if it's 
allowed to go past. 
 
I think we've got to take a bigger stand than just an amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. We've got to take a more positive stand than that 
against these kind of injustices. 
 
And then we get back to the point I was making about why 
people are afraid of registration. Immediately that everybody 
has got their long gun registered, what's to stop the next 
government or even this one from saying, okay now we're going 
to bring in another law; let's confiscate all the rifles. 
 
And you will say, well there's an extremist attitude; we would 
never do that. Well nobody ever expected that they were going 
to have to give away their handguns either, the antiques and the 
things that they'd inherited from their grandfathers or whoever. 
But it's happened. It's already happened. That's not extremism. 
This is reality. This is what's going on in the real world. Read 
the print. Find the Bill. Check her out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five hundred and thirty-three thousand. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Five hundred and thirty-three thousand of 
them. The member from Souris-Cannington is up on his 
numbers. Isn't that ever something? And then you wonder why 
people fear the legislatures and the legislators and have disdain 
for politicians and are down on the system and against  

registering and are afraid of losing their rights and afraid of 
losing control of their lives and their privacy and afraid that 
their personal property will become jeopardized as a result of 
registering if people find out that they've got them. 
 
And in the same tone of that argument, then you can understand 
why American people are afraid to come to this country and 
bring their guns along to go hunting because they have to 
register them immediately. Interpol (International Criminal 
Police Organization) and CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) 
and the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) and everybody 
else is going to have their numbers and know where they are. 
These folks know exactly what is happening in our country; 
they've been watching. They don't want that to happen to 
themselves, and so they're probably going to stay home. 
 
And even if it isn't going to happen quite that way, the 
perception that it might will keep them home, and we're going 
to lose our industry of tourism and all of the money that is made 
from the hunting in the fall and throughout the year in Canada. 
People coming to shoots will no longer be buying gas in 
Saskatchewan because they're simply going to have their shoot 
in Montana. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I talked to this gentleman earlier, I had 
my eyes opened up a little bit because I thought because I was a 
gun owner, and I am, and a gun user, and I am — because I 
thought that and because I'm used to it, I thought everybody 
knew and understood what we were talking about. I thought 
that everybody had a visual idea in their minds that we had 
more rules and regulations from Ottawa already than what are 
being enforced; that the laws are not being enforced because we 
don't have enough money for our police forces, and we don't 
have enough time to get everything done. 
 
But now I realize that a lot of people don't realize that the 
reality of crime is that if you confiscate guns and going to stop 
all crime as a result of guns . . . and you're going to stop all the 
crime by taking those guns away, if that's your thinking, then 
you have to do like one of my friends told me — you have to 
take all the baseball bats and all the knives, and you've got to 
take them all away. 
 
And in reality you say, well that's kind of extreme. Well I'm 
going to get a little more extreme. You're going to have to take 
away all the cars too, because the hardest thing to prove in this 
world of ours is that somebody was killed with a car. And I'll 
bet you it happens more often than we'd like to think about, and 
yet we're not going to confiscate all the cars because they might 
be a weapon. We often hear about people getting run over and 
killed with cars and pedestrian-car accidents. How do we know 
that those weren't planned? How do we know that that guy just 
accidentally got run over? It's the hardest thing in the world to 
prove because you can't climb into the mind of the driver and 
find out what his thoughts were. 
 
So reality is that guns are only a tool. And a tool is only as 
responsible to society as the person who uses it. And you can 
never know who the person that's using it will be, or what his  



April 24, 1995 

 
1716 

thoughts will be or how they might change. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, and through you the people to 
know, that I find no offence whatever when people shoot at clay 
pigeons. They are little round discs made out of clay; you can 
throw them up in the air by hand but they work better if you 
throw them up with a machine. And I see no reason why 
anybody would be offended at someone finding an art form, 
and shooting at those, and developing a skill at being able to hit 
one after the other. 
 
In fact I suspect that when Billy Bishop went to war for this 
country, everybody was pretty proud of him being able to shoot 
straight. They tell me it was a combination of his good eyesight 
and his ability to shoot that he learned as a child. Now if he 
hadn't done that, he could not have protected our country. 
 
Are we about to suggest in this country that we should not be an 
armed nation to defend ourselves in the world any more? And 
that's really what it's starting to boil down to. We have people 
that are seriously questioning this. 
 
And then we have people today on television . . . I guess it was 
last night, Mr. Speaker, and I was really quite upset. Because 
here we have one of the most terrible explosions in the United 
States, blew up a whole building . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I've listened for sometime to the 
member from Maple Creek and I must admit I find it very 
difficult to relate many of his discussions that he's having. And 
now to go to United States with the bomb threat or the bomb 
explosion . . . 
 
The question before us is here: be it resolved that this Assembly 
urge the federal . . . Order . . . urge the federal government to 
introduce amendments to Bill C-68, An Act respecting Firearms 
and Other Weapons, to allow provinces and territories to opt 
out of the provisions. That's the question that is before this 
Assembly and I wish the member would get back to the topic 
that we are discussing. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I realize that Allan Rock 
and his gun law and the way that we are going to approach it 
are the reason we are here. And I will have to — as they say in 
the courts — tie this in for you, and I will do that immediately, 
sir. 
 
Because the reality is that Allan Rock today, and the people that 
support his gun law, in the newspapers . . . and I have a copy of 
the news item here today. People who support stronger and 
tougher gun laws are saying that right-wing extremists who use 
guns in their everyday life should now be put in their place and 
there should be more gun control because there was this terrible 
catastrophe in the United States where fertilizer and diesel fuel 
were used as the bomb components. And yet the media is trying 
to tie that to extremist groups that use guns in their everyday 
life and I saw it on television. They interviewed them. They  

interviewed them out there on some prairie with a bunch of 
guns and they had on army fatigues and they're supposed to be 
some organized group. And now we have Ottawa trying to tie 
this terrorism together with anybody that has a gun. So that 
they're trying to give the impression that everybody with a gun 
now is a terrorist because somebody blew up a building in the 
United States. 
 
Well quite frankly I'm saying . . . and my argument is that we 
better ban nitrogen fertilizer, diesel fuel, and whatever it takes 
to set that off. Because the argument down there is so ludicrous 
now that they will go to any extreme to prove their point. And 
the point is that Liberals and Ottawa can't be trusted and Allan 
Rock is trying to make criminals out of ordinary, honest people. 
 
So I hope that has tied it together for the folks, Mr. Speaker, 
because there is a connection here. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when 
you talk about trusting a federal Liberal I'd have to say  and 
go a step further  it would be more likely for gun owners . . . 
if you want to put this into perspective, as far as gun owners are 
concerned and looking at Ottawa and Ottawa's approach to 
Saskatchewan, it would be better for a flock of chickens to trust 
a fox in the chicken house as they say. And realistically, it 
would be more probably sensible, in context of a metaphor to 
explain this, it would be better for a frog to trust a scorpion in 
the middle of the ocean than for the gun owners to trust a 
Liberal in Ottawa. 
 
And I think everybody knows that story because the frog can 
swim; the scorpion can't. The scorpion needs to get across the 
pond. He sits on the frog's back and the frog says, I'm not going 
to take you. You'll sting me and kill me, and then I'll drown. 
And he says you'll drown too. And the scorpion says, of course 
I won't sting you, I don't want to die. But halfway across the 
scorpion stings the frog and they start to stink. And the frog 
yells, why did you do that, we're both going to die. And the 
scorpion says, because I'm a scorpion; that's what I do. 
 
Well Liberals in Ottawa, that's what they do. They're not going 
to give you a fair break when you get down there because that's 
what they do. They take from Saskatchewan to give to eastern 
Canada. They always have and always will, Mr. Speaker, and 
there's no question in my mind that the whole trip will end up 
being a waste of time and a waste of money. But we have to go 
because we have to try; everybody's going to do that. But the 
chance of getting this done in a positive manner so that we in 
fact will see a positive result, I don't believe is there if we take 
too wishy-washy an approach. 
 
And this amendment, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what is required 
here to put some teeth into this approach. We've got our 
members decided some time ago that we have to take some 
positive, very direct action. And that positive action has to 
mean taking a Saskatchewan . . . building a Saskatchewan point 
of view and a stand — a solid, hard stand. And if we can get all 
of the parties to work together on that stand, that's great. And it 
looks like we might be heading that way. 
 
But we got to be tougher because when you get to Ottawa, it's  



April 24, 1995 

 
1717 

not going to be just a bunch of little jellyfish sitting around. 
These are hard-core, tough politicians looking to get things their 
own way in eastern Canada. And if you ever think that they're 
going to give up easy, you're dreaming in technicolor because 
it's not going to be easy. 
 
You're going to have go down there and you're going to have 
negotiate tough and negotiate hard. And you're going to have 
negotiate hard simply by going with good, solid facts and hard 
ammunition. 
 
And that's why we've brought in this amendment. This 
amendment puts teeth into this thing. It says, let's put in the 
opposition amendment. We're going to put in amendments that 
will say we have property rights that are just as important to the 
people of Saskatchewan as language rights are to Quebec. 
 
We're going to put in amendments that say that Saskatchewan is 
taking control of an area of jurisdiction that we've always had 
control over. We've always had control over property in the 
provinces. And we must maintain that, and we must insist upon 
that. 
 
And guns are property. I don't care what the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) think about property or, philosophically, 
about ownership. The truth of the matter is that if I buy and pay 
for a car, for the period of time after I've got it until I sell it, or 
it gets broken, or whatever happens to it, it is mine. It's 
property; I have the right to own that for awhile in my life. It 
may become somebody else's if I die or sell it, but the truth is 
for now it's mine. 
 
If I buy a gun it's the same way — it's property. It's mine. I 
bought it and paid for it. I should have the right to own it. And 
we as a province have the right to say to Ottawa, we have 
maintained our rights of ownership and our rights of property, 
and we as a province are going to stand up for those rights for 
the people. 
 
And so very simply, Mr. Speaker, what we're going to say is 
that the members ought to seriously consider taking some hard 
ammunition with them, some solid facts, some good, hard 
negotiating point-of-view things to do that will give them a 
chance to win. 
 
Now I don't like to put the Minister of Justice down, but I have 
to say that his original motion is just too weak. It's not tough 
enough to withstand the test and the time trials that will come 
up in Ottawa. Those guys are also politicians as senior as you 
are. Some of them have been around since the Trudeau years. 
And can you remember how Ottawa in the Trudeau years 
treated the West? Does anybody remember how the national 
energy program . . . and how they treated people in western 
Canada to get cheap gas for the East, and all that stuff all 
happened. 
 
Don't go there thinking that these guys are pushovers. They're 
not going to let you win — not easily, at least. And I read some 
place here that someone's comment was that a turbot would  

have a better chance beside a Spanish ship than we will have of 
getting Allan Rock to change his gun law. 
 
So you know how tough they think they're going to be. So we've 
got to be tougher than a turbot, and tougher than a Spanish 
trawler and a fisherman. And we've got to go down there armed 
with enough, enough determination and a strong enough point 
of view so that we have a chance of winning. 
 
The property rights that we've talked about are not uncommon, 
and not been unheard of before. People have genuine fears. 
They have genuine concerns about the loss of their privacy, the 
loss of their guns and things that they own, and one thing 
leading to the other. We've got all kinds of people in our 
province who have come to hate the word Rock, not just 
because they lay around in the fields. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we're going to ask the Minister of Justice 
to take his colleagues back to the back for a minute and have a 
little huddle like a football game and discuss this amendment 
before they vote on it. In all seriousness, let's get down to the 
brass tacks of studying this thing a little further. Reconsider the 
strength you will need in order to win. If you're going to spend 
70,000, 100,000, or half a million or whatever it takes to go to 
Ottawa, at least go so that you have a chance to win. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to have the government of this 
province not just playing politics with this important issue. I 
hear report after report that we have got way too much politics 
being played with this issue in Saskatchewan. And I guess it's 
just a natural process that will have to happen  that people 
will have to go to Rosetown to try to get the Minister of 
Economic Development re-elected on this issue, because none 
other will work. We'll have to live with that, I guess. 
 
But remember, the issue itself is far more important than 
partisan politics. It is far more important to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we go down there and we win. And you are 
not going to win simply by putting in some jellyfish kind of an 
amendment to Allan Rock's legislation. 
 
You're going to have to defend yourself in a constitution that I 
understand was written basically against the West in terms of 
property rights; written in a time when people like Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau gave people, I think it was the finger or the thumb or 
something. They told us to sell our own wheat. 
 
In that context and that line of thinking, people drew up the 
constitution that deals with this particular issue now. Why, why 
would you then not take very seriously the need to take very 
solid ammunition with you to fight this insanity of Allan 
Rock's. 
 
There are three things you need to do, Mr. Minister of Justice. 
First of all, you need to support this amendment to put some 
teeth into today's debate so that the whole day isn't a waste of 
taxpayers' money. The second thing you have to do is to support 
the legislation that the opposition has introduced into this 
legislature. The first piece of legislation of course being the  



April 24, 1995 

 
1718 

most important, which is the one that deals with ownership of 
property; the other one that deals with the notwithstanding 
clause in our constitution. 
 
And even though you have stated to us that you don't think this 
would hold up in court in the future and all those kinds of 
things, think about this. How many years have businesses had 
to have French-only signs in Quebec, even though after many 
years it was found out, with a ruling of the Supreme Court, that 
they were doing something that was contrary to the 
constitution? 
 
You can protect our people for a year, three years, maybe ten 
years. Anyway, what we're saying to you is you're buying 
enough time that the government could change. The 
government in Ottawa could change while you buy the time for 
us in Saskatchewan; you could do that. 
 
You have the power in your hands today to stave off this thing 
for the people of western Canada, and particularly in 
Saskatchewan. But believe me if you take this stand, and take it 
hard now and win, there's absolutely no question that the rest of 
the prairie provinces would follow in your footsteps and 
applaud you all the way. 
 
I would say, Minister, you'd have a better chance of getting the 
member in Rosetown re-elected if you take that stand, even 
better than going out to the meeting in Rosetown. Because the 
people in this province know and understand how tough it is to 
beat the Liberals in Ottawa and to stand up to them. 
 
So, Minister, do the right thing. This is not a simple little issue. 
This is extremely important to rural people. It's extremely 
important not just to the first residents of this province, the 
aboriginal people, but it's important to every farmer and every 
rancher, every person that I've heard from. 
 
In fact I guess it's possible that people know my position and 
therefore those that are in favour of gun control have said very 
little to me. But the truth of the matter is that I've only had a 
couple of people mention some very casual things about why 
gun control would be important or good; in fact not big enough 
arguments made to ever sustain going into this process very 
much further of having more gun control. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we would like nothing better than to stand up 
and cheer in this Assembly tonight, and to pat you on the back 
all the way to Ottawa, to stand you on a stage and give you a 
medal when you get home from Ottawa because we would like 
you to be able to win this battle. And we are offering only our 
best support and our best ammunition for you to be successful. 
And so I ask you to reconsider this whole process and support 
this amendment, pass it, accept our support on the full, newly 
amended motion, and let's go forward from here and win the 
day for Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 

Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe that this debate today in this legislature, on the same day 
as the opening of the hearings in Ottawa, the public hearing 
process with respect to Bill C-68, is very timely. And I'm 
pleased to have this opportunity to rise and speak on this issue 
again although I have spoken on it previously, and my views I 
think were clear. But now that we know some more of the 
details of what is being proposed I would like to make some 
further comments. 
 
It's Bill C-68 that is before us or before the public hearing 
process in our national capital today. But in 1991, Bill C-17 
received Royal Assent. Its stated goals were also public safety 
and the reduction of the criminal use of firearms. 
Implementation of these considerable amendments — these are 
over four years ago, Mr. Speaker — is still not complete, and 
costs have exceeded estimates for implementation. Has the 
expenditure made on Bill C-17 provided the public safety and 
reduced criminal gun use it was intended to purchase? It is 
apparent that this is a question that the federal government has 
not yet answered. 
 
In his 1993 annual report, the Auditor General turned his 
attention to the federal gun control program. The lack of 
adequate evaluation of even the 1978 amendments, much less 
Bill C-17, much less those that are before us proposed today, 
led him to this recommendation: 
 
 Canada's gun control program is controversial and 

complex. An evaluation of the program is therefore 
essential to give the Canadian public and members of 
parliament the assurance that its objectives are being 
met. A more up-to-date evaluation of the program is 
essential. 

 
This is remarks related to Bill C-17  passed in 1991  by the 
Auditor General in 1993, prior to the proposal of Bill C-68. He 
also recommends in that same annual report in 1993 — this is 
the Auditor General — and I quote: 
 
 The Department of Justice (this is the federal 

Department of Justice) should undertake a rigorous 
evaluation of the gun control program. 

 
To which the recorded departmental response was as follows: 
 
 The current gun control initiative made only limited use 

of the 1983 evaluation. More reliance is placed on the 
statistics available since the 1970s on homicides, 
suicides, accidental deaths, and robberies. In any event 
(and note this, Mr. Speaker) the legislation and 
regulations were driven by clear public interest 
considerations which needed to be acted upon despite 
the absence of precise data. 

 
And now the minister is proposing the enactment of Bill C-68 
without any data on how the recently implemented gun control 
provisions in Bill C-17 have worked. It is submitted that it is 
unacceptable and irresponsible in the current economic climate  



April 24, 1995 

 
1719 

for the Department of Justice to compound its previous error by 
introducing a costly new gun control Bill without having 
completed an evaluation of the existing program. 
 
The cost . . . Mr. Speaker, I believe that the money would be 
much better spent on education, health care, and a number of 
the real needs of the people in this country. Time is also money, 
in terms of the time that enforcement officers will have to spend 
on filling out forms, checking serial numbers on the property of 
law-abiding people — time which would be better spent 
enforcing laws against criminal activity. 
 
There's a great deal of frustration already amongst our peace 
officers, Mr. Speaker, in this province and elsewhere, because 
they know that harassment of law-abiding gun owners, hunters, 
collectors, and target shooters, will not reduce crime. They do 
say that . . . there is that old saying: if you outlaw guns, only 
outlaws will have guns. And enforcement officers have told me 
that there's evidence that there's already, in anticipation of 
stricter gun laws, a growing movement of the underground 
acquisition of firearms by people who don't qualify under the 
current laws  much less more stringent ones  and that this 
activity is already growing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The concerns expressed by the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Police Officers are as follows, and I quote: 
 
 SFPO (Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers) . . . 

in their recent survey, overwhelmingly voted down the 
principle of registration, viewing it as an extremely 
expensive initiative that targets law abiding firearms 
owners and does little regarding crime prevention or 
crime control. Saskatchewan officers also believe 
registration will have little effect on the criminal 
element. 

 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we should pay attention to what 
the peace officers of this province are saying to us about their 
work and about what these regulations proposed will do to 
assist them in that work. 
 
Another element of the cost, Mr. Speaker, is found in the 
summary of what this legislation is purportedly proposed to do. 
One is enhancing firearm acquisition certificate application 
procedures. And there's a long list of provisions that will be in a 
detailed questionnaire pursuant to the regulations of the 
proposed legislation, addressing a number of issues, including 
but not limited to, previous behaviour problems, depression, 
alcohol or drug abuse, recent divorce, separation, failure in 
school, loss of a job, or bankruptcy. 
 
And this implies, Mr. Speaker, that if these are to be 
considerations that will be looked at on the original acquisition 
certificate, then it implies that there will be some kind of a 
monitoring procedure so that if any of these conditions stated 
occur after the acquisition, that there would be ways of 
removing the certificate. Now this is as expensive and very . . . 
could be extremely invasive in terms of people's privacy and 
very discriminatory. 

There are some other provisions. Some other members have 
mentioned, I believe, the succession and the confiscation  for 
instance, firearms that are considered restricted now that will 
not be allowed to be transferred and that upon the demise of the 
current owner, even though they have a valid firearms 
acquisition certificate or registration certificate, that their 
property will be confiscated. And in many cases these firearms 
have historic value and sentimental value. 
 
There's also the provision of search and seizure where 
enforcement officers would be permitted to enter the premises 
of a private citizen to search for firearms on the basis of such a 
thing as a telephone call. And I'm sure that's not the kind of 
society that I want to live in. 
 
I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from a source that we on this side 
of the House do not often quote, but the Fraser Institute 
published in March of 1995, a very recent Critical Issues 
Bulletin entitled: Gun Control is not Crime Control. And the 
author of this report from the Fraser Institute is Professor 
Mauser, Ph.D., who is a professor in business administration, 
and in the Institute for Canadian Urban Research Studies at 
Simon Fraser University in Burnaby. 
 
His publications include books and over 30 published papers in 
criminology, political science, and research methodology. For 
the past several years Professor Mauser has been researching 
issues related to firearms and firearm legislation. He has 
published two articles comparing Canadian and American 
attitudes towards firearms and firearm legislation, and another 
examining the treatment of polls and gun control by the mass 
media. He has published econometric analyses of the effects of 
the 1977 Canadian firearms legislation on homicide. And he is 
currently working on a parallel evaluation of the same law's 
effect on armed robbery. 
 
Professor Mauser is a gun owner and a certified Canadian 
firearms safety course instructor. 
 
I want to read briefly from what Professor Mauser, established 
as an authority in this field, says about the current legislation 
where there seems to be a perception that it's wide open, home 
on the range out there in terms of gun ownership now. And 
what I want to outline is a quote from Dr. Mauser's article that 
describes the situation generally in Canada now, today, without 
Bill C-68. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Firearms ownership is a significant part of modern 

Canadian life. Many Canadians own firearms for 
hunting or target-shooting purposes; this has been true 
for hundreds of years. With reasonable care and 
attention, firearms do not pose a significant threat to the 
public in the hands of the ordinary person. Owners of 
long guns (rifles and shotguns) tend to be hunters; 
handgun owners tend to be target-shooters or collectors. 

 
 Canada has some of the strictest firearms laws in the 

world. 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1720 

 Firearms are covered in the federal criminal law. Part III 
of the Criminal Code, Sections 84 through 117, is 
devoted entirely to firearms regulations. Provincial 
hunting regulations also cover firearms use. In addition 
to federal and provincial legislation, there are hundreds 
of pages of regulations that specify how these laws are 
to be interpreted. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I repeat, I'm outlining as set out in this 
article the situation today, without Bill C-68. 
 
 Anyone wishing to purchase a firearm must hold a valid 

Firearms Acquisition Certificate (FAC). To obtain an 
FAC, the applicant must pay $50, subject him or herself 
to a full character investigation by the police, pass a 
3-hour firearms safety exam or course costing between 
$100 and $180, and wait a minimum of 28 days. In 
practice, the wait is often closer to three months. 
First-time applicants must often wait 6 months or more. 
Prospective hunters must also obtain a provincial 
hunting licence, which involves passing a second exam 
or course costing at least $75. 

 
 The purchase of a handgun, or any other firearm 

classified as a "restricted weapon," requires further 
permits and police checks. Canadians have required 
permits to purchase handguns since 1913, and handguns 
have been registered since 1934. For the past 20 years, 
the police have required all purchasers of restricted 
weapons to undergo police checks and to join a gun 
club. All restricted firearms are registered, and a police 
permit is required to transport a restricted firearm to and 
from the owner's home or place of business. In order to 
shoot the handgun or restricted rifle, the owner must 
apply annually for a carrying permit which will allow 
him or her to take the restricted firearm to an approved 
shooting range. This permit requires another thorough 
police check every year. 

 
This doesn't sound to me, Mr. Speaker, like home on the range 
in Canada or Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatchewan, there are some interesting statistics with 
respect to gun ownership in this same Critical Issues Bulletin 
from the Fraser Institute. In Saskatchewan, according to an 
Angus Reid survey, 87 per cent of households in Saskatchewan 
— 87 per cent — own a rifle; 61 per cent own a shotgun; 13 per 
cent own a handgun  at least one. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that perhaps those who think that Bill 
C-68 has some currency in some parts of the country, will 
certainly understand from those statistics why it doesn't have a 
lot of favour in Saskatchewan. 
 
And some other myths are sort of exploded in this report in the 
statistics that they give, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the kind of 
people who own firearms for various reasons. There's a profile 
of Canadian firearms owners in this report compiled by Dr. 
Mauser, and he talks about the demographics of firearms  

owners 18 years old and older. Fully 72 per cent have at least a 
complete high school, some post-secondary or completed 
university; 45 per cent of firearms owners have annual incomes 
of over $40,000, and a full 57 per cent are, by occupation, 
owners, professionals, clerical or service workers; 33 per cent 
are blue-collar workers, and 8 per cent are farmers. 
 
And I think there might be a few surprises in those statistics for 
some people who think they know the profile of a gun owner 
and relate it to somebody that has a rack on the back of their 
half ton with a couple of guns on it. 
 
Another interesting statistic is the number of firearms accidents. 
This is a table of causes of death in Canada in 1992 — total 
accidents being 8,800; total firearms accidents being 66. 
 
(2015) 
 
There were 3,400 motor vehicle accidents; 2,100-and-some 
people died through falls; 726 by poisoning; 706 by drowning 
or suffocation; 328 in fires; 66 people, Mr. Speaker, 66 in 
firearms accidents in all of Canada — less than half  being 
154  who died in surgical or medical misadventures . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . My hon. friend across the way says, 
outlaw doctors. Well, I'm not sure we'd go that far. 
 
But I think those statistics are very telling, and I think that what 
we have now really is, in Bill C-68, embodied in that, is politics 
of the worst kind, Mr. Speaker. It is legislation that appears to 
be a political response to a perception that crime is increasing in 
Canada when in fact crime is not increasing in Canada. I think 
it is not an appropriate response. And I just cannot understand 
why the perception and the hysteria that's created by that — 
making people feel as if their streets are not safe and that crime 
is increasing — I think that is a crime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think partly the legislation is a money grab in terms of the 
amount of fees that will be required to register. And I think that 
if someone can prove to me that more owners' registration laws 
for the .410 shotgun that I have, that I inherited from my 
grandmother who was a pioneer woman in the province, and 
that I use occasionally to dispatch magpies and skunks; if 
somebody can prove to me why paying money every year and 
going through this kind of a rigmarole and involving the time of 
peace officers in checking serial numbers and filling out forms 
for me to maintain ownership of that firearm, the day that 
somebody can show me that that is going to prevent a random, 
unfortunate shooting incident — a drive-by shooting in some 
large urban centre in this country; if putting me through that, 
putting peace officers . . . wasting the time and money of the 
system is going to prevent such an incident, then, you know, I 
might be able to, being open-minded and honest, I think that I 
would be able to take another look at it. 
 
But I do not see, I fail to see, any relationship whatsoever 
between those situations. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion and I will not be supporting the 
amendment. But I certainly will be voting on behalf of the main 
motion. Thank you very much. 



April 24, 1995 

 
1721 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to stand up today and join the debate on the motion 
before the Assembly on the federal government's gun control 
legislation. I spoke on the issue about a year ago in this 
Assembly, and I remember talking about the fact about how my 
mother has a .22 and she uses it to shoot gophers that are 
hassling her garden, and magpies and stuff like that. 
 
And just to follow up on the former member's comments, I fail 
to see how making my mother register her .22 is going to make 
life much safer in my community or my country. I think that this 
is . . . in my opinion, it is an economic issue. 
 
I think also last year when I was responding on the budget, I 
called on the federal government to come forward with a sound 
financial plan to get the government's finances in shape, in 
order, with a long-term plan. And of course they didn't do that, 
and instead they come out with a bureaucratic, expensive, I 
believe, expensive system of registering long rifles in this 
country, that has been mentioned time and time again in this 
Assembly, that's not going to achieve or control crime or try and 
make our society any safer than it's been in the past. 
 
This past weekend, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night, I had the 
opportunity to spend . . . went to an awards night for the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation in Willowbrook. Now 
Willowbrook is a little community just about 12 miles north of 
my place, and they had the awards night in the curling rink. And 
I didn't really take a good look at the crowd, but — as about 
how many were there — but there was well over 100. I would 
say there was a 150, 160 individuals at this Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation banquet and awards night. 
 
And it was a real family gathering. I mean there was parents 
there, and children, and grandparents, and members of the 
community out. There was a supper. Following that was the 
presentation of awards to junior white tail hunters, 
photography, fishing, seniors' awards. There was a lot of awards 
given out that night that's been sponsored by the wildlife 
federation in the area. 
 
And it wasn't just older people there, Mr. Speaker; there was a 
lot of young people there. And these people are involved in 
recreational activities in our province, in hunting and in fishing. 
And of course, this was to recognize their achievements in 
hunting and fishing. 
 
But to put these young individuals, who have gone through a 
course that the wildlife federation teaches on hunter safety, gun 
safety . . . and it is a fairly in-depth course, and they get to 
understand the use of a rifle and the respect that needs to be 
shown towards that firearm. 
 
And you know the communities are . . . certainly it's one part of 
the community, is to have these activities going on. And to put 
another hardship amongst rural families, an economic hardship 
about, you know, the cost of rifles, the cost of ammunition, the  

cost of licensing, for getting your hunting licence, and then to 
throw an additional cost of registering these firearms, to me, 
Mr. Speaker, does not make a lot of sense. And I think it is, in 
my opinion, an economic issue as much as it is . . . or more than 
it is a safety issue. 
 
The other night, when I was travelling back to my community, I 
was listening to the radio. And they were interviewing an MP 
(Member of Parliament) from Edmonton Southwest, I believe it 
was; he happens to be a member of the Reform Party, and he 
himself, personally, is in favour of the gun legislation. He did a 
survey amongst his constituents and his constituents appeared 
in the survey . . . however he done it, a majority of them were 
opposed to it. But he had decided that he was going to support 
it. 
 
Or they were in favour of it; he was going to oppose the 
legislation. And he based it on an economic issue, on the fact 
that, you know, it's only going to cost a few hundred million 
here and a few hundred million there and a few hundred million 
some other place. And you know that's the way we've got 
ourselves into this economic crisis that we find ourselves in in 
this country. It doesn't sound necessary like a tremendous 
amount of money, but you've got to start some place to try and 
get spending under control. And to waste more money on a 
system and on something that's going to force people to register 
rifles who are not criminals, I don't think is going to address the 
problem. 
 
But I think if you look back in your smaller communities in 
rural Saskatchewan, I mean that seems to be a thing, that rifles 
are something that people use certainly very often to chase 
animals away from their cattle or chickens or other animals, 
other domestic animals. And to put this extra hardship on them 
— who knows? — you're probably going to . . . I believe you're 
going to have to have show your licence or your registration for 
this particular rifle when you go to buy shells. And I mean this 
is just going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Abide by the rules. 
 
Mr. Carlson: — You've got to abide by the rules, the member 
says. That's right. 
 
So I just think that it's going to be very burdensome, very hard 
for individuals to function, and it's not going to achieve what it 
wants to achieve. 
 
I think in the past we've seen other countries that maybe there's 
more violence than there is in Canada, and maybe they've got a 
little bit less controls than we have because we do have a fair 
bit of controls. And I think the amount of controls we have are 
more than enough, and I don't think we need to take this extra 
step to make just a whole bureaucratic run-around for 
individuals who want to do some hunting, want to do some 
recreational shooting, or who maybe even want to go into 
competition. There's a lot of shooting competition in this 
country, and it's just going to make life much more difficult for 
them. 



April 24, 1995 

 
1722 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I will be supporting 
the main motion when it comes to a vote, and I urge all 
members to support this too because it's a very important issue. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise here today and participate in this particular 
debate, a debate that certainly evokes a lot of emotion in 
Saskatchewan and amongst a lot of people and for good reason. 
Mr. Speaker, it's very visible that our government has been very 
strongly opposed to this particular legislation, and for very good 
reason. 
 
I think all of us can go back to the federal election of 1993, and 
as we followed that particular election, and most of us 
participated in that campaign, it was interesting to note and to 
look back now, and we never had it mentioned once during the 
campaign by the Liberals, about proposed gun legislation or any 
enhancements or modifications they were going to be making to 
gun legislation in the future. 
 
And again, this of course, when the current minister came out 
and decided that he was going to bring forward new gun 
legislation, took us, the government, by surprise, and I'm sure 
everybody in the Chamber. And of course our government has 
been very strong in opposing this particular legislation. 
 
Again it's interesting to note that nowhere in the 1993 
legislation, whether in the red book or anywhere, was there any 
mention of proposed changes to the gun legislation. 
 
Now the previous federal minister of Justice had brought 
forward a package of amendments. And I'm sure that all 
members are much aware of those particular amendments and 
what was included in those particular changes. And we felt at 
the time that we could support most of those changes — and we 
did — because we felt as a government that if that was the 
compromise, then that was . . . we could live with that. And so 
we supported that, knowing and feeling that that was going to 
be the end of gun legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some years later, we have another ambitious 
Justice minister who wants to bring forward another whole 
array and another whole set of packages and has got them 
before us. Well I can tell you that our government is going to 
oppose this right to the bitter end because we believe that 
Saskatchewan people, the majority of Saskatchewan people, are 
opposed to these particular amendments. 
 
One of the things as I followed the debate . . . and I'm not a gun 
enthusiast. I don't collect guns, but I do have some at home. 
One of the things that I found amazing about the former Justice 
minister's gun legislation and now the new ones that the present 
minister is bringing forward, is that there has never been a 
thorough evaluation of what our objectives are with this 
particular gun legislation. 
 

And I think it's very important that we take time to evaluate, to 
assess, to analyse, whether we have sound objectives set 
forward and that we try to see if we are meeting those 
objectives before we get on with bringing forward a whole new 
package and passing a whole new package of amendments. 
 
I find it completely baffling and completely — to me — 
irresponsible to be moving forward again when we haven't done 
that. So I would recommend, first of all, that we take a good, 
strong look and evaluate whether we are meeting our objectives 
with gun legislation, and in fact this has been voiced by many 
officials in Ottawa and even the Auditor General has 
commented on that. 
 
I want to talk a bit about the gun registry and obviously in 
Saskatchewan as we see the mounting opposition to this and 
this is really amazing. And we see the current minister going 
around the country. And I heard him today even as a witness to 
the parliamentary committee claiming that this new gun registry 
would certainly go a long way in preventing violent crime. And 
even today he went as far as saying that it would curb the 
incidents such as we have seen in Oklahoma City. 
 
Well I want to tell you, and I want to tell the people of Canada, 
that that almost borders on being preposterous. I mean the fact 
is, the fact is, does anyone in Canada think that a national gun 
registry is going to stop these kinds of incidents? 
 
(2030) 
 
I want to ask anyone in Canada, do you think that the criminal 
element in Canada is going to come forward and is going to 
register their guns? I would say no, Mr. Speaker, I don't think 
they will and I think it's amazing to think that the criminals are 
going to line up and are going to be coming forward to register 
their guns. That is not going to happen and this gun registry is 
not going to curb that one iota 
 
Now one of the biggest problems we have, obviously, is the 
smuggling of guns. What this government, the federal 
government, should be doing, should be tackling that particular 
problem and putting more emphasis on the current gun laws 
and trying to enforce those particular gun laws instead of 
bringing on a whole new package of enhancements. 
 
And I think it's very, very important that the federal government 
start to place the priorities in the right order  and certainly 
enforcing the present laws would go a long way  instead of 
trying to bring in some new amendments. 
 
Now they're saying, of course, that the cost to this — and this is 
where we really have some grave concerns — the costs of this, 
which I don't think have been clearly quantified . . . I hear 
figures of $87 million. I'm not sure that's accurate. I don't think 
it is. I think it's going to be considerably higher. 
 
But this again, Mr. Speaker, speaks to the mixed priorities of 
this federal government, the mixed priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
They're going to spend $87 million or a figure around that  I  



April 24, 1995 

 
1723 

think it's going to be higher  but they're going to spend on a 
national gun registry, while what we have seen in the last 
budget, they have cut education and health and agriculture. The 
Crow is gone. And they're going to put $87 million towards a 
gun registry that is not  is not  going to meet the objectives 
that it's set out for. 
 
You are going to be placing a burden on law-abiding people 
who have respect for rifles and have respect for guns. Those are 
the ones that you're going to be hurting and are going to be 
placing a burden on — not the criminal element, Mr. Speaker. 
You're not going to have any effect on them. And you're going 
to be spending $87 million — misplaced priorities. And that is 
really something that I think this federal government has to 
answer the Canadian people across. Why are we going to be 
placing that much money into this kind of a gun registry. 
 
So what I want to encourage all of my colleagues is to try to 
place as much pressure in any way they possibly can to try to 
encourage the federal government to reassess this particular 
decision in light of what they're hearing in Saskatchewan and 
right across Canada. 
 
And I want to ask the federal government and urge the federal 
government, and in particular the Justice minister, to refocus his 
priorities, refocus them on what they should be. And that is, 
number one, health and education; number two, agriculture — 
not spending $87 million on a piece of legislation that, first of 
all, is not going to meet objectives because the objectives are 
not identified. We don't know what the objectives are. They 
claim that this is going to stop crime. This is going to stop 
bombings. I'm not sure how it's going to stop it. 
 
So I think before they spend $87 million, they better 
demonstrate to Canadian people in a tangible fashion what 
exactly are the objectives, how they're going to meet them, and 
then I think engage the Canadian public in the big debate. So I 
would encourage the federal government to get on with that and 
again place the priorities where they should be, place it on what 
Saskatchewan people need, place it on what Canadian people 
need — and that is jobs. That is quality education, quality 
health care, and not a national gun registry. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I will be 
supporting this particular motion, and I appreciate the 
opportunity to have spoken here today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 8:36 p.m. until 8:38 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Swenson Martens Goohsen 
D'Autremont Toth Britton 

— 6 
 

Nays 
 
Van Mulligen Thompson Lingenfelter 
Shillington Johnson Trew 
Goulet Calvert Cunningham 
Mitchell Penner Upshall 
Hagel Teichrob Cline 
Crofford Murray Sonntag 
Flavel Roy Scott 
Kujawa Carlson Jess 

— 24 
 
The Speaker: — The debate will continue on the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to join in the debate here in the 
Assembly with respect to the federal gun legislation, and at the 
end of my brief remarks, I will be moving an amendment to the 
motion. 
 
As many, many of my constituents point out to me, Mr. 
Speaker, there seems to be that this legislation the federal 
government is proposing certainly does not punish the criminal 
but makes criminals out of ordinary people in my constituency 
right in Meadow Lake. It makes criminals out of friends and 
neighbours of ours. 
 
I think what this really requires is a logical approach to things. 
When I look back in the 1960s and earlier, it is my 
understanding that the number of deaths related to firearms in 
Saskatchewan amounted to something over 100 deaths per year. 
And since that time I think we've taken a logical approach and 
have brought into place hunter safety courses and those sorts of 
things. And it is now my understanding that we have probably 
in Saskatchewan less than 10 deaths a year related to firearms. 
 
So I think what we've done is we've taken the logical approach 
to firearms. And I think that it also proves that education is the 
approach that we should be taking. 
 
One of the things that I think that Mr. Rock doesn't realize is 
that this has absolutely nothing to do with stopping criminals 
from continuing on with the crimes that they're about to 
commit. And I refer to the member from Kinistino earlier, who 
made remarks about Minister Rock who said that the bombing 
that took place in Oklahoma earlier this week could have been 
prevented had we had this registry in place. Well I agree that it 
makes absolutely no sense at all. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in 1993 the auditor's 
report said that he anticipated the average cost for registering 
guns to be about $100 per gun. Now the wildlife federation says 
that the number of guns in Saskatchewan is approximately 
$700, so if you do quick multiplication, 700,000 guns times 
$100, that amounts to $70 million taken out of our provincial 
economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1724 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to move this amendment 
then based on those numbers. And the amendment would read: 
 
 That the motion be amended by adding the following 

words after the word "licensing": 
 
 which would impose a cost of $70 million on the 

provincial economy, over and above the hundreds of 
million of dollars the federal government is already 
taking out of the province by its unilateral decision to 
end the Crow benefit and to reduce federal funds for 
medicare; and instead allow the people of this province 
to better use that $70 million for law enforcement, crime 
prevention, economic development, and medicare. 

 
This amendment will be seconded by the member from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased to 
stand in my place this evening and just say a very few words in 
support of the amendment moved by my colleague, the member 
from Meadow Lake, on this issue of gun control. 
 
I think one of the important things that we have to recognize is 
that the view of western Canadians in relationship to guns is 
different from what it might be of our friends in the eastern 
centres. When we think of guns, we don't associate them with 
crime. We don't associate them with violence, as perhaps our 
friends in the larger eastern cities do. We think of guns as being 
tools that are used for hunting or pest control or the humane 
destruction of farm animals, as my colleague, the member from 
Nipawin, explained earlier on today. We see guns as a 
necessary part of rural life. We have a gun on our farm. In fact 
we've had one since we bought the farm. And I don't see that, 
and I never have seen it, as a threat or as a danger. 
 
We already have, Mr. Speaker, quite comprehensive gun 
legislation in Canada which is very restricting, particularly for 
handguns. In fact we have a lot of legislation in Canada, and we 
know that. But what we don't know is how effective this 
legislation is. No one has ever evaluated this legislation, as the 
member from River Heights said earlier on today. What no one 
has ever shown me is how this proposed federal legislation is 
going to reduce crime, how it's going to reduce violence, how 
it's going to make any woman, any child, or any person, safer in 
their home. 
 
What I have been told is that we have crime in Canada, we have 
violence in Canada, and if we just had more gun control laws, 
that would stop the crime and that would stop the violence. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just don't believe that. I think that crime is 
a complex problem and I think to just give us more gun 
legislation is a solution that is just not going to work. I don't 
think that it's fair for us to expect legitimate gun owners to fill 
out yet more forms, do more paperwork, and spend yet more 
money, as the federal government will have to spend more  

money — $70 million more — and somehow expect us to 
believe that that's going to make Canada a safer place. I just 
don't believe that. 
 
So I'm very pleased to stand in support of the amendment that's 
just been presented by my colleague from Meadow Lake. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure today to rise in support of this amendment. 
 
I want to go into some statistics on this and to let people know 
that research has shown that if the Liberals really wanted to 
save money, and this is what they say the gun control is for . . . 
is to save lives rather, rather than money, that they would not be 
wasting this hard-earned tax dollars on gun control. Statistics 
for 1992, which shows that . . . over 170,000 Canadian men and 
women dying of heart disease, cancer, digestive disease, mental 
disorders, motor vehicle accidents, accidents, falls, etc., and in 
order to put firearm deaths in perspective, in the year 1992, only 
247 Canadians were murdered by firearms. 
 
Certainly this is the still of . . . too many when you look at any 
number. I mean any number of people that are killed with 
firearms is . . . if one is killed, that's one too many. Only 1,050 
committed suicide with firearms and only 63 died in fatal gun 
accidents. 
 
The registration of all firearms will cost hundreds of millions of 
dollars, and Justice Minister Allan Rock cannot explain to us 
how that will save even one life; how many lives could be 
saved by spending these hundreds of millions of dollars in areas 
where they would have a chance of saving hundreds and 
possibly even thousands of lives. 
 
In 1992 mortality statistics charts show that 76,211 Canadians 
died of heart and circulatory disease. That's one death for every 
seven minutes. And only 247 were murdered with a firearm, 
and that's one death every day and a half. 
 
Still the Liberal government is trying to convince us that half a 
billion dollars spent on gun control will save more lives than if 
it was spent on heart disease research or improved care of 
patients. 
 
In 1992, one woman died every two hours from breast cancer. 
A total of 4,830. But only one woman died every five days as a 
result of a homicide by firearms. So whether a gun is registered 
or not, it could still be used to kill Canadian women. But I bet if 
we took that half a billion dollars the government will spend 
implementing gun control and spend it on breast cancer 
research and treatment, we could save a lot more than 69 
women's lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — In 1992 one Canadian died by suicide every two  



April 24, 1995 

 
1725 

hours for a total of 3,709, but only one every eight hours 
committed suicide with a gun. Gun control hasn't reduced 
suicides, and gun registration won't either. How many suicide 
prevention centres could be opened up with $500 million? How 
many families could have been counselled with half a billion 
dollars, and how many domestic disputes could be avoided? 
How many women's crisis centres could be financed with that 
much money? 
 
These mortality statistics show that the Liberal government has 
its priorities all wrong. Whether you own a gun or not, all 
Canadians should be asking government three questions: how 
much will gun registration cost, how many lives will gun 
registration save, and how could this money be better spent? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, a couple more statistics that show . . . and 
as I said before, even one person may be dying at the hands of 
someone with a gun is one too many. On a statistics chart that 
shows what is killing Canadian men, cancer — one person dies 
every 17 minutes from cancer in Canada, one man. But one 
person is killed by a firearm every two days. And if you take 
those statistics to every 17 minutes, why would we be spending 
all that money registering the guns when we could be spending 
that money on cancer research and saving many more lives. 
 
Same as what is killing Canadian women — cancer. There 
again, one death every 21 minutes. Killed by firearms, one 
every five days. And I don't know how many times a person 
would have stress . . . maybe one is one too many. But there are 
so many other places that we could be spending that money on 
research, saving lives, and making life better for people that 
have these diseases and so forth, and making life in Canada just 
general, all-round . . . 
 
It's just a waste of money. As my colleague from Lumsden says, 
guns in rural Saskatchewan are our way of life, our necessity in 
lots of cases. I own a farm with sheep, and I don't know how 
else I would keep the coyotes from coming in and stealing our 
lambs and so forth. I can't throw a rock that far to keep them 
out, and it's a way of life in rural Saskatchewan. We have 
creditors coming in. We have pests coming into our yards, and 
the rifles are not the ones that kill. We have controls now on 
handguns, and yet I understand that most of the homicides are 
created with handguns. The control shows that it isn't working. 
 
So then why do we not take . . . and I certainly agree with the 
statistics — let's take this money, let's put it to better use. Let's 
put it to cancer research, breast cancer research, or some other 
. . . traffic safety and so forth, and let's put it where it can be 
best used by Canadian people. 
 
I stand, Mr. Chairman, and will be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
somewhat appalled at the amendment that we have before us.  

And I guess one would have to ask what the real motive is 
behind the amendment that would talk of a $70 million cost to 
the provincial economy. And I'm not exactly sure where the $70 
million was arrived at or how it was arrived at. 
 
But I can appreciate some of the comments that have been made 
regarding the amendment. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there's no 
question that we in our society need to take a more serious look 
at how we treat others and how we focus our attention on some 
of the other major problems. As I indicated earlier this 
afternoon that there are so many other issues that are very 
important and imperative that we take the time to review. 
 
But to bring this amendment forward tonight, it seems to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that the amendment really does not address the 
issue before us today and the question that will be facing the 
Minister of Justice and every one of the legislators that would 
travel to Ottawa to meet with the committee. 
 
And putting their . . . bringing forward the issue of 
Saskatchewan's stand regarding Mr. Rock's Bill C-68, some 
statistics haven't been brought forward by government members 
that have shown that certainly to just argue that this is going to 
protect people more . . . as Mr. Rock even today went so far to 
indicate that his piece of legislation would certainly make it a 
much safer society and a much better society to live in. 
 
And yet I think if we took the time to review the statistics that 
has been presented to us in this Assembly this afternoon, 
certainly the statistics show and go to prove that we have come 
a long ways in the way we respect and treat firearms. And the 
fact that they have, in reality, a much less . . . or less of a 
significant impact in mortal crime than they even had 10 or 15 
years ago. 
 
And so I think what the government has done in bringing 
forward this amendment to the present Bill before us it just 
goes one step further in watering it down that much more. And 
I think that's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because it's taking us 
away from the real issue before us. 
 
I'm not sure if it's the fact that the government is so taken up 
with the issue of the federal government reducing funding in 
the areas of health and education and other third-party grants 
and that's why this motion is before us; and the fact that they 
have come up with a level of some $70 million and they feel 
that the government should compensate the province so that 
they could turn around and put that kind of funding into health 
care, into research in the area of health care or education or 
economic development. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think what this does, does not add 
to the legislation or to the motion before us but it takes away 
from it. I think it's very important. And that's why the 
amendment we introduced earlier, we brought it forward, Mr. 
Speaker, because I believe it dealt more directly with the motion 
and with the views of Saskatchewan taxpayers and with views 
of the gun owners and the firearms individuals, the 
Saskatchewan firearms association, the Saskatchewan Wildlife  



April 24, 1995 

 
1726 

Federation, and all the different groups that have stood up in 
support and rallied around and basically brought together, if 
you will, a team of individuals to face Mr. Rock and suggest 
that it's to his folly that he continue on with Bill C-68. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we had addressed this 
afternoon, and asked for the government to join with us in 
bringing forward legislation that would really bring his motion . 
. . and give more credence to his motion, was significant and 
important. 
 
However I find that this amendment that we have before us, 
talking about the unilateral decision to end the Crow benefit . . . 
and yes, the federal government who are currently a Liberal 
government in this country, have eliminated the Crow benefit. 
But whether this will be a benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan and address the transportation costs that will be 
faced because of the demise of the Crow benefit, or whether the 
dollars they're talking of here will have any significant impact 
in medicare in this province, versus the economic impact that 
we are going to face should Bill C-68 pass, is something that 
one has to really question. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we agree in principle with the motion 
before us, yet the fact is we would like to have seen more teeth 
to the motion. 
 
(2100) 
 
We can certainly agree that it's time that we in western Canada 
. . . And I trust, as the minister has indicated in his motion, that 
they're more than prepared to look at the idea that was presented 
by, I believe it was Alberta and Manitoba and the Territories, in 
a made-in-western-Canada piece of gun legislation. 
 
And that in fact . . . I guess I would like to believe that once the 
committee from this province, and possibly working in 
conjunction with the committees from Alberta and Manitoba 
and the Territories, are able to convince Mr. Rock that there is 
an appropriate place in his gun legislation to allow the motion 
that we're dealing with this afternoon rather than getting and 
making it . . . well, even a little more convoluted and watering it 
down that much more. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would indicate that while I'm disappointed 
the amendment we brought forward was defeated, we're ready 
to certainly to support the motion brought forward by the 
minister. 
 
But I do not understand how this really applies or makes the 
minister's motion that much more credible or gives that much 
more weight or credence to his motion. And so that's why it's 
important for us, Mr. Minister, to have raised these few 
questions, asked these questions, and ask the government what 
the real motive is in bringing forward this amendment at this 
time. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, to allow for the motion to have the most  

significant impact that it would have, it would be appropriate 
for this amendment to be defeated. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being confused 
with the member from Meadow Lake certainly puts us a long 
ways apart, but on this issue we're closer together. 
 
While we have another amendment, Mr. Speaker, I think it's 
necessary that I speak a little bit about this amendment, having 
gone to some length to explain our position on the motion as a 
whole. 
 
The amendment deals with an extension of the whole process. 
And certainly I welcome that, because as a I spent quite a long 
time earlier in this debate explaining to the members that they 
had put together a wishy-washy position that really didn't have 
enough strength in it and really didn't have enough teeth to do 
very much for Saskatchewan people, any addition to that 
certainly is an improvement on a proposal that is supposed to be 
the groundwork or the basis for delivering a message to Ottawa 
that is going to cost this province many thousands of dollars to 
send people down there. 
 
So as I pointed out in that first debate, and certainly applies in 
this amendment, there's not much sense going to Ottawa and 
spending all that money if you're only going to do a half a job. 
So we might just as well go down there with some ammunition 
and some real teeth in this motion and try to accomplish as 
much as we can. That's what we've got to do. We've got to get 
after it and try to do as much for Saskatchewan as possible. 
This helps. 
 
I wish they'd have gone a little bit further. Obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, if they had accepted our amendment as well as this 
one and put those two together with the main motion, then we'd 
really have had something. We could have gone down there 
with amendments and legislation as put together. 
 
We could have had these amendments that the government has 
put together today and we could have had the legislation that 
the opposition has introduced into this Assembly on gun 
ownership and on the notwithstanding clause. We could have 
put them all into one, great big, solid package and we would 
have really went to Ottawa and done a job on those fellows and 
had some real power for the Minister of Justice to use down 
there in the process of negotiation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while I'm disappointed that the government 
has to play partisan politics with such an important issue and 
defeat our amendment, which would have in fact given this 
whole thing the kind of perspective it should have had, we 
certainly can't say that we are totally opposed to what's going on 
because there are at least some elements of possibility of merit 
in the direction we're going because we are building this thing a 
little by little and getting a little more strength into it. 
 
And I'm sure that the people from the Cumberland House area 
will be happier with the member from Cumberland House now 
that his government has seen the wisdom to extend this process  



April 24, 1995 

 
1727 

a little further and to try and put a little more teeth into this 
whole mechanism, to try to defend the people that he represents 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that for those of us who enjoy the sport of 
using guns and related equipment, enjoy the sports of hunting, 
enjoy the sports of target shooting, we certainly hope that the 
government can achieve the goals that they are setting out for 
themselves in getting Allan Rock, the minister federally, to 
change his mind. 
 
Unfortunately, I don't think that this process is going to work 
and that we're going to succeed unless we do in fact take a 
provincial stand. And the only really true test of a provincial 
stand is for the government to stand in the Legislative 
Assembly. The power bloc of any government has to be built in 
the Assembly in the province and here we have to make 
legislation — good, hard, solid legislation, saying that we're 
taking control of the situation, saying that we are taking control 
of our own destiny, that we are going to be masters of our own 
destiny and that we are not going to allow the eastern Liberals 
to push us around as they've always done in the past. 
 
Constantly they push western Canada around; constantly they 
give us the short end. You can bet when a Liberal government 
gets elected in Ottawa, they're going to take from the West and 
give to the East — it's almost a stamped, guaranteed contract 
and it's a time we put a stop to that kind of nonsense by going 
down there and saying we're going to stand for ourselves and 
pass some legislation that truly does defend Saskatchewan 
people against the tyranny of eastern Canada. And that's what it 
is, a form of tyranny that they take advantage of us all the time. 
Simply because we're few in numbers, they think they can get 
away with that. 
 
Well I say let's pass some legislation, just as the Quebec people 
did with their language Bill, and stand in there in Ottawa and 
say, we're going to take care of our own. We're going to fight 
for our people and fight for our rights. Now you guys take us to 
court and fight over that, wherever levels you want to go. And 
instead of us always fighting against them, let them take us on 
for a change. 
 
And that's what we've been saying all along. Not that we're 
against what the government's trying to do. We're trying to beef 
them up. We want to pour some cement in their spines so they 
go to Ottawa and win. We can't afford to lose. 
 
We've got too much at stake in western Canada. They're going 
to destroy our economy and finally this amendment does go 
along with that part. And I think that's a good idea, to show 
them that it's important to our economy. It's important to our 
medicare system that we talk about what's going on through this 
amendment. 
 
It's important that we talk about $70 million more going out of 
our province, if that's what the figure is. I'm amazed at how 
high that is. But if it's anything close to that, then certainly it is 
a travesty of justice for Saskatchewan people to see a federal  

government bleeding that kind of money out of Saskatchewan 
people. And we certainly have to support any effort to stop that 
kind of nonsense from happening in our province and in our 
country. 
 
We see here that we've got a position taken now that we're 
going to look at using some money for crime prevention and 
crime control. And that's exactly what we should be doing right 
from the start. We shouldn't be controlling honest people. We 
should be controlling criminals and we should concentrate our 
efforts on the crime element of our society. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake made a fine point about all of 
the things that go on in relationship to the misnomers about the 
use of guns, and having come from the north country where 
bear hunting and hunting and trapping and all that is a way of 
life, I'm sure that there's no one that doubts his sincerity in 
knowing exactly how this is going to affect his people. 
 
But I want you to know that it affects the people in southern 
Saskatchewan just as crucially, especially in the area of 
economic development, as we talk about in this amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Economic development needs to have that extra money, and we 
do need that desperately in Saskatchewan and we need it in the 
area of tourism in south-west Saskatchewan to provide a little 
dam on our creek so we can have fishing, so the wildlife can 
have a drink of water, so we can sell more hunting licences for 
antelope and deer, and have more people come into the area on 
those tourist adventures. 
 
And that's economic development, Mr. Speaker. And that's the 
Battle Creek in south-west Saskatchewan that needs to have 
that dam, as some of my colleagues are wondering where I 
thought that would be necessary. And certainly we've alluded to 
that in this amendment. And for that, I commend the members 
opposite for at least extending this process so that there's a little 
more teeth in this motion today. In having talked about it for so 
long today, we might as well get it as strong and powerful as we 
can and make our points on things like the Crow benefit, which 
of course is mentioned in the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly everybody in Saskatchewan knows that we are 
taking a beating again in Saskatchewan over this abolition of 
the Crow benefit, in the process that it has been done, and the 
way it's being undertaken. We see instead of $7 billion coming 
to the farmers of this province and of this country, instead of 
that we have a billion and six hundred thousand dollars, which 
is really chicken-feed, for that whole process. 
 
And it's just a disgrace to realize that the federal government 
will probably eat up half of that in bureaucratic red tape and all 
kinds of things that are going to eat that up — in job creation 
programs that is only paper pushing from one desk to the other 
instead of genuinely developing western Canada into the 
prosperous place that it can be and should be and would be if 
we didn't have eastern Canada trying to drag us down every step 
of the way all the time, especially with gun laws and that  



April 24, 1995 

 
1728 

kind of commotion that we've got on here today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while I was hoping that the members opposite 
would take our point of view and our arguments and our 
contribution to this debate even more seriously than they have, 
we're glad that they're at least putting some more strength into 
this thing. And I hope that they can go down there and actually 
win the day for us, because this is a tremendously important 
issue to the people of Canada and to western Canada, especially 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
We've heard situations mentioned already, Mr. Speaker, where 
in some of the experiments done in the United States, people 
have actually passed laws saying that every household should 
have a gun in order to cut crime. And in fact now they have sort 
of proven some limited experiments in Oregon state that it 
appears in fact the crime goes down when you have more guns 
in more homes, because now the criminals start to fear the 
honest people. And that's the way it should be. The criminals 
should be afraid of the honest people. The honest people should 
have the right to put the fear of everything into them and send 
them right out of here and right out of anywhere that they 
happen to be. 
 
So let's concentrate on the criminals. Let's not make criminals 
out of honest people. Let's give every bit of strength and effort 
to this cause that we can possibly muster, Mr. Speaker, because 
it is so important to all of us that we ought to all shed our 
political clothes and put on a united uniform and march to 
Ottawa for the people of Saskatchewan and come back 
victorious with Allan Rock's Bill defeated. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm glad that 
the government members again gave me the opportunity to rise 
today on this very important issue, especially the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I won't take a lot of time on this particular 
date because I have said a significant amount today on this 
particular issue, although it does disappoint me that the 
government has brought in this particular motion to try and 
change the direction of the debate. 
 
We initially started off this debate, Mr. Speaker, talking about 
gun control and now all of a sudden we're talking about 
medicare, economic development. Now the law enforcement is 
part of the Bill C-68 so that is certainly valid. But the Crow 
benefit, Mr. Speaker, I think is stretching it a little bit, although 
the federal government has certainly taken away from 
Saskatchewan with the changes to the Crow benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government opposite talks of the $70 
million, it's my estimation that they're on the low side when it 
comes to costs in Saskatchewan for the registration system as 
proposed by Allan Rock. It could be, in my estimation, as much 
as double that — up to $150 million, Mr. Speaker. And that is a 
considerable amount of money and would certainly be much  

more valuable when used in Saskatchewan rather than being 
sent to Ottawa to feed more bureaucrats down there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this amendment as proposed by 
the members opposite adds little of any value to the original 
discussion that we were debating the entire day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I believe that this motion 
should be defeated, that it provides very little, very little of 
assistance, of assistance in the gun debate. There is a lot of area 
that should be debated in this. The Crow rate is certainly one of 
them, Mr. Speaker, but that should be dealt with in the context 
of agriculture, economic development. The minister himself has 
failed miserably in this province to provide new jobs — 
miserably, miserably. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that's another area that we should be debating 
perhaps on another day. And certainly medicare, while the 
government is condemning the federal government for 
decreasing the payments to medicare, the people of 
Saskatchewan certainly can't condemn the government for 
spending less on health care in Saskatchewan. We can't do that. 
 
They have indeed increased the budgets on health care, but they 
have certainly decreased the service that health care has 
provided, Mr. Speaker, decreased the service. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this amendment adds little, if 
any, value to the original motion and the debate on gun control. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
The division bells rang from 9:16 p.m. until 9:17 p.m. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Thompson Lingenfelter Shillington 
Atkinson Johnson Trew 
Goulet Calvert Cunningham 
Mitchell Penner Upshall 
Hagel Koenker Teichrob 
Cline Crofford Murray 
Sonntag Flavel Roy 
Scott Kujawa Carlson 
Keeping Jess  

— 26 
Nays 

 
Swenson Martens D'Autremont 
Toth Britton Bergman 

— 6 
 
The division bells rang from 9:19 p.m. until 9:24 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division 



April 24, 1995 

 
1729 

Yeas 
 
Van Mulligen Thompson Lingenfelter 
Shillington Atkinson Johnson 
Trew Goulet Calvert 
Cunningham Mitchell Penner 
Upshall Hagel Koenker 
Cline Crofford Murray 
Sonntag Flavel Roy 
Scott Carlson Keeping 
Jess Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Bergman  

— 29 
Nays 

 
Swenson Martens Britton 

— 3 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As it relates to the questions 
mentioned, I would convert to motions return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 63, 64, and 65, motions for return 
debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry, why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I noted today a memo came around 
regarding some committees that must operate tomorrow, and 
there's some name changes to be made, so I'm asking leave to 
present names of changes to committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Committees 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move by myself, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for 

that of Mr. Bill Neudorf on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Education. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for 

that of Mr. Bill Neudorf on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Don Toth be substituted for that 

of Mr. Harold Martens on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for 

that of Mr. Bill Neudorf on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Don Toth be substituted for that 

of Mr. John Britton on the list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Rick Swenson be substituted for 

that of Mr. Harold Martens on the list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for 

that of Mr. John Britton on the list of members 
composing the Continuing Select Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Don Toth be substituted for that 

of Mr. Harold Martens on the list of members 
composing the Continuing Select Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move, seconded by the member from  



April 24, 1995 

 
1730 

Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Dan D'Autremont be substituted 

for that of Mr. Harold Martens on the list of members 
composing the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Rick Swenson be substituted for 

that of Mr. Bill Neudorf on the list of members 
composing the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Department of 
 Health Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I very much 
appreciate the opportunity to present these few short remarks in 
second reading for . . . to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Department of Health Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will allow Saskatchewan to 
benefit economically from our knowledge and achievements in 
the health field. By amending this Act, we will be enabled to 
enter into commercial agreements related to health technology, 
expertise, and information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's leadership 
in health renewal has already attracted international attention. In 
recent months, health officials have visited our province from 
the nations of Wales, South Africa, the Republic of Georgia, 
and in the meantime, we have received and fulfilled speaking 
engagements and invitations from many other countries and 
organizations including the Pan American Health Organization 
in Washington, D.C.; we've had invitations from Bolivia, 
Taiwan, and Northern Ireland. 
 
Now this international interest carries the potential for 
significant economic development in the health field. Mr. 
Speaker, last year Saskatchewan Health established the 
international division to develop commercial aspects of our 
health care initiatives. And at that point, Mr. Speaker, I would 
want to congratulate members of our caucus and our caucus 
committee, and particularly the member from Saskatchewan 
Sutherland, who gave a great deal of impetus and interest to 
seeing this development happen. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Having now established the international 
division within the department, this amendment will allow the 
division to conduct market research and establish partnerships 
to achieve these objectives. 
 
The amendment equally confirms our deep commitment to 
keeping all individual health records confidential. No 
information can be released which would allow the 
identification of any individual. Mr. Speaker, in the past we've 
taken great care to protect the privacy of individuals, and this 
amendment provides clear guidance to ensure that the 
protection of privacy will continue in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, economic growth in our province will come from 
building upon our strengths in biotechnology and resources and 
tourism and in health, Mr. Speaker. It is said that a wise person 
will make opportunities that he or she can find. We, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Department of Health, are in the process of 
making opportunities. By positioning ourselves to take 
advantage of the growing interest in health reform, we are once 
again demonstrating the spirit of innovation that has made 
Saskatchewan a recognized leader in health. 
 
And there, Mr. Speaker, therefore I hereby move second 
reading of the Act to amend The Department of Health Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there are some interesting words in this little Bill that the 
minister has presented which take me somewhat by surprise 
when it comes from the government opposite in dealing with 
health care. When I look at words like commercial potential, 
market health systems, it makes you wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
what's going on in this province when the minister and the 
members opposite are prepared to deal in the market-place with 
health care. It's somewhat of a surprising context for the 
minister and the members opposite. 
 
I can think of one particular item within our health care system, 
Mr. Speaker, that is indeed of interest around the world, that 
has some commercial value, and that is marketable around the 
world, Mr. Speaker, and that is our health card, which was 
brought in by the previous administration and was a very 
advanced technological innovation at that time. It gives us a 
great deal of potential, Mr. Speaker, to carry our health 
information around with us. Mr. Speaker, this is the type of 
thing that we should indeed be doing in Saskatchewan, is 
marketing that type of expertise. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, later on in the Bill, I also come to some other 
areas that cause me some concern, where it talks about giving 
the minister power. I'm always nervous when the minister is 
giving himself power, Mr. Speaker. And I realize that the two 
members from Moose Jaw enjoy this feeling of empowerment, 
Mr. Speaker — it gives them something that in their own daily 
lives they lack, I suspect, Mr. Speaker. 



April 24, 1995 

 
1731 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at this power that the 
minister is taking on to himself, you have to also ask what 
controls will be put in place to limit the exercise of that power 
and to limit the spending that accompanies all exercising of 
power within government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are a couple of the avenues that need to 
be explored. The people who deal in medical technologies in 
this province need to be consulted, Mr. Speaker, on these 
particular initiatives. There may very well be a number of areas 
that are commercially viable that we could export and sell. 
Those need to be explored, Mr. Speaker; therefore I would 
move that we adjourn this debate at the present time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — Before we deal with the first resolution, I would 
ask the minister to please introduce the officials who have 
joined us here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I know that all members of the 
House will want to join me in welcoming Saskatchewan's new 
deputy minister of Finance, Bill Jones, who is seated to my left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Seated behind him is Larry Spannier, 
the executive director for Treasury Board branch, and seated 
immediately behind me is Craig Dotson, the associate deputy 
minister, budget analysis division. 
 
The Chair: — At this point then I would ask that the minister 
move the first motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, resolution no. 1: 
 
 That a sum not exceeding $701,474,000 be granted to 

Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1996. 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
join the minister in welcoming the new deputy minister of 
Finance to the Assembly. I know he's been here many times 
before in other capacities, but we do, from the official 
opposition point of view, extend a welcome to him and give 
him the best of luck in his new position. Sometimes Finance 
ministers and their assistants need luck. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us if this is 
exactly one-twelfth, and would you be prepared to send across 
the list of the expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It is exactly two-twelfths, with no 
exceptions. Two-twelfths is in fact what I am told; this is the 
traditional amount that is voted when the . . . On the second  

interim supply it's traditionally been two-twelfths. That's what 
this is, and I will have this sent to the . . . Oh yes there is, 
indeed. If I could get the assistance of a page, I will have one 
copy sent to the opposition caucus and one to the member of 
the third party. Okay. I guess he's going to make me a copy. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering why at 
this stage, given that we can expect the House to perhaps sit for 
another month, that you would deem it necessary to go for 
two-twelfths. I thought your practice . . . your Finance minister 
told us in the last interim supply that that was all that was 
necessary, to go one-twelfth at a time; that she didn't expect any 
untoward events to occur, that it would make sure that the 
government couldn’t operate until it came back before the 
Assembly. 
 
Your budget has not been passed yet and I would think you 
would want to keep it to an absolute minimum until you did 
have the okay of this Assembly to go out and spend money. 
Why the need at this point in time in April for two-twelfths? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'll ask the page to give this to the 
member of the third party, if I might. The tradition has been that 
the second time interim supply is called, it's for two-twelfths in 
order to ensure that sufficient supplies are voted to the end of 
the Assembly. That's been the tradition when this government's 
been in office. It was also the tradition when members opposite 
formed the former administration. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that it probably 
was but I remember a great deal of whining and snivelling from 
the opposition benches when I was in government about 
two-twelfths being granted at this time, and assurances that if 
you ever had the opportunity to take the Finance estimates 
forward that you wouldn't do those sorts of things. And now I 
find it strange, Minister, that you have looked for a convenient 
excuse. 
 
It changes the nature of this task before us, Mr. Chairman, 
because it's quite easy, when we're only dealing with a twelfth, 
to look at the numbers and ascertain exactly what is going to 
happen. Two-twelfths gives the government far more latitude in 
its spending habits. The numbers, of course, are a lot larger and 
if the House should go on for some time it, I think, calls into 
question . . . and I have a nice little quote here from the member 
from Churchill Downs about grievance before supply, I think 
that he delivered about the third day of a debate on interim 
supply back in 1991. But I won't quote that back to him. 
 
But perhaps he can alleviate our concerns by just going through 
the list and pointing out some of the highlights, anticipated 
government expenditures during the next couple of months; 
then why numbers are what they are and where he sees certain 
pressures being brought on the government to meet its 
expectations; and why he needs the latitude of two-twelfths at 
this time. 
 



April 24, 1995 

 
1732 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, there's the . . . what this 
highlights is good, sound budgeting and good, sound financial 
control. In all cases it's exactly two-twelfths, which is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That was traditional. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well it's been traditional with this . . . 
Good, sound management, good financial control has become a 
tradition of this government. It was not exactly a hallmark of 
the former administration. There are no exceptional 
expenditures in here. What is being voted is exactly 
two-twelfths, which covers one two-twelfths of the year. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, does that . . . on the 
non-budgetary side, you have a few items there. Are they 
exactly the same as they were before? I haven't had time to do 
the mathematics. Can you give us a run-down on those items. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. The answer to your question is 
yes. They're exactly the same as before. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, during the last interim supply 
Bill, we asked the minister some questions dealing with 
taxation and the expectations that she had on the revenue side, 
given the tremendous pressures that were coming forward from 
Alberta — which is, as you know, a sales-tax-free zone — and 
what it does to the Saskatchewan economy. And I know that the 
representations from communities along the border have 
continued apace; that communities like St. Walburg and others 
have still felt that they are second-class citizens because of what 
happens there and the amount of money that flows out. She said 
at that time that there were no discernible changes in the tax 
collection rate in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you bring us up to date on exactly how the sales tax 
revenue are doing and if there are any changes occurring, 
particularly on the west side of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We're just barely, by a few days — 
24, I guess, to be precise — into the new fiscal year, so it's a 
little too early to discern any changes. However, with respect to 
the tax collection rates for the previous year, there's no 
discernible changes. The problem that communities along the 
border experience is not new; it has been around for . . . well 
since this province began having sales tax, and it will likely be 
with us for a period of time to come. No government, including 
the former one, has found a solution to this problem. 
 
Strictly speaking, your question is whether or not there have 
been any changes in the tax collection rates — none that we can 
discern, although it's too early for this year. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps you could give 
us some numbers from the last quarter of the last fiscal year, 
which I'm sure you have. Can you tell us what growth has 
occurred then in retail spending? I'm sure you must have some 
ideas about certain areas of the province on the retail spending 
side. How does that compare to, say, the last quarter of the 
previous fiscal year. And maybe we can get some numbers then  

that we can start to make some comparisons with. 
 
It's very difficult for us to ascertain exactly what's going on 
unless you have those numbers. And I'm sure that if you are not 
suffering a hemorrhaging of money on the west side of the 
province, that you would have figures to show that retail sales 
are up in a number of communities and that therefore your tax 
collection would be up in a number of communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I am told that that information is 
normally supplied in Finance estimates. It's normally not 
supplied in interim supply. This is an Appropriation Bill, not 
estimates. I'm told these sort of figures would normally be 
provided in Finance estimates which we had offered to do later 
this same day. As a matter for principle however, it's 
inadvisable — I believe — inadvisable to be supplying those 
sort of figures in the interim supply. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That's unfortunate, Minister, that you don't 
want to give that to the Assembly at this time. I think people are 
concerned enough about it. 
 
I just read an article again the other day with some comments 
from an individual from Swift Current talking about $55 
million in lost sales revenue in that direct area. And that's a lot 
of money. And that's based on only 10 per cent of the total retail 
sales in the Medicine Hat area, that it was a comparison against. 
 
So if we are losing $55 million in sales in just that region, that 
tells me that it must be of some concern, certainly to merchants. 
I mean the people that have to pay not only sales tax, but they 
pay business tax and personal income tax; if they make any 
money they pay tax on their domicile. 
 
And it's very difficult to pay all of those taxes plus all of the 
utilities that they have to pay, and be in competition with 
someone 150 miles away and still maintain a livelihood. And I 
think those figures are important. They're important to 
formulation of public policy in this province. 
 
I'm wondering . . . I'll ask a question directly off of here, seeing 
as you're not going to give us any that you deem to be an 
estimate question. In the portion of the budget dealing with the 
Provincial Secretary, are there many expenditures in this — I 
believe it's one million . . . What's the number here? Provincial 
Secretary — $1.134 million. How much of that is dedicated to 
the Celebrate Saskatchewan, the birthday party for '95? Any 
idea? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, we really wouldn't. And even if 
we were to check with the department, it might be difficult for 
them to provide any kind of a precise statement as to what 
portion of this one-sixth would be used for that program. 
 
Expenditures are often mixed up and often not easily 
identifiable. But certainly we don't have that information, nor 
do I think detailed questions about individual departments make 
a lot of sense. It makes a lot more sense to ask those questions  



April 24, 1995 

 
1733 

of the departments when they come before you for estimates. 
And I would remind the hon. member that all of the 
departments' estimates are still open. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Perhaps you could identify for the Assembly, 
Mr. Minister, the . . . I noticed the minister responsible for 
Municipal Affairs was making comments yesterday and again 
today about an emergency expenditure which was going to 
happen because of all the flooding and the damage to grid 
roads. Can you tell me where in this two-twelfths this 
expenditure's going to come out of. Is there money budgeted 
separate from this, or is this going to come out of existing 
budgets to meet the commitments that the minister and the 
Premier have been talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There has been for some time, a 
program of funding for emergencies; however, it's impossible to 
know what sort of emergencies are going to arise, and in some 
years, indeed for the last few years  in many years  there 
haven't been any calls upon this particular expenditure. They're 
really more often related to flooding than any other single 
phenomenon, and that has not been a problem for some years 
actually. For some years flooding was not a problem. 
 
This is sort of a long-winded way of saying that there is nothing 
budgeted in this budget for emergency aid. And that's one of the 
items which I think is yet to be determined but will be 
determined very shortly. But it's one of the issues which is yet 
to be determined, exactly what form aid will take. 
 
So we don't have a decision to share with you this evening, 
although I think that will be forthcoming fairly shortly. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I understand there's a cabinet 
meeting dealing with the issue tomorrow. And my recollections 
of going to cabinet meetings was if I had that responsibility, I 
better have my documents prepared; and I'd go before cabinet 
and say I'd like to spend X amount of money because of. Are 
you telling me that no one in the Department of Finance has 
been in discussion with the minister for Municipal Affairs in 
preparing her cabinet document to go ahead and spend money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Oh, there've been a fair number of 
discussions but there've been no decisions made. And we'd be 
happy with you to share the decisions when they're made and to 
justify them. 
 
However, it's quite a stretch to suggest that we ought to share 
the discussions with you. I'm not sure that that's an appropriate 
request to make of a government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I don't expect to know the details of 
your sworn oath. What I asked you was where in this particular 
document is the money that you are going to discuss tomorrow 
which you are probably going to turn around and spend within a 
few days? That's all I ask. There is a certain sum and it could be 
very large. Where does it fit into this proposed expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well there's two-twelfths for the  

Department of Municipal Affairs. It's conceivable that it may 
come from existing funding. Another option is it may be extra, 
in which case it wouldn't be in here, it would be in addition to 
the budget. 
 
So what I'm saying to the hon. member is there's a number of 
options and those options have not yet been narrowed down to 
one. And so I'm not able to tell you what the program is, and 
therefore certainly not able to tell you how it'll be funded. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — This whole area, Minister, is in some . . . 
what would be the proper term? — some things have fallen in 
abeyance. The Minister of Highways had a piece of legislation 
before the House that didn't meet a deadline and has gone. And 
that was about $20 million. There was infrastructure money and 
federal money that was involved in it that because it didn't 
happen, it has potentially changed the way that your budget 
looks. Now instead of taking that money out of last year, you 
now have to take that money out of this year, and it takes your 
budget surplus from 20-some-odd million to a few million 
dollars. Are we looking at a situation with the disaster relief 
monies that, if you have to do extra budgeting, that actually 
would take your budget from a surplus position to a minus 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. All the . . . there's still a number 
of options open to the government as I explained. When a 
decision is made, we'll obviously be providing full details to the 
legislature at its inception. And I think the Premier indicated the 
other day he expected a decision fairly shortly. So when the 
decision is made, we'll then be in a position to justify it. We 
aren't in really a position to tell you today since no decision has 
been made. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, does any of that money that you 
wanted to spend out of last year's budget, does it show up 
anywhere in any of this expenditure in this year's budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, as you acknowledged, that was 
out of last year's budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So there's been no attempt by the Minister of 
Highways to come forward with a different proposal at this time 
that would include in his . . . and I ask these questions because 
obviously the highway-grid road system, town systems, 
everything else is under a great deal of pressure right now given 
the weather situation. And we clearly want to understand where 
the monies are going to come and move around. Is there a 
chance that some of that money that the minister was dealing 
with in that legislation could in fact end up in this particular 
disaster program? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, that really was a separate 
program. 
 
And it is not reflected in . . . none of that is reflected in here as I 
think the member understands. It is conceivable the minister  



April 24, 1995 

 
1734 

may come forward with some alternative, but that's not reflected 
in these figures and wouldn't be reflected in anything until a 
decision is made. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — But you're not categorically ruling out then, 
Minister, that that particular program which that Bill . . . which 
didn't make it through the Assembly in time, may in fact 
resurface at a future date dealing with the situations occurring 
on the east side of the province with flooding and the other 
various components. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The Bill is still before the Assembly. 
I'm not in a position to either categorically deny it, categorically 
admit it, or waffle in between. Those are questions which 
would have to be put to the Minister of Highways. We don't 
make those decisions; nor do I have either the background nor 
the jurisdictional authority to comment on that. Those are 
questions that would have to be put to the minister, or in the 
alternative, the Premier. But I don't really have the . . . I'm not 
really in a position to comment one way or another, 
categorically or otherwise. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, you shouldn't be surprised if I 
made the comment. It was why I didn't really — and no offence 
to the member from Churchill Downs, he's a very competent 
and able minister — why I didn't want to do the estimates of 
Finance without Madam Minister present, Mr. Chairman, so 
that she could answer those kinds of questions. Because we're 
talking about a lot of money here — there's $20 million that 
was involved in that particular Bill. 
 
We now have a situation on the east side of the province where 
there are going to be large expenditures needed, perhaps to 
solve some very serious infrastructure programs. The Minister 
of Highways hasn't darkened the door of the place for about 
three weeks because he's out trying to save his political skin. 
Therefore we have to go to the next best alternative which 
tonight is the Associate Minister of Finance. And it is a 
legitimate question because there are literally hundreds of 
people phoning and writing and wondering what exactly is 
going on and wondering where the government's going to come 
up with the money necessary. And I look over the numbers. The 
minister assures me — I believe him — that there isn't anything 
on this sheet of paper that says that the government is preparing 
to deal with that situation. 
 
But I think it was a reasonable question we'd ask  if that 
particular $20 million which was earmarked from last year's 
budget where they had a very large surplus because of the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) funds being taken from the 
farm families of this province and used to balance that budget 
. . . that with this year's budget now in a very small surplus 
position, that people are wondering if that money is going to be 
used for communities like Melville, Langenburg, Preeceville, 
Canora, and others. And I think it is legitimate. And the 
minister and his officials in Finance are going to have to be the 
ones that come up with the funds to fund that program. 
 
And I just say to you, do you not think it a legitimate question  

to know where the expectations are of that money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The question is legitimate. As you 
yourself acknowledge, the $20 million was budgeted in last 
year's budget. It is our intention to meet the deficit target set out 
in the budget. And it is our intention to do so whatever 
unexpected emergencies may arise. And it would be our hope 
that if we spend the additional money on the emergencies, the 
savings and economies can be found elsewhere which will 
cover that off so that at the end of the year we meet the deficit 
target which we set. 
 
So the answer to your question is no, it's not available since we 
want to meet our deficit target. And that will mean if we spend 
extra money on this emergency, we want to try to find 
economies elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Is that money not available, Minister, 
because the federal government is involved in it? Would that be 
one of the reasons that that money wouldn't be available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member, I think, sort of crossed 
from one area into another. Twenty million dollars as a sum of 
money was in last year's budget and we've got to meet this 
year's budget deficit. And so I said if we spend additional 
monies here, we will want to find economies elsewhere to cover 
it off so that we meet our deficit . . . our budgeted targets. 
 
We are very, very, very firm on meeting budgeted targets which 
we set. It is part of the whole process of restoring our credibility 
as managers of public assets. 
 
The program whereby the federal government may share — will 
share  the cost of the roads we're building, it is conceivable 
that program may be available. Can't put it on any higher plane 
than that until we have a definite proposal to take to the federal 
government, and they say yes or no. 
 
But it is conceivable — and I can't put if any more definite than 
that  it is conceivable that that program of shared costs may 
be available to deal with this emergency. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — You see, Minister, we want to clearly 
understand where this money comes from, because you 
balanced . . . and had a very large surplus in the previous year, 
but most of that money was money that came out of the GRIP 
surplus. Now I've asked a lot of questions in here of the 
Minister of Agriculture about a hundred and . . . he says 112; I 
say $115 million that's sitting out there — people have got 
notices. And he's saying that the government is not going to ask 
it back. 
 
Now you're saying we're very, very definite on our targets. That 
means you got to come with enough money to fix the problems 
that are being caused out there. That means that some place in 
here there's going to have to be some give. 
 
And unfortunately farm families in this province have been a 
pretty easy target for you because, number one, you neutered  



April 24, 1995 

 
1735 

their political ability by redistributing seats — taking away 
eight seats from rural Saskatchewan. And number two, there's 
only about 56,000 of them left — farm families in this 
province. 
 
Now the minister's got $115 million in dunners out there with 
him which says he probably won't . . . He can't guarantee us that 
some people won't have to pay 50 cents an acre or a buck an 
acre. 
 
And we've got a big problem on our hands and you're absolutely 
firm on your budget numbers. What's to stop the Minister of 
Agriculture from saying, oops, we need a little more money? I 
know I said you wouldn't have to pay it back, but we're in a 
bind. You go down the list here and who else is going to give it 
up? And those are pretty easy targets. 
 
And we're pretty darn sensitive after what you did in the last 
budget year with that money. I mean you spent it. You gave 
back the federal Liberals $317 million, Minister, and they took 
it off to Ottawa and now we've got a disaster on our hands out 
in rural Saskatchewan. We've got roads washed out all over the 
place. The gravel's all gone. We've got provincial highways 
with the top coming off, they tell us, and it's going to take a lot 
of money to fix it. 
 
And I look down the list and I say, where are you going to take 
the money from to come up with this expenditure because it 
isn't budgeted here; it has to come from somebody. And I guess 
I'm a little leery when I know that the Minister of Agriculture 
has got the dunners out there already, and all we have so far 
from him is his word that he isn't going to collect them. 
 
Now, Minister, you don't know where it's coming from. You tell 
me you're absolutely firm on your deficit numbers. Can you 
give me an indication that would give those farm families, who 
are going into a very uncertain seeding year, with the changes to 
the Crow and everything else . . . that you aren't going to grab 
some more of that agricultural money to make up the 
difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well if the Minister of Agriculture 
has given his word, then that can be relied upon. In addition to 
being careful to meet our targeted surplus — the member used 
the phrase targeted deficit; we're in a happy position now of 
having targeted surpluses — in addition to being firm about our 
targeted surpluses, we're also firm and careful to ensure that 
when we give our word, it can be relied upon. 
 
So if the Minister of Agriculture has given his word, we're most 
unlikely to go back on that. I can't tell you where savings might 
be made. That . . . because if we could, we'd have taken them 
now. But in the course of a year there will be underexpenditures 
that can be managed and there are, there are some areas where 
you overexpend; there are some areas where you underexpend. 
 
Part of the . . . one of the many services which these officials 
provide to the government is that they attempt to manage the 
underexpenditures so that they meet the overexpenditures.  

Where are they going to arise? Nobody can tell you. Will they 
arise? They always do. And we have managed so far to match 
one with the other. We expect to be able to do so this year. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I think the minister, Mr. Chairman, 
misunderstood me. The problem was the Minister of 
Agriculture hasn't given his word, because he says, I can't 
categorically promise that I won't be out there collecting — and 
he used a figure with me of a dollar an acre. Well that's maybe 
not a lot. On my farm that's $1,600, you know. But there's lots 
of people it's more. And it's money that's really hard to come by. 
And that's the problem. 
 
He won't categorically give us his word. We've asked him many 
times saying, will you categorically say that you will not take 
any of that money, and he won't do it. So that's why I'm asking 
you the questions tonight because you've got to come up with 
some money, and he won't give us his word. 
 
So we have to assume that he's prepared to dig into rural 
Saskatchewan once more and take more money out of farmers' 
pockets to pay for this program. And what I wanted you to do 
was categorically say no, Minister of Agriculture, you're not 
doing that. That's what I was hoping I'd hear from the Minister 
of Finance tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member from Thunder Creek is 
indeed an optimist. If the Minister of Agriculture — and I'm 
taking the member's word for it; I'm unaware of this 
conversation — but if the Minister of Agriculture was less than 
categorical, I am likely to repeat his comments. So whatever 
you found his comments to be, mine would be the same. 
 
Let me just assure the member from Thunder Creek, we don't 
see agriculture as any sort of a source for making up anything 
we might overexpend. And we have not yet decided to 
overexpend. It may be that the problem can be managed by 
advancing money to them earlier which they would get in any 
event, so that the end of the year we'll still meet our target. That 
may not be possible. 
 
But let me assure the member, we do not see that particular 
program as a source of making that up. It will be made up in 
ways which I cannot now describe to you. But experience has 
shown there are always underexpenditures. If you're careful to 
manage them and marshal them, they can meet your 
overexpenditures which also arise in any given year. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hear members 
over there talking about a nest egg for a rainy day. I think the 
rainy day is coming. It's called an election. And I'm sure we'll 
see the nest egg get spent. So I understand that language that 
the member's talking about. It's just a forewarning to the 
taxpayers of this province what their money is going to be spent 
on. 
 
Minister, I don't see anything here, and I'm puzzled by this.  



April 24, 1995 

 
1736 

Your seat mate there is gung-ho on building casinos in the 
province, and I understand the one downtown is going to be 
going full blast so that he can get it done by Grey Cup time. 
 
And I don't see anything on here from the Gaming Corporation 
at all. And I'm wondering how it is you can spend several 
millions of dollars on that entity which you'll have contractors 
and you'll have all sorts of people being paid, why you haven't 
budgeted any money here for your seat mate's expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That is being done by the Gaming 
Corporation without any expenditure, as I understand it, without 
expenditure of funds from the Department of Finance. 
 
Again when the members have the opportunity to question the 
Minister of Economic Development, that would be a more 
appropriate time to get the details of that. But those 
expenditures are coming from the Gaming Corporation and not 
directly out of the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I don't understand that process, Minister. 
When you wanted to buy VLTs (video lottery terminal) in their 
thousands, the Minister of Finance had to come up with the 
cash. I remember it clearly. Why is it now, all of a sudden, that 
the Gaming Corporation is off on its own, doing its own thing 
and not coming before the Assembly for supply . . . can go out 
. . . 
 
Are you telling this Assembly that the minister, your seat mate, 
can now go out and spend all kinds of money on a casino 
wherever he is wont to because he's got enough cash flow 
inside the corporation that he doesn't have to worry about going 
through the Minister of Finance and his officials to garner 
money? Is that what you're telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There's nothing in this money that 
you're voting which will be spent on a construction of a casino. 
It's not being paid for out of this. It is being financed by the 
Gaming Corporation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I thought the whole reason 
for this process and the phrase you were so wont to use earlier 
on in your career about grievance before supply, that if we're, as 
a province and as taxpayers spending . . . and I understand we 
are. It's clearly within the bailiwick of the provincial taxpayer to 
spend several millions, tens of millions of dollars on a casino in 
downtown Regina. Why we would not have those expenditures 
scrutinized by the Assembly when we had all of the VLTs 
scrutinized by the Assembly and other things that you did when 
you were setting up the Gaming Corporation. 
 
Why all of a sudden . . . tell me where we're going to scrutinize 
this then, I guess. He's going to make all these expenditures. 
Where are we going to talk about those things if not in here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As is the case with any Crown 
corporation, you have an opportunity to scrutinize those before 
the Crown Corporations Committee. We certainly believe and 
follow the principle of grievance before supply. However we're  

not supplying anything for the construction of casinos. That is 
being financed by the corporation, and indeed as I understand, 
it's being financed out of future earnings. However you'll have 
ample opportunity to pursue those issues when the Gaming 
Corporation comes before Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, that's bizarre, because that'll be a 
year from now or a year and a half from now. I mean you came 
before this Assembly and Finance, and you needed money to set 
that corporation up and buy all of those thousands of machines, 
which you did. 
 
I mean what kind of a shell game have we got going on here? Is 
this the way it's going to be in the future? That a minister comes 
before the House. He gets a bunch of money. He goes off and 
sets up his own little corporation bailiwick. And then for a year 
and a half you don't have to answer to the Assembly for the 
expenditures. You're going to spend 20 million or $30 million 
in downtown Regina on a casino, and that's going to be going 
on right as . . . all summer long, during this period of time that 
you've come to the House for expenditures. And yet you're not 
going to tell us about it. There's no money allocated. 
 
I mean how in the world are we suppose to know if that 
corporation is running itself into a hole or if it's making a profit; 
how much profit it's making, where it's coming from? Are you 
telling me that the Minister of Economic Development can go 
off and decide to spend that kind of money outside of the 
budget of this province and then expect us to wait for a year and 
a half down the road to see how it's going? 
 
That's not the kind of language I heard coming from you and 
others prior to 1991. That simply is not the language I heard. 
Do you think that's appropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well the members have ample 
opportunity to pursue these issues. The Crown Corporations 
Committee now deals with them and, I want to add, is more or 
less current in dealing with Crown corporations — something 
that was not the case during the decade you people were in 
office. And the estimates are open and the Estimates in this 
House are available. 
 
These committees now function and function well. The 
members have ample opportunity to question Crown 
corporations before that committee, to question line 
departments in here — something that was not the case when 
you people were in office. The system is working and working 
in an exemplary fashion, actually. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just asked my colleague 
from Moosomin where they're at in there and he said '93-94. 
We're going into the '95-96 budget year. They haven't finished 
'93-94 yet. They've hardly caught up to when you spent the 
money on the machines, much less getting into building casinos 
for tens of millions of dollars. 
 
I mean, current? That's two years ago. How in the world . . . 
And I'm sorry that interim supply has to be the place where we  



April 24, 1995 

 
1737 

ask these questions, but we don't appear to be getting any 
answers at all. 
 
And I asked you a question: do you believe it's appropriate 
when the committee is in '93-94 and you come for interim 
supply and the minister, your seat mate, is spending that kind of 
money out of something at that rate we won't see for two years? 
 
I don't understand the logic behind it. Why you would not say 
we're building a casino in downtown Regina, here's the 
expenditures that we're going to do over the next three months; 
or you have to have it ready by Grey Cup so you're going to 
spend an awful pile of money. And why that would not be 
budgeted for in the interim supply of this province, and in fact 
in the budget of this province, like the very machines that you 
bought to set the corporation up with. They were all accounted 
for. 
 
We knew. The minister came in; he said, here's the expenditure 
— $24 million for the first bunch and another 20 million for the 
second bunch. And we're supplying with this, and that, and the 
next person. We had great debates in here about whether those 
suppliers were up to the mark. And now you tell me you're 
going to spend that kind of money and there's nothing showing 
up and that we're going to have to wait that long for answers. I 
don't think that's acceptable. And I heard you and your 
colleagues say many times that that wasn't acceptable. Now do 
you believe at this juncture that it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — One of the many ways in which this 
government has become more accessible, more open, is that the 
Crown corporations . . . In reviewing the activities of Crown 
corporations, you're no longer restricted to the year under 
review — one of the many innovations that we've made so that 
this government is as open and accessible as possible. So that 
it's more or less meaningless to say that you're dealing with 
'93-94 because you can deal with the whole range of a 
corporation's activities and not be restricted to the year under 
review. 
 
I say again, there is nothing in this interim supply which goes to 
pay for casinos, for the construction of casinos. It was 
otherwise — and the member's right — it was otherwise with 
respect to video lottery terminals. Those were financed by the 
government, owned by the government. That was a different 
arrangement. But the casinos are being done through the Crown 
corporation and the taxpayer is not putting any money into 
those. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I beg to differ, Minister. There's a lot of 
taxpayers putting a lot of money in those machines. A lot of 
taxpayers probably can't afford to put money in those machines. 
And I think it's very weak of you to come to this Assembly and 
tell us that it's none of our business. You know full well that 
that casino will be built and up and running, and there will be a 
provincial election before the committee ever gets around to 
meeting again to ask those questions. And whether it's current 
or not current, that simply ain't going to happen. And that's a 
fact of life. 

So I think we have a bit of a problem here. I would have 
thought to do this properly, that there would have been a line on 
here and the line would have been, along with some of the other 
entities here . . . I mean we've got the Sask Water Corporation 
on with non-budgetary; Property Management. We've got other 
entities that are very similar. 
 
And I guess if you'd wanted to go with a non-budgetary and put 
in here the Gaming Corporation, we would add a line that 
would have given us something to understand and work off of 
instead of . . . I mean all I've got is your word that this 
self-financing is going on. Is that predicated on another 10,000 
people going out and pulling the handle? Is that the 
self-financing that we're talking about? 
 
Well I understand that the handles are on the way; that we're 
going to have slot machines besides VLTs in this province very 
shortly. And they're going to be paid for from somewhere too. 
Are we going to see them show up in the Assembly? Is it just 
buildings and the tables and that kind of stuff that don't show 
up in here? Machines show up, and buildings and tables don't 
— is that what I'm led to understand by the answers that you're 
giving me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The video lottery terminals were 
bought at an earlier . . . were purchased at an earlier period of 
time in a different fashion. They were bought directly by the 
government and then owned by the government. The casinos 
and the equipment and the furniture and fixtures contained 
therein are being purchased . . . are being obtained by the 
Gaming Corporation with no outlay of tax dollars. And so yes, 
the tables and equipment, the furniture, and the fixtures, as well 
as the building, are being purchased through the Gaming 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well you see the problem, Minister  maybe 
I've got too long a memory but I remember some other entities 
that used to kick around this province called Saskoil, and PCS 
(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) and — what was the 
one that you used to run uranium mines with — SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). There are 
all sorts of these supposedly self-financing operations around 
that had real high values put on them, and they went out and 
they sourced money all sorts of different places, and they didn't 
show up in this Assembly either. 
 
And quite frankly, Minister, I don't think that was totally 
appropriate at the time and I don't believe this is. I mean I have 
no way of knowing that this Gaming Corporation is 
self-financing, no way of knowing at all. 
 
We're in here talking about the budget of this province. You tell 
us that that Gaming Corporation . . . and it is a big component 
of your budgetary process. You've predicated surpluses on that 
corporation and the take that comes from it, but I have no way 
of knowing if it's self-financing, what the revenue flow is — 
what the monthly revenue flow is. 
 
And the minister has repeatedly said he wouldn't answer those  



April 24, 1995 

 
1738 

questions. And he's been asked that many times by members of 
the official opposition, the member from Rosthern has asked 
over, and over, and over again . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And told it wasn't appropriate. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And told it wasn't appropriate. And now 
you're saying, well don't worry about it folks, it's self-financing. 
The member from Elphinstone can run off and spend all sorts 
of money and not worry about this Legislative Assembly at all. I 
mean we could have gold-plated bathtub fixtures in there for all 
I know. 
 
I remember a few other of your corporate connotations that got 
a little fast and loose with the taxpayers' money back in another 
era, and I'm really wondering if you think it's appropriate that 
that should happen. If we should just take your word for it that 
it's self-financing, that we as taxpayers shouldn't worry about 
the expenditures your Gaming Corporation's making. And the 
Minister has the sole discretion to direct it wherever it will go 
and nothing show up on interim supply; not back to Crown 
Corporations until after the next election and you're casino's up 
and running. 
 
I don't follow your logic, Mr. Minister, of why you believe that 
should not come before the Assembly. Because I have no 
assurance that that particular entity is self-financing and will 
not be looking for money some place else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There are no revenue . . . no revenue 
is . . . no revenue from casinos has been assumed as part of this 
budget or as part of the next cycle  the next four years. There 
is no revenue assumed to be obtained from casinos; it's not part 
of this budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, there is revenue assumed 
to be coming from the Gaming Corporation in your budget; 
you've picked the number. There's no gambling money coming 
into the government that's showing up in the budget anywhere. 
Then what are you doing with it? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, there is of course money from 
the liquor and gaming corporation, but we do not assume any 
revenue from casinos. Yes, the liquor and gaming corporation, 
quite obviously there is. But we do not assume in the budget 
any revenue from casinos. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we aren't going to solve 
this tonight, but one last question before we shut this place 
down. 
 
So then what you're telling me, Minister  and this gets more 
interesting as we go  you're saying that we're going to allow 
the Minister of Economic Development, the minister in charge 
of the liquor and gaming corporation, to go off and build a 
casino with internal money which may or may not contribute to 
the dividend to the provincial coffers. But if he loses a whack  

of money on it well it's not a big deal because he's 
self-financing it from inside the liquor and gaming corporation. 
Is that what you're telling me? There's no problem if the 
minister loses a bunch of money on his casino in downtown 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I repeat, for the purposes of this 
Appropriation Bill, there is no revenue assumed to be received. 
There is no revenue taken into account or assumed for the 
purposes of this budget that the four-year cycle is based upon. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:33 p.m. 
 
 


